D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


1 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material 
Committee, Maharashtra State 

EDITORIAL BOARD 

1 Shri Kamalkishor Kadam 
Minister For Education 

2 Prof. Javed Khan 
Education Minister For State 

3 Shri R. S. Gavai 

4 Shri Dadasaheb Rupavate 

5 Shri B. C. Kamble 

6 Dr. P. T. Borale 

7 Shri Ghanshyam Talvatkar .. 

8 Shri Shankarrao Kharat 

9 Shrimati Shantabai Dani 

10 Shri Waman Nimbalkar 

11 Shri Prakash Ambedkar 

12 Shri R. R. Bhole 

13 Shri S. S. Rege 

14 Dr. Bhalchandra Phadke 

15 Shri Daya Pawar 

16 Shri Laxman Mane 

17 Prof. N. D. Patil 

18 Prof. Moreshwar Vanmali 

19 Prof. Janardan Waghmare 

20 Barrister P. G. Patil 

21 Dr. M. P. Mangudkar 

22 Prof. G. P. Pradhan 

23 Shri B. M. Ambhaikar 

24 Shri N. M. Kamble 

25 Prof. J. C. Chandurkar 

26 Shri Girish Khobragade 

27 Secretary, Education Department .. 

28 Director of Education 

29 Shri V. W. Moon, O.S.D 


Publication 


President 

Vice-President 

Vice-President 

Executive 

President 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member- 

Secretary 

Member 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


2 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


3 


FOREWORD 


The seventh volume of the Writings and Speeches of Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar contains two of his most memorable contributions to the 
sociological literature of the modern India, viz. (1) ‘Who were the 
Shudras?- How they came to be the Fourth Varna in the Indo-Aryan 
Society;’ and (2) ‘The Untouchables- Who Were They and Why They 
Became Untouchables?’ Both these works have influenced the thinking 
of the present century which has witnessed emergence of the 
individual as the autonomous unit in the constitutional jurisprudence 
of equality and liberty. They mark the inauguration of the age of 
reason in our history and impress upon us the need to rearrange 
our social institutions in harmony with the dynamics of technological 
changes which have made it possible for masses to enjoy freedom. 
The age of reason was the effect of technologies of freedom and 
mobility inherent in the Railways, Roads, Telegraphs, mass educa- 
tion movements and greater contacts with the liberal culture of the 
West. 

Both the works have a historical orientation and throw a critical 
light on the problem of the caste as the inhibitory and controlling 
element in the social organisation and structure. The defect of the 
Indian social structure was immobility which was institutionalised 
as the divine dispensation, leading to decay and atrophy. 
Dr. Ambedkar examines the problem in the light of historical 
evidence and shows how the caste became the fundamental criterion 
of social action. 

The work ‘Who were the Shudras?’ is inscribed to the memory of 
Mahatma Jotiba Fule whom Dr. Ambedkar esteems “as the greatest 
Shudra of Modern India who made the lower classes of Hindus 
conscious of their slavery to the higher classes and who preached the 
gospel that for India social democracy was more vital than 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


4 


(ii) 

independence from foreign rule.” The history of India is a tally of 
events of caste-discrimination preached and practised in the name 
of God. It is fair to conclude in retrospect that the caste as the 
institution is the survival of pre-jural society and the early juris- 
prudence of India like the jurisprudence of many other countries, was 
sustained by the belief in supernatural agencies which punish 
transgression of usages and can be assuaged by the magic charms 
and rituals. It is due to the role of religion in the early laws that 
the priest became the most potent instrument of the stability and 
the status quo. In Europe the priest and the supremacy of the Church 
was challenged by intellectuals but in India the challenge to the 
priestly class and the tradition came much later when the British 
Rule for the first time introduced masses to the democratic values 
which find expression in the Proclamation of 1858 which states: “And 
it is our further Will that, so far as may be, our subjects of whatever 
Race or creed, be freely and impartially admitted to offices in our 
service, the duties of which they may be qualified by their education, 
ability and integrity to discharge.” In a society of institutionalised 
gradation and hierarchy, this was a revolution in ideas and ideals 
of equality which Dr. Ambedkar has advocated in a spirit of social 
democracy. The present constitutional mandate for equality is trace- 
able to this accident of history which brought with the British rule 
the philosophy of social change that whatever may be birth-mark, 
education would qualify an individual for a public office or employ- 
ment. This was the first blow to the doctrine of the caste followed 
by the Railways which made the static society mobile. The caste is 
replaced by the ethics of classification which must be reasonable. 
Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits class legislation but does not 
forbid reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation as held 
by the Supreme Court in ‘Budhan Vs State of Bihar, 1955- Supreme 
Court 1045.’ 

In a sense, ‘Who were the Shudras’ may be said to be an invitation 
by Dr. Ambedkar to a fresh historical research on this subject to know 
the reality of human nature which is not harmonious: it has two sides: 
an aggressive self-assertive side which leads to ignoring the expec- 
tations of others in the satisfaction of one’s own expectations and 
a co-operative social side which leads to working with others in 
association and groups of all sorts in recognition of common purposes. 
The individual needs the force of social control to keep these two 
sides in balance. Undoubtedly, the struggle for existence, the com- 
petition in satisfying expectations or desires whenever acute 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


5 


(hi) 

because of the limited goods of existence, out of which they can be 
satisfied, disturbs this balance. In order to maintain the balance men 
have relied upon religion and upon reason.” (Pound - jurisprudence 
Vol. III). For the Indian historical content Dr. Ambedkar shows how 
the desire for monopoly of social control made the priest the most 
powerful factor in social control. The caste as a sociological insti- 
tution resembles a Corporation in which the Board of Directors never 
changed. It was the law of status which classified men according 
to their birth and it was fixed and static; ability was not recognised 
as the means to cross the class-barriers. In theory and in practice 
the caste is the opposite of liberty, anti-thesis of equality and 
negation of humanity as it postulates the capacity for thinking 
incidental to the gift of reason for the chosen few distinguished by 
the marks of their pedigrees and not by the degrees of excellence 
evidenced in the free exercise of reason or conscience. The philosophy 
of the sacred texts in general discouraged the free exercise of reason 
with the result that the authority of the sacred texts became 
unquestioned and Truth became a datum and not a problem. This 
was the cause of intellectual atrophy and social stagnation. One is 
reminded of the words of Milton : 

“Well knows he who uses to consider, that our faith and knowledge 
thrives by exercise, as well as our limbs and complexion. Truth is 
compared in Scripture to a streaming fountain; if her waters flow not 
in perpetual succession, they sicken into a muddy pool of conformity 
and tradition. A man may be heretic in the truth and if he believes 
things only because his Pastor says so, or the Assembly so determines, 
without knowing other reason, though his belief be true, yet the very 
truth he holds becomes his heresy.” 

It is in this context that the works of Dr. Ambedkar will prove 
to be a frank assessment and a candid critique of the societal norms 
requiring revision and reformulation which he himself did when the 
opportunity presented in the Constituent Assembly which framed the 
noble Constitution in which fundamental rights protect the indi- 
vidual against despotism whether it comes from the State or Society. 

‘The Untouchables’ is a sequel to the work on Shudras. Dr. Ambedkar 
has in his usual critical style assessed the Indian social system. He 
is critical of the Indian social system because it did not foster the 
spirit of critical inquiry. It is, indeed, a matter of regret that Indians 
could not produce a Voltaire or Milton or Victor Hugo because 
as a class they did not approve of it. The spirit of inquiry is the 
sine-qua-non of progress. The larger the area of inquiry, the 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


6 


(iv) 

greater the scope of investigation, the greater are the chances that 
liberty will thrive and prosper along with tolerance and the existence 
of dissent. It is in this context that both the works which are brought 
together in the present volume provide enough material for reflection 
and action to the layman and will prove to be the source of inspiration 
to the scholar. The works have to be adjudged in the context in which 
they were written to shake the average Indian out of his complacency. 
Today the caste has become irrelevant in the light of modern 
technological developments. However, social sciences lag behind the 
technology. It is in this area that our efforts must be concentrated 
to improve the mind of man, so as to bring it in harmony with the 
technological progress. Dr. Ambedkar has shown that the caste has 
become out of place and is a barrier to social progress and individual 
advancement of freedom. The basic message of his work is that control 
of minds of men by some powerful individuals is bad as such control 
retards movement. The best source of practical instruction in the art 
of life is the opportunity to commit errors and this means respon- 
sibility for one’s actions and their consequences. That India did not 
wake to the need to rearrange its social institutions for centuries 
and it produced Mahatma Fule and Dr. Ambedkar only under the 
British rule because of its democratic culture of public instruction 
shows the old truth which has been succinctly expressed by G. B. Shaw 
in, ‘Man, and Superman’ that “liberty means responsibility. That’s 
why most men dread it.” Modern psychoanalysts and existentialist 
philosophers have not been able to add to or detract from this 
statement. In the context of the march of technology, there is a chance 
of abuse of powers by those in authority and experts or priests of 
science who control masses by techniques of electronic media. Mind 
control by mass media and drugs is the awesome reality. Just consider 
what F. A. Hayek says: (The Constitution of Liberty) : 

“The day may not be far off when authority by adding appropriate drugs 
to our water supply or by some other similar device, will be able to elate 
or depress, stimulate or paralyse, the minds of whole population.” 

Today the priesthood is replaced by experts and it is a new class 
or caste that has emerged. The remedy lies in making knowledge free 
and in widening the frontiers of practical social wisdom. It is in this 
context that the rationalism of Dr. Ambedkar is relevant to all of 
us who prize the liberty to know, to utter and to argue freely 
according to conscience, above all liberties. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


7 


(v) 

This slightly long Foreword has become necessary to elucidate and 
emphasise the social context in which they came to be written and 
with which the post-independence generation of Indians may not be 
adequately acquainted. The Editorial Board has no doubt that these 
works will prove to be an invitation to renew our faith in our noble 
Constitution. 

The Editorial Board thanks the Secretary, Education Department 
for his interest in the project. The Board places on record its 
appreciation of the assistance it has received from the Officer on 
Special Duty and his staff as well as Shri P. S. More, Director of 
Government Printing and Stationery, M.S., Bombay; Shri P. L. Purkar, 
Manager, Government Photozinco Press, Pune and the staff under 
them in bringing out the present volume on time. 



(Kamalkishor Kadam) 
Education Minister and 
President of the 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar 
Source Material Publication Committee, 
M.S., Bombay. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


8 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


9 


1 


SHUDRAS 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


10 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


11 


WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


12 


Inscribed to the 
Memory of 

MAHATMA JOTIBA FULE 
( 1827 — 1890 ) 

The Greatest Shudra of Modern India who 
made the lower classes of Hindus conscious 
of their slavery to the higher classes and 
who preached the gospel that for India 
social democracy was more vital than 
independence from foreign rule. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


13 


WHO WERE 
THE 

SHUDRAS? 


How they came to be the 
Fourth Varna in the 
Indo-Aryan Society 


By 

B. R. Ambedkar 


[Reprint of the Edition of 1947] 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


14 


Thacker and Co.’s editions 


First Edition 1946 

Second Edition 1947 

Third Edition 1970 


Government of Maharashtra’s 

First Edition January 26, 1990 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XM 


15 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Preface .. .. 9 

Chapter 

I. The Riddle of the Shudras .. .. 21 

II. The Brahmanic Theory of the Origin 

of the Shudras .. .. 37 

III. The Brahmanic Theory of the Status 

of the Shudras .. .. 42 

IV. Shudras versus Aryans .. .. 65 

V. Aryans against Aryans .. .. 86 

VI. Shudras and Dasas .. .. 101 

VII. The Shudras were Kshatriyas .. .. 114 

VIII. The Number of Varnas, Three or Four? .. .. 132 

IX. Brahmins versus Shudras .. .. 140 

X. The Degradation of the Shudras .. .. 156 

XI. The Story of Reconciliation .. .. 186 

XII. The Theory in the Crucible .. .. 204 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\CONTENT Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


16 


APPENDICES 

I. References to the word ‘Arya’ (3pf) in the 
Rig Veda 

II. References to the word ‘Arya (3IFf) in the 
Rig Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda 

III. Different meanings of the word (3Pf) found in 
the Rig Veda 

IV. References to ‘Dasa’ in the Rig Veda 

V. References to ‘Dasyu’ in the Rig Veda 

VI. References to the word ‘Varna’ in the Rig Veda 


MAPS 

I. People of India according to Cephalic Index 

II. Expansion of the Pre-Teutonic Nordics 

III. Maximum Expansion of Alpines 

IV. Expansion of the Teutonic Nordics and Slavic Alpines 

Notes : (1) Appendices I to VI are based upon the information contained 

in the Maharashtra Dyankosh, Vol. III. 

Map I is taken from the Census Report by Mr. Das. Maps 
II, III and IV are from Mr. Grant’s Book, The passing of the 
Great Race, published by Bell & Sons. 


( 2 ) 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


9 


PREFACE 


In the present stage of the literature on the subject, a book on the 
Shudras cannot be regarded as a superfluity. Nor can it be said to 
deal with a trivial problem. The general proposition that the social 
organization of the Indo-Aryans was based on the theory of 
Chaturvarnya and that Chaturvarnya means division of society into 
four classes — Brahmins (priests), Kshatriyas (soldiers), Vaishyas (trad- 
ers) and Shudras (menials) does not convey any idea of the real 
nature of the problem of the Shudras nor of its magnitude. 
Chaturvarnya would have been a very innocent principle if it meant 
no more than mere division of society into four classes. Unfortunately, 
more than this is involved in the theory of Chaturvarnya. Besides 
dividing society into four orders, the theory goes further and makes 
the principle of graded inequality the basis for determining the terms 
of associated life as between the four Varnas. Again, the system of 
graded inequality is not merely notional. It is legal and penal. Under 
the system of Chaturvarnya, the Shudra is not only placed at the 
bottom of the gradation but he is subjected to innumerable ignominies 
and disabilities so as to prevent him from rising above the condition 
fixed for him by law. Indeed until the fifth Varna of the Untouchables 
came into being, the Shudras were in the eyes of the Hindus the 
lowest of the low. This shows the nature of what might be called 
the problem of the Shudras. If people have no idea of the magnitude 
of the problem it is because they have not cared to know what the 
population of the Shudras is. Unfortunately, the census does not show 
their population separately. But there is no doubt that excluding the 
Untouchables the Shudras form about 75 to 80 per cent of the 
population of Hindus. A treatise which deals with so vast a population 
cannot be considered to be dealing with a trivial problem. 

The book deals with the Shudras in the Indo-Aryan Society. There 
is a view that an inquiry into these questions is of no present-day 
moment. It is said by no less a person than Mr. Sherring in his Hindu 
Tribes and Castes 1 that : 

“Whether the Shudras were Aryans, or aboriginal inhabitants of India, or 

tribes produced by the union of the one with the other, is of little practical 


1 Vol. I, Introduction, P. xxi. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


10 


10 


moment. They were at an early period placed in a class by themselves, 
and received the fourth or last degree of rank, yet at a considerable 
distance from the three superior castes. Even though it be admitted that 
at the outset they were not Aryans, still, from their extensive intermar- 
riages with the three Aryan Castes, they have become so far Aryanized 
that, in some instances as already shown, they have gained more than 
they have lost, and certain tribes now designated as Shudras are in reality 
more Brahmins and Kshatriyas than anything else. In short, they have 
become as much absorbed in other races as the Celtic tribes of England 
have become absorbed in the Anglo-Saxon race; and their own separate 
individuality, if they ever had any, has completely vanished.” 

This view is based on two errors. Firstly, the prsent-day Shudras are 
a collection of castes drawn from heterogeneous stocks and are racially 
different from the original Shudras of the Indo-Aryan society. Secondly, 
in the case of Shudras the centre of interest is not the Shudras as a 
people but the legal system of pains and penalties to which they are 
subjected. The system of pains and penalties was no doubt originally 
devised by the Brahmins to deal with the Shudras of the Indo-Aryan 
society, who have ceased to exist as a distinct, separate, identifiable 
community. But strange as it may seem the Code intended to deal with 
them has remained in operation and is now applied to all low-class 
Hindus, who have no lock stock with the original Shudras. How this 
happened must be a matter of curiosity to all. My explanation is that 
the Shudras of the Indo-Aryan Society in course of time became so 
degraded as a consequence of the severity of the Brahmanical laws that 
they really came to occupy a very low state in public life. Two 
consequences followed from this. One consequence was a change in the 
connotation of the word Shudra. The word Shudra lost its original 
meaning of being the name of a particular community and became a 
general name for a low-class people without civilization, without culture, 
without respect and without position. The second consequence was that 
the widening of the meaning of the word Shudra brought in its train 
the widening of the application of the Code. It is in this way that the 
so-called Shudras of the present-day have become subject to the Code, 
though they are not Shudras in the original sense of the word. Be that 
as it may, the fact remains that the Code intended for the original 
culprits has come to be applied to the innocents. If the Hindu law-givers 
had enough historical sense to realize that the original Shudras were 
different from the present-day low-class people, this tragedy — this 
massacre of the innocents — would have been avoided. The fact, however 
unfortunate it may be, is that the Code is applied to the present-day 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


11 


11 

Shudras in the same rigorous manner in which it was applied to the 
original Shudras. How such a Code came into being cannot therefore 
be regarded as of mere antiquarian interest to the Shudras of to- 
day. 

While it may be admitted that a study of the origin of the Shudras 
is welcome, some may question my competence to handle the theme. 
I have already been warned that while I may have a right to speak 
on Indian politics, religion and religious history of India are not my 
field and that I must not enter it. I do not know why my critics have 
thought it necessary to give me this warning. If it is an antidote 
to any extravagant claim made by me as a thinker or a writer, then 
it is unnecessary. For, I am ready to admit that I am not competent 
to speak even on Indian politics. If the warning is for the reason 
that I cannot claim mastery over the Sanskrit language, ‘I admit this 
deficiency. But I do not see why it should disqualify me altogether 
from operating in this field. There is very little of literature in the 
Sanskrit language which is not available in English. The want of 
knowledge of Sanskrit need not therefore be a bar to my handling 
a theme such as the present. For I venture to say that a study of 
the relevant literature, albeit in English translations, for 15 years 
ought to be enough to invest even a person endowed with such 
moderate intelligence like myself, with sufficient degree of compe- 
tence for the task. As to the exact measure of my competence to speak 
on the subject, this book will furnish the best testimony. It may well 
turn out that this attempt of mine is only an illustration of the 
proverbial fool rushing in where the angels fear to tread. But I take 
refuge in the belief that even the fool has a duty to perform, namely, 
to do his bit if the angel has gone to sleep or is unwilling to proclaim 
the truth. This is my justification for entering the prohibited field. 

What is it that is noteworthy about this book? Undoubtedly the 
conclusions which I have reached as a result of my investigations. 
Two questions are raised in this book: (1) Who were the Shudras? 
and (2) How they came to be the fourth Varna of the Indo-Aryan 
society? My answers to them are summarised below : 

(1) The Shudras were one of the Aryan communities of the Solar 
race. 

(2) There was a time when the Aryan society recognized only three 
Varnas, namely, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. 

(3) The Shudras did not form a separate Varna. They ranked as 
part of the Kshatriya Varna in the Indo-Aryan society. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


12 


12 

(4) There was a continuous feud betwen the Shudra kings and 
the Brahmins in which the Brahmins were subjected to many 
tyrannies and indignities. 

(5) As a result of the hatred towards the Shudras generated by 
their tyrannies and oppressions, the Brahmins refused to 
perform the Upanayana of the Shudras. 

(6) Owing to the denial of Upanayana, the Shudras who were 
Kshatriyas became socially degraded, fell below the rank of 
the Vaishyas and thus came to form the fourth Varna. 

I must of course await the verdict of scholars on these conclusions. 
That these conclusions are not merely original but they are violently 
opposed to those that are current is of course evident. Whether these 
conclusions will be accepted or not will depend upon the mentality 
of a person claiming to have a right to sit in judgement over the 
issue. Of course, if he is attached to a particular thesis he will reject 
mine. I would not however bother about his judgement for he would 
be an adversary from whom nothing can be expected except oppo- 
sition. But if a person is an honest critic, howsoever cautious, however 
conservative he may be, provided that he has an open mind and a 
readiness to accept facts, I do not despair of converting him to my 
view. This expectation may fail to materialize, but about one thing 
I am quite certain. My critics will have to admit that the book is 
rich in fresh insights and new visions. 

Apart from scholars, how the Hindu public will react may be an 
interesting speculation. The Hindus of to-day fall into five definite 
classes. There is a class of Hindus, who are known as orthodox and 
who will not admit that there is anything wrong with the Hindu social 
system. To talk of reforming it is to them rank blasphemy. There 
is a class of Hindus who are known as Arya Samajists. They believe 
in the Vedas and only in the Vedas. They differ from the orthodox 
inasmuch as they discard everything which is not in the Vedas. Their 
gospel is that of return to the Vedas. There is a class of Hindus who 
will admit that the Hindu social system is all wrong, but who hold 
that there is no necessity to attack it. Their argument is that since 
law does not recognize it, it is a dying, if not a dead system. There 
is a class of Hindus, who are politically minded. They are indifferent 
to such questions. To them Swaraj is more important than social 
reform. The fifth class of Hindus are those who are rationalists and 
who regard social reforms as of primary importance, even more 
important than Swaraj. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


13 


13 

With the Hindus, who fall into the second category, those who are 
likely to regard the book as unnecessary, I cannot agree. In a way, 
they are right when they say that the existing law in British India 
does not recognize the caste system prevalent in the Hindu society. 
It is true that, having regard to section 11 of the Civil Procedure 
Code, it would not be possible for a Hindu to obtain a declaration 
from a civil court that he belongs to a particular Varna. If courts 
in British India have to consider the question whether a person 
belongs to a particular Varna, it is only in cases of marriage, 
inheritance and adoption, the rules of which vary according to the 
Varna to which the party belongs. While it is true that the Law in 
British India does not recognize the four Varnas of the Hindus, one 
must be careful not to misunderstand what this means. To put it 
precisely: (1) it does not mean that the observance of the Varna 
system is a crime; (2) it does not mean that the Varna system has 
disappeared; (3) it does not mean that the Varna system is not given 
effect to in cases where the observance of its rules are necessary to 
acquiring civil rights; (4) it only means that the general legal sanction 
behind the Varna system has been withdrawn. Now, law is not the 
only sanction which goes to sustain social institutions. Institutions 
are sustained by other sanctions also. Of these, religious sanction 
and social sanction are the most important. The Varna system has 
a religious sanction. Because it has a religious sanction, the Varna 
system has the fullest social sanction from the Hindu society. With 
no legal prohibition, this religious sanction has been more than 
enough to keep the Varna system in full bloom. The best evidence 
to show that the Varna system is alive notwithstanding there is no 
law to enforce it, is to be found in the fact that the status of the 
Shudras and the Untouchables in the Hindu society has remained 
just what it has been. It cannot therefore be said that a study such 
as this is unnecessary. 

As to the politically-minded Hindu, he need not be taken seriously. 
His line of approach is generally governed by a short-term view more 
than by long-range considerations. He is willing to follow the line 
of least resistance and postpone a matter, however urgent, if it is 
likely to make him unpopular. It is therefore quite natural if the 
politically-minded Hindu regards this book as a nuisance. 

The book treads heavily on the toes of the Arya Samajists. My 
conclusions have come in sharp conflict with their ideology at two 
most important points. The Arya Samajists believe that the four 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


14 


14 

Varnas of the Indo-Aryan society have been in existence from the 
very beginning. The book shows that there was a time when there 
were only three Varnas in the Indo-Aryan society. The Arya Samajists 
believe that the Vedas are eternal and sacrosanct. The book shows 
that portions of the Vedas at any rate, particularly the Purusha 
Sukta, which is the mainstay of the Arya Samajists, are fabrications 
by Brahmins intended to serve their own purposes. Both these 
conclusions are bound to act like atomic bombs on the dogmas of the 
Arya Samajists. 

I am not sorry for this clash with Arya Samajists. The Arya 
Samajists have done great mischief in making the Hindu society a 
stationary society by preaching that the Vedas are eternal, without 
beginning, without end, and infallible, and that the social institutions 
of the Hindus being based on the Vedas are also eternal, without 
beginning, without end, infallible and therefore requiring no change. 
To be permeated with such a belief is the worst thing that can happen 
to a community. I am convinced that the Hindu society will not accept 
the necessity of reforming itself unless and until this Arya Samajists’ 
ideology is completely destroyed. The book does render this service, 
if no other. 

What the Orthodox Hindu will say about this book I can well 
imagine for I have been battling with him all these years. The only 
thing I did not know was how the meek “and non-violent looking 
Hindu can be violent when anybody attacks his Sacred Books. I 
became aware of it as never before when last year I received a shower 
of letters from angry Hindus, who became quite unbalanced by my 
speech on the subject delivered in Madras. The letters were full of 
filthy abuse, unmentionable and unprintable, and full of dire threats 
to my life. Last time they treated me as a first offender and let me 
off with mere threats. I don’t know what they will do this time. For 
on reading the book they are sure to find more cause for anger at 
what in their eyes is a repetition of the offence in an aggravated 
form for having brought forth chapter and verse to show that what 
goes by the name of Sacred Books contains fabrications which are 
political in their motive, partisan in their composition and fraudulent 
in their purpose. I do not propose to take any notice of their 
vilifications or their threats. For I know very well that they are a 
base crew who, professing to defend their religion, have made religion 
a matter of trade. They are more selfish than any other set of beings 
in the world, and are prostituting their intelligence to support the vested 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


15 


15 

interests of their class. It is a matter of no small surprise that when 
the mad dogs of orthodoxy are let loose against a person who has 
the courage to raise his voice against the so-called Sacred Books of 
the Hindus, eminent Hindus occupying lofty places, claiming them- 
selves to be highly educated and who could be expected to have no 
interest and to have a free and open mind become partisans and join 
the outcry. Even Hindu Judges of High Courts and Hindu Prime 
Ministers of Indian States do not hesitate to join their kind. They 
go further. They not only lead the howl against him but even join 
in the hunt. What is outrageous is that they do so because they 
believe that their high stations in life would invest their words with 
an amount of terror which would be sufficient enough to cow down 
any and every opponent of orthodoxy. What I would like to tell these 
amiable gentlemen is that they will not be able to stop me by their 
imprecations. They do not seem to be aware of the profound and 
telling words of Dr. Johnson who when confronted with analogous 
situation said, ‘I am not goint to be deterred from catching a cheat 
by the menaces of a ruffian.’ I do not wish to be rude to these high- 
placed critics, much less do I want to say that they are playing the 
part of a ruffian interested in the escape of a cheat. But I do want 
to tell them two things: firstly that I propose, no matter what 
happens, to follow the determination of Dr. Johnson in the pursuit 
of historical truth by the exposure of the Sacred Books so that the 
Hindus may know that it is the doctrines contained in their Sacred 
Books which are responsible for the decline and fall of their country 
and their society; secondly, if the Hindus of this generation do not 
take notice of what I have to say I am sure the future generation 
will. I do not despair of success. For I take consolation in the words 
of the poet Bhavabhuti who said, “Time is infinite and earth is vast, 
some day there will be born a man who will appreciate what I have 
said.” Whatever that be the book is a challenge to orthodoxy. 

The only class of Hindus, who are likely to welcome the book are 
those who believe in the necessity and urgency of social reform. The 
fact that it is a problem which will certainly take a long time to 
solve and will call the efforts of many generations to come, is in their 
opinion, no justification for postponing the study of that problem. 
Even an ardent Hindu politician, if he is honest, will admit that the 
problems arising out of the malignant form of communalism, which 
is inherent in the Hindu social organization and which the politically 
minded Hindus desire to ignore or postpone, invariably return to 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


16 


16 

plague those very politicians at every turn. These problems are not 
the difficulties of the moment. They are our permanent difficulties, 
that is to say, difficulties of every moment. I am glad to know that 
such a class of Hindus exists. Small though they be, they are my 
mainstay and it is to them that I have addressed my argument. 

It will be said that I have shown no respect for the sacred 
literature of the Hindus which every sacred literature deserves. If 
the charge be true, I can plead two circumstances in justification 
of myself. Firstly I claim that in my research I have been guided 
by the best tradition of the historian who treats all literature as 
vulgar — I am using the word in its original sense of belonging to 
the people — to be examined and tested by accepted rules of evidence 
without recognizing any distinction between the sacred and the 
profane and with the sole object of finding the truth. If in following 
this tradition I am found wanting in respect and reverence for the 
sacred literature of the Hindus my duty as a scholar must serve 
as my excuse. Secondly, respect and reverence for the sacred 
literature cannot be made to order. They are the results of social 
factors which make such sentiments natural in one case and quite 
unnatural in another. Respect and reverence for the sacred literature 
of the Hindus is natural to a Brahmin scholar. But it is quite 
unnatural in a non-Brahmin scholar. The explanation of this 
difference is quite simple. That a Brahmin scholar should treat this 
sacred literature with uncritical reverence and forbear laying on it 
the heavy hands which the detachment of an intellectual as 
distinguished from the merely educated is what is to be expected. 
For what is this sacred literature? It is a literature which is almost 
entirely the creation of the Brahmins. Secondly, its whole object is 
to sustain the superiority and privileges of the Brahmins as against 
the non-Brahmins. Why should not the Brahmins uphold the sanctity 
of such a literature? The very reason that leads the Brahmin to 
uphold it makes the non-Brahmin hate it. Knowing that what is 
called the sacred literature contains an abominable social philosophy 
which is responsible for their social degradation, the non-Brahmin 
reacts to it in a manner quite opposite to that of the Brahmin. That 
I should be wanting in respect and reverence for the sacred literature 
of the Hindus should not surprise any one if it is borne in mind 
that I am a non-Brahmin, not even a non-Brahmin but an Untouch- 
able. My antipathy to the sacred literature could not naturally be 
less than that of the non-Brahmin. As Prof. Thorndyke says: that 
a man thinks is a biological fact what he thinks is a sociological 
fact. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


17 


17 

I am aware that this difference in the attitude of a Brahmin 
scholar and a non-Brahmin scholar towards this sacred literature — 
literature which is the main source of the material for the study 
of the problems of the social history of the Hindus — the former with 
his attitude of uncritical commendation and the latter with his 
attitude of unsparing condemnation is most harmful to historical 
research. 

The mischief done by the Brahmin scholars to historical research 
is obvious. The Brahmin scholar has a two-fold interest in the 
maintenance of the sanctity of this literature. In the first place being 
the production of his forefathers his filial duty leads him to defend 
it even at the cost of truth. In the second place as it supports the 
privileges of the Brahmins, he is careful not to do anything which 
would undermine its authority. The necessity of upholding the 
system by which he knows he stands to profit, as well as of upholding 
the prestige of his forefathers as the founders of the system, acts 
as a silent immaculate premise which is ever present in the mind 
of the Brahmin scholar and prevents him from reaching or preaching 
the truth. That is why one finds so little that is original in the field 
of historical research by Brahmin scholars unless it be a matter of 
fixing dates or tracing genealogies. The non-Brahmin scholar has 
none of these limitations and is therefore free to engage himself in 
a relentless pursuit of truth. That such a difference exists between 
the two classes of students is not a mere matter of speculation. This 
very book is an illustraton in point. It contains an exposure of the 
real character of the conspiracy against the Shudras, which no 
Brahmin scholar could have had the courage to present. 

While it is true that a non-Brahmin scholar is free from the 
inhibitions of the Brahmin scholar he is likely to go to the other extreme 
and treat the whole literature as a collection of fables and fictions fit 
to be thrown on the dung heap not worthy of serious study. This is 
not the spirit of an historian. As has been well said, an historian ought 
to be exact, sincere, and impartial; free from passion, unbiased by 
interest, fear, resentment or affection; and faithful to the truth, which 
is the mother of history, the preserver of great actions, the enemy of 
oblivion, the witness of the past, the director of the future. In 
short he must have an open mind, though it may not be an empty 
mind, and readiness to examine all evidence even though it be 
spurious. The non-Brahmin scholar may find it difficult to remain true 
to this spirit of the historian. He is likely to import the spirit of non- 
Brahmin politics in the examination of the truth or falsity of the 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


18 


18 

ancient literature which is not justifiable. I feel certain that in my 
research I have kept myself free from such prejudice. In writing about 
the Shudras I have had present in my mind no other consideration 
except that of pure history. It is well-known that there is a non- 
Brahmin movement in this country which is a political movement of 
the Shudras. It is also well-known that I have been connected with 
it. But I am sure that the reader will find that I have not made 
this book a preface to non-Brahmin politics. 

I am sensible of the many faults in the presentation of the matter. 
The book is loaded with quotations, too long and too many. The book 
is not a work of art and it is possible that readers will find it tedious 
to go through it. But this fault is not altogether mine. Left to myself, 
I would have very willingly applied the pruning knife. But the book 
is written for the ignorant and the uninformed Shudras, who do not 
know how they came to be what they are. They do not care how 
artistically the theme is handled. All they desire is a full harvest 
of material — the bigger the better. Those of them to whom I have 
shown the manuscript have insisted upon retaining the quotations. 
Indeed, their avidity for such material was so great that some of them 
went to the length of insisting that besides giving translations in 
English in the body of the book I should also add the original Sanskrit 
texts in an Appendix. While I had to deny their request for the 
reproduction of the original Sanskrit texts, I could not deny their 
request for retaining the translations on the ground that the material 
is not readily available to them. When one remembers that it is the 
Shudras, who have largely been instrumental in sustaining the 
infamous system of Chaturvarnya, though it has been the primary 
cause of their degradation and that only the Shudras can destroy 
the Chaturvarnya, it would be easy to realize why I allowed the 
necessity of educating and thereby preparing the Shudra fully for 
such a sacred task to outweigh all other considerations which 
favoured the deletion or if not deletion the abridgement of the 
quotations. 

There are three persons to whom I owe my thanks. Firstly to the 
writer of Adhyaya LX of the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata. 
Whether it is Vyasa, Vaishampayana, Suta, Lomaharshana or Bhrigu 
it is difficult to say. But whoever he was, he has rendered great 
service by giving a full description of Paijavana. If he had not 
described Paijavana as a Shudra, the clue to the origin of the Shudra 
would have been completely lost. I express my gratitude to the writer 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


19 


19 

for having preserved so important a piece of information for posterity. 
Without it, this book could not have been written. Secondly, I must 
thank Prof. Kangle of Ismail Yusuf College, Andheri, Bombay. He 
has come to my rescue and has checked the translation of Sanskrit 
shlokas which occur in the book. As I am not a Sanskrit scholar, 
his help has been to me a sort of an assurance that I have not bungled 
badly in dealing with the material which is in Sanskrit. The fact that 
he has helped me does not mean that he is responsible for such faults 
and errors as may be discovered by my critics. Thanks are also due 
to Prof. Manohar Chitnis of the Siddharth College, Bombay, who has 
been good enough to prepare the Index. 

I am grateful to Messrs. Charles Scribner’s Sons Publishers, New 
York for their kind permission to reproduce the three maps from 
Mr. Madison Grant’s Passing of the Great Race and which form 
Appendices II, III and IV of this book. 


10th October 1946 B. R. AMBEDKAR 

“Rajgriha,” 

Dadar, 

Bombay 14. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07\PREFACE Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013XS 


20 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


21 


CHAPTER I 

THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 

EVERYBODY knows that the Shudras formed the fourth Varna 
of the Indo-Aryan society. But very few have cared to inquire who 
were these Shudras and how they came to be the fourth Varna. That 
such an enquiry is of first-rate importance is beyond question. For, 
it is worth knowing how the Shudras came to occupy the fourth place, 
whether it was the result of evolution or it was brought about by 
revolution. 

Any attempt to discover who the Shudras were and how they came 
to be the fourth Varna must begin with the origin of the Chaturvarnya 
in the Indo-Aryan society. A study of the Chaturvarnya must in its 
turn start with a study of the ninetieth Hymn of the Tenth Mandala 
of the Rig Veda — a Hymn, which is known by the famous name of 
Purusha Sukta. 

What does the Hymn say? It says 1 : 

“1. Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. 

On every side enveloping the earth he overpassed (it) by a space 
of ten fingers. 

2. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever has been and 
whatever shall be. He is the Lord of immortality, since (or when) 
by food he expands. 

3. Such is his greatness, and Purusha is superior to this. All 
existences are a quarter to him; and three-fourths of him are that 
which is immortal in the sky. 

4. With three-quarters, Purusha mounted upwards. A quarter of him 
was again produced here. He was then diffused everywhere over 
things which eat and things which do not eat. 

5. From him was born Viraj, and from Viraj, Purusha. When born, 
he extended beyond the earth, both behind and before. 

6. When the gods performed a sacrifice with Purusha as the oblation, 
the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the autumn 
its (accompanying) offering. 


1 Muir’s, Original Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I, P. 9. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


7. This victim, Purusha, born in the beginning, they immolated on the 
sacrificial grass. With him the gods, the Sadhyas, and the rishis 
sacrificed. 

8. From that universal sacrifice were provided curds and butter. It formed 
those aerial (creatures) and animals both wild and tame. 

9. From that universal sacrifice sprang the rik and saman verses, the 
metres and the yajus. 

10. From it sprang horses, and all animals with two rows of teeth; kine 
sprang from it; from it goats and sheep. 

11. When (the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut 
him up? What was his mouth? What arms (had he)? What (two objects) 
are said (to have been) his thighs and feet? 

12. The Brahmana was his mouth, the Rajanya was made his arms; the 
being called the Vaishya, he was his thighs; the Shudra sprang from 
his feet. 

13. The moon sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from the eye, Indra 
and Agni from his mouth and Vayu from his breath. 

14. From his navel arose the air, from his head the sky, from his feet the 
earth, from his ear the (four) quarters; in this manner (the gods) formed 
the worlds. 

15. When the gods, performing sacrifices, bound Purusha as a victim, there 
were seven sticks (stuck up) for it (around the fire), and thrice seven 
pieces of fuel were made. 

16. With sacrifices the gods performed the sacrifice. These were the earliest 
rites. These great powers have sought the sky, where are the former 
Sadhyas, gods.” 

The Purusha Sukta is a theory of the origin of the Universe. In other 
words, it is a cosmogony. No nation which has reached an advanced degree 
of thought has failed to develop some sort of cosmogony. The Egyptians 
had a cosmogony somewhat analogous with that set out in the Purusha 
Sukta. According to it , 1 it was god Khnumu, ‘the shaper,’ who shaped living 
things on the potter’s wheel, “created all that is, he formed all that exists, 
he is the father of fathers, the mother of mothers... he fashioned men, he 
made the gods, he was the father from the beginning... he is the creator 
of the heaven, the earth, the underworld, the water, the mountains... he 
formed a male and a female of all birds, fishes, wild beasts, cattle and of 
all worms.” A very, similar cosmogony is found in Chapter I of the Genesis 
in the Old Testament. 

Cosmogonies have never been more than matters of academic interest 
and have served no other purpose than to satisfy the curiosity of the 
student and to help to amuse children. This may be true of some parts 
of the Purusha Sukta. But it certainly cannot be true of the whole 
of it. That is because all verses of the Purusha Sukta are not of the 
same importance and do not have the same significance. Verses 

1 Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Vol. IV, p. 145. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


23 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 23 

11 and 12 fall in one category and the rest of the verses fall in another 
category. Verses other than 11 and 12 may be regarded as of academic 
interest. Nobody relies upon them. No Hindu even remembers them. 
But it is quite different with regard to verses 11 and 12. Prima facie 
these verses do no more than explain how the four classes, namely, 
(1) Brahmins or priests, (2) Kshatriyas or soldiers, (3) Vaishyas or 
traders, and (4) Shudras or menials, arose from the body of the 
Creator. But the fact is that these verses are not understood as being 
merely explanatory of a cosmic phenomenon. It would be a grave 
mistake to suppose that they were regarded by the Indo-Aryans as 
an innocent piece of a poet’s idle imagination. They are treated as 
containing a mandatory injunction from the Creator to the effect that 
Society must be constituted on the basis of four classes mentioned 
in the Sukta. Such a construction of the verses in question may not 
be warranted by their language. But there is no doubt that according 
to tradition this is how the verses are construed, and it would indeed 
be difficult to say that this traditional construction is not in 
consonance with the intention of the author of the Sukta. Verses 11 
and 12 of the Purusha Sukta are, therefore, not a mere cosmogony. 
They contain a divine injunction prescribing a particular form of the 
constitution of society. 

The constitution of society prescribed by the Purusha Sukta is 
known as Chaturvarnya. As a divine injunction, it naturally became 
the ideal of the Indo-Aryan society. This ideal of Chaturvarnya was 
the mould in which the life of the Indo-Aryan community in its early 
or liquid state was cast. It is this mould, which gave the Indo-Aryan 
community its peculiar shape and structure. 

This reverence, which the Indo-Aryan Society had for this ideal 
mould of Chaturvarnya, is not only beyond question, but it is also 
beyond description. Its influence on the Indo-Aryan society has been 
profound and indelible. The social order prescribed by the Purusha 
Sukta has never been questioned by anyone except Buddha. Even 
Buddha was not able to shake it, for the simple reason that both 
after the fall of Buddhism and even during the period of Buddhism 
there were enough law-givers, who made it their business not only 
to defend the ideal of the Purusha Sukta but to propagate it and 
to elaborate it. 

To take a few illustrations of this propaganda in support of the 
Purusha Sukta, reference may be made to the Apastamha Dharma 
Sutra and the Vasishtha Dharma Sutra. The Apastamha Dharma 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sutra states: 

“There are four castes — Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras. 

Among these, each preceding (caste) is superior by birth to the one 
following. 1 

For all these excepting Shudras and those who have committed bad 
actions are ordained (1) the initiation ( Upanayan or the wearing of the 
sacred thread), (2) the study of the Veda and (3) the kindling of the sacred 
fire (i.e., the right to perform sacrifice). 2 

This is repeated by Vasishtha Dharma Sutra which says : 

“There are four castes (Varnas), Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and 
Shudras. Three castes, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas (are called) 
twice-born. 

Their first birth is from their mother; the second from the investiture 
with the sacred girdle. In that (second birth) the Savitri is the mother, 
but the teacher is said to be, the father. 

They call the teacher father, because he gives instruction in the Veda. 3 

The four castes are distinguished by their origin and by particular 
sacraments. 

There is also the following passage of the Veda : “The Brahmana was 
his mouth, the Kshatriya formed his arms, the Vaishya his thighs; the 
Shudra was born from his feet.” 

It has been declared in the following passage that a Shudra shall not 
receive the sacraments.” 

Many other law-givers have in parrot-like manner repeated the theme 
of the Purusha Sukta and have reiterated its sanctity. It is unnecessary 
to repeat their version of it. All those, who had raised any opposition 
to the sanctity of the ideal set out in the Purusha Sukta, were finally 
laid low by Manu, the architect of the Hindu society. For Manu did 
two things. In the first place, he enunciated afresh the ideal of the 
Purusha Sukta as a part of divine injunction. He said : 

“For the prosperity of the worlds, he (the creator) from his mouth, arms, 
thighs and feet created the Brahmin, Kshatriya and Vaishya and the 
Shudra. 4 

The Brahmin, Kshatriya (and) Vaishya (constitute) the three twice-born 
castes; but the fourth the shudra has only one birth. 3 " 

In this he was no doubt merely following his predecessors. But he 
went a step further and enunciated another proposition in which he 
said : 

“Veda is the only and ultimate sanction for Dharma. 6 ” 

Bearing in mind that the Purusha Sukta is a part of the Veda, it 
cannot be difficult to realize that Manu invested the social ideal of 

1 Prasna 1. Patala 1, Khanda 1, Sutras 4-5. 4 Manu, Chapter I, Verse 31. 

2 Prasna 1, Patala 1, Khanda 1, Sutra 6. 5 Ibid., Chapter X, Verse 4. 

3 Chapter II, Verses 1-4. 6 Ibid., Chapter II, Verse 6. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


25 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 25 

Chaturvarnya contained in the Purusha Sukta, with a degree of 
divinity and infallibility which it did not have before. 


II 

A critical examination of the Purusha Sukta therefore becomes very 
essential. 

It is claimed by the Hindus that the Purusha Sukta is unique. This 
is no doubt a tall claim for an idea which came to birth when the 
mind of man was primitive and was without the rich endowment of 
varied thought available in modern times. But there need not be much 
difficulty in admitting this claim provided it is understood in what 
respect the Purusha Sukta is unique. 

The principal ground for regarding the Purusha Sukta as unique 
is that the ideal of social organization, namely, the ideal of 
Chaturvarnya which it upholds, is unique. Is this a sufficient ground 
for holding the Purusha Sukta as unique? The Purusha Sukta would 
really have been unique if it had preached a classless society as an 
ideal form of society. But what does the Purusha Sukta do? It 
preaches a class-composed society as its ideal. Can this be regarded 
as unique? Only a nationalist and a patriot can give an affirmative 
answer to this question. The existence of classes has been the 
de facto condition of every society, which is not altogether primitive. 
It is a normal state of society all over the world where society is 
in a comparatively advanced state. Looking at it from this point of 
view, what uniqueness can there be in the Purusha Sukta, when 
it does no more than recognize the sort of class composition that 
existed in the Indo-Aryan society? 

Notwithstanding this, the Purusha Sukta must be admitted to be 
unique, though for quite different reasons. The unfortunate part of 
the matter is that many people do not know the true reasons why 
the Purusha Sukta should be regarded as unique. But once the true 
reasons are known, people will not only have no hesitation in 
accepting that the Purusha Sukta is a unique production of the human 
intellect but will perhaps be shocked to know what an extraordinary 
production of human ingenuity it is. 

What are the features of the social ideal of the Purusha Sukta, 
which give it the hall mark of being unique? Though the existence 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of classes is the de facto condition of every society, nevertheless no 
society has converted this de facto state of affairs into a de jure 
connotation of an ideal society. The scheme of the Purusha Sukta 
is the only instance in which the real is elevated to the dignity of 
an ideal. This is the first unique feature of the scheme set forth in 
the Purusha Sukta. Secondly, no community has given the de facto 
state of class composition a legal effect by accepting it as a de jure 
connotation of an ideal society. The case of the Greeks is a case in 
point. Class composition was put forth as an ideal social structure 
by no less an advocate than Plato. But the Greeks never thought 
of making it real by giving it the sanction of law. The Purusha Sukta 
is the only instance in which an attempt was made to give reality 
to the ideal by invoking the sanction of law. Thirdly, no society has 
accepted that the class composition is an ideal. At the most they have 
accepted it as being natural. The Purusha Sukta goes further. It not 
only regards class composition as natural and ideal, but also regards 
it as sacred and divine. Fourthly, the number of the classes has never 
been a matter of dogma in any society known to history. The Romans 
had two classes. The Egyptians thought three were enough. The Indo- 
Iranians also had no more than three classes: 1 (1) The Athravans 
(priests) (2) Rathaeshtar (warriors) and (3) the Vastrya-fshuyat 
(peasantry). The scheme of the Purusha Sukta makes the division 
of society into four classes a matter of dogma. According to it, there 
can be neither more nor less. Fifthly, every society leaves a class 
to find its place vis-a-vis other classes according to its importance 
in society as may be determined by the forces operating from time 
to time. No society has an official gradation laid down, fixed and 
permanent, with an ascending scale of reverence and a descending 
scale of contempt. The scheme of the Purusha Sukta is unique, 
inasmuch as it fixes a permanent warrant of precedence among the 
different classes, which neither time nor circumstances can alter. The 
warrant of precedence is based on the principle of graded inequality 
among the four classes, whereby it recognizes the Brahmin to be 
above all, the Kshatriya below the Brahmin but above the Vaishya 
and the Shudra, the Vaishya below the Kshatriya but above the 
Shudra and the Shudra below all. 


1 Geiger : Civilization of the Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times, Vol. II, P.64 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


27 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 27 


III 

These are the real reasons why the Purusha Sukta is unique. But 
the Purusha Sukta is not merely unique, it is also extraordinary. It 
is extraordinary because it is so full of riddles. Few seem to be aware 
of these riddles. But anyone who cares to inquire will learn how real 
in their nature and how strange in their complexion these riddles 
are. The cosmogony set out in the Purusha Sukta is not the only 
cosmogony one comes across in the Rig Veda. There is another 
cosmogony which is expounded in the 72nd Hymn of the Tenth 
Mandala of the Rig Veda. It reads as follows d 

“1. Let us proclaim with a clear voice of the generation of the gods 
(the divine company), who, when their praises are recited, look 
(favourably on the worshipper) in this latter age. 

2. Brahmanaspati filled these (generations of the gods) with breath 
as a blacksmith (his bellows); in the first age of the gods the 
existent was born of the non-existent. 

3. In the first age of the gods the existent was born of the non- 
existent; after that the quarters (of the horizon) were born, and 
after them the upward-growing (trees). 

4. The earth was born from the upward growing (tree), the quarters 
were born from the earth; Daksha was born from Aditi and 
afterwards Aditi from Daksha. 

5. Aditi, who was thy daughter, Daksha, was born; after her, the 
gods were born, adorable, freed from the bonds of death. 

6. When, gods, you abode in this pool well-arranged, then a pungent 
dust went forth from you as if you were dancing. 

7. When, gods, you filled the worlds (with your radiance) as clouds 
(fill the earth with rain) then you brought fourth the sun hidden 
in the ocean. 

8. Eight sons (there were) of Aditi who were born from her body; 
she approached the gods with seven, she sent forth Martanda on 
high. 

9. With seven sons Aditi went to a former generation, but she bore 
Martanda for the birth and death (of human beings). 

The two cosmologies are fundamentally different in principle as 
well as in detail. The former explains creation ex nihilo ‘being was 
born of non-being’. The latter ascribes creation to a being which it 
calls Purusha. Why in one and the same book two such opposite 
cosmologies should have come to be propounded? Why did the author 
of the Purusha Sukta think it necessary to posit a Purusha and make 
all creation emanate from him? 

Any one who reads the Purusha Sukta will find that it starts with 
the creation of donkyes, horses, goats, etc., but does not say anything 

1 Wilson’s, Rig Veda, Vol. VI, p. 129 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

about the creation of man. At a point when it would have been 
natural to speak of the creation of man, it breaks off the chain and 
proceeds to explain the origin of the classes in the Aryan society. 
Indeed, the Purusha Sukta appears to make the explaining of the 
four classes of the Aryan society to be its primary concern. In doing 
this, the Purusha Sukta stands in complete contrast not only with 
other theologies but with the other parts of the Rig Veda also. 

No theology has made it its purpose to explain the origin of classes 
in society. Chapter I of the Genesis in the Old Testament, which 
can be said to be analogous in intention and purpose to the Purusha 
Sukta, does nothing more than explain how man was created. It is 
not that social classes did not exist in the old Jewish society. Social 
classes existed in all societies. The Indo-Aryans were no exception. 
Nevertheless, no theology has ever thought it necessary to explain 
how classes arise. Why then did the Purusha Sukta make the 
explanation of the origin of the social classes its primary concern? 

The Purusha Sukta is not the only place in the Rig Veda where 
a discussion of the origin of creation occurs. There are other places 
in the Rig Veda where the same subject is referred to. In this 
connection, one may refer to the following passage in the Rig Veda 
which reads as follows 

Rig Veda, i.96.2: “By the first nivid, by the wisdom of Ayu, he (Agni) 

created these children of men; by his gleaming light the earth and the 

waters, the gods sustained Agni the giver of the riches.” 

In this, there is no reference at all to the separate creation of 
classes, though there is no doubt that even at the time of the 
Rig Veda, the Indo-Aryan Society had become differentiated into 
classes; yet the above passage in the Rig Veda ignores the classes 
and refers to the creation of men only. Why did the Purusha Sukta 
think it necessary to go further and speak of the origin of the classes? 

The Purusha Sukta contradicts the Rig Veda in another respect. 
The Rig Veda propounds a secular theory regarding the origin of 
the Indo-Aryans as will be seen from the following texts: 

(1) Rig Veda, i.80.16: “Prayers and hymns were formerly congre- 
gated in that Indra, in the ceremony which Atharvan, father Manu, 
and Dadhyanch celebrated.” 2 

(2) Rig Veda, i. 114.2 : “Whatever prosperity or succour father Manu 
obtained by sacrifice, may we gain all that under thy guidance, O Rudra.” 3 

1 Muir, Vol. I. p. 180 

2 Muir, Ibid., Vol. I, p. 162. 

3 Ibid., p. 163. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


29 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 29 

(3) Rig Veda, ii.33.13 : “Those pure remedies of yours, O Maruts, those 
which are most auspicious, ye vigorous gods, those which are beneficent, 
those which our father Manu chose, those and the blessing and succour 
of Rudra, I desire.” 1 

(4) Rig Veda, viii.52.1 : “The ancient friend hath been equipped with 
the powers of the mighty (gods). Father Manu has prepared hymns to 
him, as portals of access to the gods.” 2 

(5) Rig Veda, iii.3.6 : “Agni, together with the gods, and the children 
(jantubhih) of Manush, celebrating a multiform sacrifice with hymns.’’ 3 

(6) Rig Veda, iv. 37.1 : “Ye gods, Vajas, and Ribhukshana, come to our 
sacrifice by the path travelled by the gods, that ye, pleasing deities, may 
institute a sacrifice among these people of Manush (Manusho vikshu) on 
auspicious days.” 4 

(7) Rig Veda, vi.14.2 : “The people of Manush praise in the sacrifice 
Agni the invoker.” 5 

From these texts it is beyond question that the rishis who were the 
authors of the hymns of the Rig Veda regarded Manu as the progenitor of 
the Indo-Aryans. This theory about Manu being the progenitor of the Indo- 
Aryans had such deep foundation that it was carried forward by the 
Brahmanas as well as the Puranas. It is propounded in the Aitareya 
Brahmana, 6 in the Vishnu Pur ana 7 and the Matsya Pur ana. 8 . It is true that 
they have made Brahma the progenitor of Manu; but the Rig Veda theory 
of Manu being the progenitor has been accepted and maintained by them. 9 
Why does the Purusha Sukta make no mention of Manu ? This is strange 
because the author of the Purusha Sukta seems to be aware of the fact that 
Manu Svayambhuva is called Viraj and Viraj is called Adi Purusha, 10 since 
he too speaks of Virajo adhi Purushah in verse five of the Sukta. 

There is a third point in which the Purush Sukta has gone beyond the Rig 
Veda. The Vedic Aryans were sufficiently advanced in their 

1 Muir, Vol. I. p. 163. 

2 Ibid., p. 163. 

3 Ibid., p. 165. 

4 Ibid., p. 165. 

5 Ibid., p. 165. 

6 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 108. 

7 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I pp. 105-107. 

8 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I. p. 110-112. 

9 There is however a great deal of confusion when one comes to details. The Vishnu 
Purana says that Brahma divided his person into two parts: with the one half he became 
a male, with the other half a female. The female was called Satarupa who by incessantly 
practising austere fervour of a highly arduous description acquired for herself as a husband 
a Male called Manu Svayambhuva. There is no suggestion in the Vishnu Purana of incest 
by Brahma with his daughter. The Aitareya Brahmana and the Matsya Purana on the 
other hand speak of Brahma having begotten Manu by committing incest with his daughter 
Satarupa; the Matsya Purana adds that Manu by his austerity obtained a beautiful wife 
named Atlanta. According to the Ramayana (see Muir, I, p. 117) Manu was not a male 
but a female and was a daughter of Daksha Prajapati and the wife of Kasyapa. 

10 Matsya Purana- Muir, Vol., 1 p. Ill f.n. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


30 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

civilization to give rise to division of labour. Different persons among 
the Vedic Aryans followed different occupations. That they were 
conscious of it is evidenced by the following verse: 

Rig Veda, 1.113.6 : “That some may go in pursuit of power, some in 
pursuit of fame, some in pursuit of wealth, some in pursuit of work, Ushas 
has awakened people so that each may go in pursuit of his special and 
different way of earning his livelihood.” 

This is as far as the Rig Veda had gone. The Purusha Sukta goes beyond. 
It follows up the notion of division of labour and converts the scheme of 
division of work into a scheme of division of workers into fixed and 
permanent occupational categories. Why does the Purusha Sukta commit 
itself to such a perversity? 

There is another point in which the Purusha Sukta departs from the 
Rig Veda. It is not that the Rig Veda speaks only of man. It speaks also 
of the Indo-Aryan nation. This nation was made up of the five tribes, which 
had become assimilated into one common Indo-Aryan people. The following 
hymns refer to these five tribes as moulded into a nation: 

(1) Rig Veda, vi.11.4 : “Agni, whom, abounding in oblations, the five 
tribes, bringing offerings, honour with prostrations, as if he were a man.” 1 

(2) Rig Veda, vii.15.2 : “The wise and youthful master of the house (Agni) 
who has taken up his abode among the five tribes in every house.” 2 

There is some difference of opinion as to who these five tribes are. Yaska 
in his Nirukta says that it denotes Gandharvas, Pitris, Devas, Asuras and 
Rakshasas. Aupamanyava says that it denotes the four Varnas and the 
Nishadas. Both these explanations seem to be absurd. Firstly, because the 
five tribes are praised collectively as in the following hymns: 

(1) Rig Veda, ii.2.10 : “May our glory shine aloft among the five tribes, 
like the heaven unsurpassable.” 3 

(2) Rig Veda, vi.46.7 : “Indra, whatever force or vigour exists in the tribe 
of Nashusa or whatever glory belongs to the five races bring (for us).” 4 

Such laudatory statements could not have been made if the five 
tribes included the Shudras. Besides, the word used is not Varnas. The 
word used is Janah. That it refers to the five tribes and not to the four 
Varnas and Nishadas is quite clear from the following verse of the 
Rig Veda : 


1 Muir. Vol. I, p. 177. 

2 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 178. 

3 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 178. 

4 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 180. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


31 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 31 

Rig Veda, i.108.8: “If, O Indra and Agni, ye are abiding among 
the Yadus, Turvasas, Druhyus, Anus, Purus, come hither, vigorous 
heroes from all quarters, and drink the Soma which has been poured 
out. 1 

That these five tribes had been moulded into one Aryan people 
is clear from the Atharva Veda (iii.24.2) which says : 

“these five regions, the five tribes springing from Manu.” 

A sense of unity and a consciousness of kind can alone explain 
why the Rishis of the Rig Vedic hymns came to refer to the five 
tribes in such manner. The questions are: why did the Purusha Sukta 
not recognize this unity of the five tribes and give a mythic 
explanation of their origin? Why instead did it recognize the 
communal divisions within the tribes? Why did the Purusha Sukta 
regard communalism more important than nationalism? 

These are some of the riddles of the Purusha Sukta , which come 
to light when one compares it with the Rig Veda. There are others, 
which emerge when one proceeds to examine the Purusha Sukta from 
a sociological point of view. 

Ideals as norms are good and are necessary. Neither a society nor 
an individual can do without a norm. But a norm must change with 
changes in time and circumstances. No norm can be permanently 
fixed. There must always be room for revaluation of the values of 
our norm. The possibility of revaluing values remains open only when 
the institution is not invested with sacredness. Sacredness prevents 
revaluation of its values. Once sacred, always sacred. The Purusha 
Sukta makes the Chaturvarnya a sacred institution, a divine ordi- 
nation. Why did the Purusha Sukta make a particular form of social 
order so sacred as to be beyond criticism and beyond change? Why 
did it want to make it a permanent ideal beyond change and even 
beyond criticism? This is the first riddle of the Purusha Sukta which 
strikes a student of sociology. 

In propounding the doctrine of Chaturvarnya, the Purusha Sukta 
plays a double game. It proceeds first to raise the real, namely, the 
existence of the four classes in the Indo-Aryan Society, to the status 
of an ideal. This is a deception because the ideal is in no way 
different from facts as they exist. After raising the real to the status 
of the ideal, it proceeds to make a show of giving effect to what 
it regards as an ideal. This again is a deception because the ideal 
already exists in fact. This attempt of the Purusha Sukta to idealize 

1 Muir. I. p. 179. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the real and to realize the ideal, is a kind of political jugglery, 
the like of which, I am sure, is not to be found in any other book 
of religion. What else is it if not a fraud and a deception? To idealize 
the real, which more often than not is full of inequities, is a very 
selfish thing to do. Only when a person finds a personal advantage 
in things as they are that he tries to idealize the real. To proceed 
to make such an ideal real is nothing short of criminal. It means 
perpetuating inequity on the ground that whatever is once settled 
is settled for all times. Such a view is opposed to all morality. No 
society with a social conscience has ever accepted it. On the contrary, 
whatever progress in improving the terms of associated life between 
individuals and classes has been made in the course of history, is 
due entirely to the recognition of the ethical doctrine that what is 
wrongly settled is never settled and must be resettled. The principle 
underlying the Purusha Sukta is, therefore, criminal in intent and 
anti-social in its results. For, it aims to perpetuate an illegal gain 
obtained by one class and an unjust wrong inflicted upon another. 
What can be the motive behind this jugglery of the Purusha Sukta ? 
This is the second riddle. 

The last and the greatest of all these riddles, which emerges out 
of a sociological scrutiny of the Purusha Sukta, is the one relating 
to the position of the Shudra. The Purusha Sukta concerns itself with 
the origin of the classes, and says they were created by God — a 
doctrine which no theology has thought it wise to propound. This in 
itself is a strange thing. But what is astonishing is the plan of 
equating different classes to different parts of the body of the Creator. 
The equation of the different classes to different parts of the body is 
not a matter of accident. It is deliberate. The idea behind this plan 
seems to be to discover a formula which will solve two problems, one 
of fixing the functions of the four classes and the other of fixing the 
gradation of the four classes after a preconceived plan. The formula 
of equating different classes to the different parts of the body of the 
Creator has this advantage. The part fixes the gradation of the class 
and the gradation in its turn fixes the function of the class. The Brahmin 
is equated to the mouth of the Creator. Mouth being the noblest part 
of the anatomy, the Brahmin becomes the noblest of the four classes. 
As he is the noblest in the scale, he is given the noblest function, 
that of custodian of knowledge and learning. The Kshatriya is equated 
to the arms of the Creator. Among the limbs of a person, arms 
are next below the mouth. Consequently, the Kshatriya is given 
an order of precedence next below the Brahmin and is given 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


33 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 33 

a function which is second only to knowledge, namely, fighting. The 
Vaishya is equated to the thighs of the Creator. In the gradation of 
limbs the thighs are next below the arms. Consequently, the Vaishya 
is given an order of precedence next below the Kshatriya and is 
assigned a function of industry and trade which in name and fame 
ranks or rather did rank in ancient times below that of a warrior. 
The Shudra is equated to the feet of the Creator. The feet form the 
lowest and the most ignoble part of the human frame. Accordingly, 
the Shudra is placed last in the social order and is given the filthiest 
function, namely, to serve as a menial. 

Why did the Purusha Sukta choose such a method of illustrating 
the creation of the four classes? Why did it equate the Shudras to 
the feet? Why did it not take some other illustration to show how 
the four classes were created. It is not that Purusha is the only stock 
simile used to explain creation. Compare the explanation of the origin 
of the Vedas contained in the Chhandogya Upanishad. It says : 1 

“Prajapati infused warmth into the worlds, and from them so heated 
he drew forth their essences, viz., Agni (fire) from the earth, Vayu (wind) 
from the air, and Surya (the sun) from the sky. He infused warmth into 
these three deities, and from them so heated he drew forth their essences, — 
from Agni the ric verses, from Vayu the yajus verses and from Surya the 
soman verses. He then infused heat into this triple science, and from it 
so heated he drew forth its essences — from ric verses the syllable bhuh, 
from yajus verses bhuvah, and from Saman verses svar.” 

Here is an explanation of the origin of the Vedas from different 
deities. So far as the Indo-Aryans are concerned, there was no dearth 
of them. There were thirty crores of them. An explanation of the origin 
of the four Varnas from four gods would have maintained equality 
of dignity by birth of all the four classes. Why did the Purusha Sukta 
not adopt this line of explanation? 

Again, would it not have been possible for the author of the Purusha 
Sukta to say that the different classes were born from the different 
mouths of the Purusha. Such a conception could not have been 
difficult because the Purusha of the Purusha Sukta has one thousand 
heads, enough to assign one species of creation to one of his heads. 
Such a method of explaining creation could not have been unknown 
to the author of the Purusha Sukta. For we find it used by the Vishnu 
Purana to explain the origin of the different Vedas as may be seen 
from the following extract : 2 

1 Muir, Vol. m. p.5 

2 Ibid., p. 11. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“From his eastern mouth Brahma formed the Gayatri, the ric verses, 
the trivrit, the sama-rathantara and of sacrifices, the agnistoma. From his 
southern mouth he created the yajus verses, the trishtubh metre, the 
panchadasa stoma, the brihatsaman, and the ukthya. From his western 
mouth he formed the saman verses, the jagati metre, the saptadasa stoma, 
the Vairupa, and the atiratra. From his northern mouth he formed the 
ekavimsa, the atharvan, the aptoryaman with the anushtubh and viraj 
metres.” 

The Harivamsa has another way of explanining the origin of the 
Vedas. According to it : 1 

“The god fashioned the Rig Veda with the Yajus from his eyes, the Sama 
Veda from the tip of his tongue, and the Atharvan from his head.” 

Assuming that for some reason the author of the Purusha Sukta 
could not avoid using the body of the Creator and its different parts 
for explaining the origin and the relation of the four classes, the question 
still remains as to why he chose to equate the different parts of the 
Purusha to the different classes in the manner in which he does. 

The importance of this question is considerably heightened when 
one realizes that the Purusha Sukta is not the only instance in which 
the different parts of the body of the Creator are used as illustrations 
to explain the origin of the different classes in society. The same 
explanation is given by the sage Vaishampayana to explain the origin 
of the various classes of priests employed in the performance of 
sacrifices. But what a difference is there between the two! The 
explanation of Vaishampayana which is reported in the Harivamsa 
reads as follows : 2 

“Thus the glorious Lord Hari Narayana, covering the entire waters, slept 
on the world which had become one sea, in the midst of the vast expanse 
of fluid (rajas), resembling a mighty ocean, himself free from passion 
(virajaskah), with mighty arms; Brahmans know him as the undecaying. 
Invested through austere fervour with the light of his own form and clothed 
with triple time (past, present and future) the lord then slept. Purushottama 
(Vishnu) is whatever is declared to be the highest. Purusha the sacrifice, and 
everything else which is known by the name of Purusha. Here how the 
Brahmins devoted to sacrifice, and called ritvijas, were formerly produced by 
him from his own body for offering sacrifices. The Lord created from his 
mouth the Brahman, who is the chief, and the udgatri, who chants the Saman, 
from his arms the hotri and the adhvaryu . He then... created the prastotri, 
the maitravaruna, and the pratishthatri, from his belly the pratiharti 
and the potri, from his thighs the achhavaka and the neshtri, from his 
hands the agnidhra and the sacrificial brahmanya, from his arms the 
gravan and the sacrificial unnetri. Thus did the divine Lord of the 

1 Muir, Vol. ID, p. 13. 

2 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 154-155 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


35 


THE SHUDRAS : THE RIDDLE OF THE SHUDRAS 35 

world create the sixteen excellent ritvijas, the utterers of all sacrifices. 
Therefore this Purusha is formed of sacrifice and is called the Veda; and 
all the Vedas with the Vedangas, Upanishads and ceremonies are formed 
of his essence.” 

There were altoghether seventeen different classes of priests 
required for the performance of a sacrifice. It could never be possible 
for anyone attempting to explain the origin of each by reference to 
a distinct part of the body of the Creator to avoid using the feet 
of the Purusha as the origin of a class, the limbs of the Purusha 
being so few and the number of priests being so many. Yet what 
does Vaishampayana do? He does not mind using the same part of 
the Creator’s body to explain the origin of more than one class of 
priests. He most studiously avoids using the feet as the origin of 
anyone of them. 

The situation becomes completely intriguing when one compares 
the levity with which the Shudras are treated in the Purusha Sukta 
with the respect with which the Brahmins are treated in the 
Harivamsa in the matter of their respective origins. Is it because 
of malice that the Purusha Sukta did not hesitate to say that the 
Shudra was born from the feet of the Purusha and that his duty 
was to serve? If so what is the cause of this malice? 

IV 

The riddles about the Shudras mentioned above are those which arise 
out of a sociological scrutiny of the Purusha Sukta. There are other 
riddles regarding the position of the Shudra which arise out of later 
developments of the ideal of Chaturvarnya. To appreciate these 
results it is necessary first to take note of these later developments. 
The later developments of Chaturvarnya are mainly two. First is the 
creation of the fifth class next below the Shudras. The second is the 
separation of the Shudras from the first three Varnas. These changes 
have become so integrated with the original scheme of the Purusha 
Sukta that they have given rise to peculiar terms and expressions 
so well-known that everybody understands what they stand for. These 
terms are : Savarnas, Avarnas, Dvijas, non-Dvijas, and Traivarnikas. 
They stand to indicate the sub-divisions of the original four classes 
and the degree of separation between them. It is necessary to take 
note of the relative position of these classes because they disclose a 
new riddle. If this riddle has not caught the eye of the people, it is 
because of two reasons. Firstly, because students have not cared to 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-Ol Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

note that these names are not mere names but that they stand for 
definite rights and privileges, and secondly, because they have not 
cared to find out whether the groupings made under these names 
are logical having regard to the rights and privileges they connote. 

Let us therefore see what is the de jure connotation of these terms. 
Savarna is generally contrasted with Avarna. Savarna means one who 
belongs to one of the four Varnas. Avarna means one who does not 
belong to any one of the four Varnas. The Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras are Savarnas. The Untouchables or Ati- 
Shudras are called Avarnas, those who have no Varna. Logically, the 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras are within the 
Chaturvarnya. Logically, the Untouchables or the Ati-Shudras are 
outside the Chaturvarnya. Dvija is generally contrasted with non- 
Dvija. Dvija literally means twice-born and non-Dvija means one who 
is born only once. The distinction is based on the right to have 
Upanayana. The Upanayana is treated as a second birth. Those who 
have the right to wear the sacred thread are called Dvijas. Those 
who have no right to wear it are called non-Dvijas. The Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas have the right to wear the sacred thread. 
Logically, they are Dvijas. The Shudras and the Ati-Shudras have 
no right to wear the sacred thread. Logically, they are both non- 
Dvijas. The Traivarnika is contrasted with the Shudra. But there is 
nothing special in this contrast. It conveys the same distinction which 
is conveyed by the distinction between the Dvijas and the non-Dvijas 
except the fact that the contrast is limited to the Shudra and does 
not extend to the Ati-Shudra. This is probably because this termi- 
nology came into being before the rise of the Ati-Shudras as a 
separate class. 

Bearing in mind that both the Shudra and the Ati-Shudra are non- 
Dvijas, why then is the Shudra regarded as Savarna and the Ati- 
Shudra as Avarna ? Why is the former within and why is the latter 
outside the Chaturvarnya ? The Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and 
Shudras are all within the four corners of the Chaturvarnya. They 
are all Savarnas. Why then is the Shudra denied the right of the 
Traivarnikas ? 

Can there be a greater riddle than the riddle of the Shudras ? 
Surely, it calls for investigation and explanation as to who they were 
and how they came to be the fourth Varna in the Aryan Society. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-02 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


37 


CHAPTER II 

THE BRAHMANIC THEORY OF THE 
ORIGIN OF THE SHUDRAS 

HAS the Brahmanic literature any explanation to offer which can 
account for the origin of the Shudras? There is no doubt that the 
Brahmanic literature is full of legends regarding creation which 
touch upon the creation of the universe, of man and of the different 
Varnas. Whether or not they furnish any clue to discover the origin 
of the Shudras, there can be no doubt that all such theories should 
find a place in a book which is concerned with the problem of the 
Shudras if for no other reason than that of assembling all material 
relating to the Shudras in one place and making their story complete. 
It would be better to take each piece of the Brahmanic literature 
separately, and note what contribution it has to make to the subject. 


I 

To begin with the Vedas. As to the Rig Veda, the legend about 
creation to be found in its Sukta known as the Purusha Sukta has 
already been set out in the previous chapter. It now remains to take 
note of the legends contained in the other Vedas. 

There are two recensions of the Yajur Veda : (1) the White Yajur 
Veda and (2) the Black Yajur Veda. To take the White Yajur Veda 
first. The Vajasaneyi Samhita of the White Yajur Veda sponsors two 
theories. One is a mere reproduction of the Purusha Sukta of the 
Rig Veda with this difference that it has 22 verses, while the original 
as it occurs in the Rig Veda has only 16 verses. The six additional 
verses in the White Yajur Veda read as follows : 

17. Brought forth from the waters and from the essence of the 
earth, he was produced by Vishvakarman in the beginning. Tvashta 
gives him form; that is the Universe of Purusha on all sides in the 
beginning. 

18. I know this great Purusha, of the colour of the sun, beyond 
darkness. Only by knowing him does one go beyond death; there 
is no other path for going. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-02 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

19. Prajapati moves in the interior of the womb; though unborn, he 
is born in many forms. Wise men see his source; wise men desire the 
place of the Marichis. 

20. He who shines for the gods, he who is the priest of the gods, he 
who was born before the gods, — salutation to that shining offspring of 
Brahma. 

21. The gods, generating the shining offspring of Brahma, said in the 
beginning: “That Brahmin who knows thus, — the gods will be under his 
control.” 

22. Sri and Laxmi are his wives; the day and night his sides; the stars 
his ornament; the Ashwins his bright face. Grant me my desires; grant 
me that; grant me everything. 

The second explanation contained in the Vajasaneyi Samhita is quite 
different from the Purusha Sukta. It reads as follows : 

V.S., xiv.28. 1 — “He lauded with one. Living beings were formed. He lauded 
with three: the Brahman was created; Brahmanaspati was the ruler. He lauded 
with five: existing things were created; Bhutanampati was the ruler. He lauded 
with seven: the seven rishis were created: Dhatri was the ruler. He lauded with 
nine: the Fathers were created: Aditi was the ruler. He lauded with eleven: the 
seasons were created: the Artavas were the rulers. He lauded with thirteen: the 
months were created: the year was the ruler. He lauded with fifteen: the Kshatra 
(the Kshatriya) was created: Indra was the ruler. He lauded with seventeen: 
animals were created: Brihaspati was the ruler. He lauded with nineteen: the 
Shudra and the Arya ( Vaishya ) were created: day and night were the rulers. 

He lauded with twenty-one: animals with undivided hoofs were created: Varuna 
was the ruler. He lauded with twenty-three: small animals were created: Pushan 
was the ruler. He lauded with twenty-five: wild animals were created: Vayu was 
the ruler (compare R.V., x.90.8). He lauded with twenty-seven: heaven and earth 
separated: Vasus, Rudras and Adityas separated after them: they were the rulers. 

He lauded with twenty-nine: living beings were created: the first and second 
halves of the month were the rulers. He lauded with thirty one: existing things 
were tranquillized: Prajapati Parameshthin was the ruler.” 

Now to turn to the Black Yajur Veda. The Taittiriya Samhita of the 
Black Yajur Veda gives altogether five explanations. The one at iv. 3, 
10 is the same as has been put forth by the Vajasaneyi Samhita of the 
White Yajur Veda at (xiv.28) and which has been reproduced earlier. Of 
the rest those which narrate the origin of the Shudra are set out below: 

T.S., ii.4.13.1" “The gods were afraid of the Rajanya when he was in the 
womb. They bound him with bonds when he was in the womb. Consequently, 
this Rajanya is born bound. If he were born unbound he would go on slaying 
his enemies. In regard to whatever Rajanya any one desires that he should be 
born unbound, and should go on slaying his enemies, let him offer for him 
this Aindra-Barhaspatya oblation. A Rajanya has the character of Indra, and 

1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 18. 

2 Muir, Vol. I, p. 22. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-02 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


39 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... ORIGIN OF THE SHUDRAS 39 

a Brahman is Brihaspati. It is through the Brahman that anyone releases 
the Rajanya from his bond. The golden bond, a gift, manifestly releases 
from the bond that fetters him.” 

(2) T.S., vii. I.I.4. 1 — Prajapati desired, ‘may I propagate.’ He formed 
the Trivrit (stoma) from his mouth. After it were produced the deity Agni, 
the metre Gayatri, the Saman (called) Rathantara, of men the Brahmin, 
of beasts the goats. Hence they are the chief (mukhyah) because they were 
created from the mouth (mukhatah). From (his) breast, from his arms, 
he formed the Panchadasa (stoma). After it were created the god, the Indra, 
the Trishtubh metre, the Saman (called) Brihat, of men the Rajanya, of 
beasts the sheep. Hence they are vigorous, because they were created from 
vigour. From (his) middle he formed the Saptadasa (stoma). After it were 
created the gods (called) the Vishvedevas, the Jagati metre, the Saman 
called the Vairupa of men the Vaishya, of beasts kine. Hence they are 
to be eaten, because they were created from the receptacle of food. 
Wherefore they are more numerous than others, for the most numerous 
deities were created after (the Saptadasa). From his foot he formed the 
Ekavimsa (Stoma). After it were created the Anushtubh metre, the Saman 
called Vairaja, of men the Shudra, of beasts the horse. Hence these two, 
born the horse and the Shudra, are transporters of (other) creatures. Hence 
(too) the Shudra is incapacitated for sacrifice, because no deities were 
created after (the Ekavimsa). Hence (too) these two subsist by their feet, 
for they were created from the foot. 

Coming to the Atharva Veda, there are altogether four explanations. 
One of these is the same as the Purusha Sukta of the Rig Veda. It occurs 
at xix.6. The others are as stated below : 

(1) A.V., 2 iv.6.1. — The Brahman was born the first with ten heads and 
ten faces. He first drank the soma; he made poison powerless. 

(2) A.V., 3 xv. 8.1. — He (the Vratya) became filled with passion thence 
sprang the Rajanya. 

(3) A.V., 4V xv.9.1. — Let the king to whose house the Vratya who knows 
this, comes as a guest, cause him to be respected as superior to himself. 
So doing he does no injury to his royal rank, or to his realm. From him 
arose the Brahman {Brahmin) and the Kshattra ( Kshatriya ). They said 
‘Into whom shall we enter,’ etc. 

II 

To proceed to the Brahmanas. The Satapatha Brahmana contains six 
explanations. There are two which concern themselves with the creation 
of the Varnas. Of the two, the one which speaks of the origin of the Shudras 
is given below : 

S.B. 5 xiv.4.2.23. — ’’Brahma (here, according to the commentator, existing 
in the form of Agni and representing the Brahmana caste) was formerly this 

1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 16. 4. Muir, Vol I, p. 22 

2. Muir, Vol. I, p. 21 5. Muir Vol I, p. 20 

3. Muir, Vol. I, p. 22 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-02 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(universe), one only. Being one, it did not develope. It energetically created 
an excellent form, the Kshattra, viz., those among the gods who are powers 
(Kshattrani), Indra, Varuna, Soma, Rudra, Parjanya, Yama, Mrityu, Isana. 
Hence nothing is superior to the Kshatra. Therefore, the Brahmana sits 
below the Kshatriya at the Rajasuya sacrifice; he confers that glory on 
the Kshattra (the royal power). This, the Brahma, is the source of the 
Kshattra. Hence although the king attains supremacy, he at the end 
resorts to the Brahman as his source. Whoever destroys him (the 
Brahman) destroys his own source. He becomes most miserable, as one 
who has injured a superior. He did not develope. He created the Vis, viz., 
those classes of gods who are designated by troops, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, 
Visvedevas, Maruts. He did not develope. He created the Shudra class 
Pushan. This earth is Pushani; for she nourishes all that exists. He did 
not develope. He energetically created an excellent form, Justice (Dharma). 
This is the ruler (Kshattra) of, the ruler (Kshattra), namely, Justice. Hence 
nothing is superior to Justice. Therefore the weaker seeks (to overcome) 
the stronger by Justice, as by a king. This justice is truth. In conseqence 
they say of a man who speaks truth, ‘he speaks justice.’ For this is both 
of these. This is the Brahma, Kshattra, Vis and Shudra. Through Agni 
it became Brahma among the gods, the Brahmana among men, through 
the (divine) Kshatriya a (human) Kshatriya, through the (divine) Vaishya 
a (human) Vaishya, through the (divine) Shudra a (human) Shudra. 
Wherefore it is in Agni among the gods and in a Brahman among men 
that they seek after an abode. 

The Taittiriya Brahman is responsible for the following explanation : 

(1) T.B., 1 i.2.6.7. — “The Brahmana caste is sprung from the gods; the 
Shudras from the Asuras.” 

(2) T.B., 2 iii. 2.3.9. — “This Shudra has sprung from non-existence.” 

Ill 

Here is a complete collection of all the Brahmanic speculations on the 
origin of the four classes and of the Shudras. The ancient Brahmins were 
evidently conscious of the fact that the origin of the four classes was an 
unusual and uncommon social phenomenon and that the place of the 
Shudra in it was very unnatural and that this called for some explanation. 
Otherwise, it would be impossible to account for these innumerable 
attempts to explain the origin of the Chaturvarnya and of the Shudra. 

But what is one to say of these explanations? The variety of them 
is simply bewildering. Some allege that Purusha was the origin of 

1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 21 

2 Muir, Vol. I, p. 21. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-02 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>9-l 1-2013 


41 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... ORIGIN OF THE SHUDRAS 41 

the four Varnas, and some attribute their origin to Brahma, some 
to Prajapati and some to Vratya. The same source gives differing 
explanations. The White Yajur Veda has two explanations, one in 
terms of Purusha, the other in terms of Prajapati. The Black Yajur 
Veda has three explanations to offer. Two are in terms of Prajapati, 
the third in terms of Brahman. The Atharva Veda has four 
explanations, one in terms of Purusha, second in terms of Brahman, 
third in terms of Vratya and fourth quite different from the first 
three. Even when the theory is the same, the details are not the 
same. Some explanations such as those in terms of Prajapati, or 
Brahma are theological. Others in terms of Manu or Kasyapa are 
in humanistic terms. It is imagination running riot. There is in them 
neither history nor sense. Prof. Max Muller commenting on the 
Brahmanas has said : 

“The Brahmanas represent no doubt a most interesting phase in the 
history of the Indian mind, but judged by themselves, as literary produc- 
tions, they are most disappointing. No one would have supposed that at 
so early a period, and in so primitive a state of society, there could have 
risen up a literature which for pedantry and downright absurdity can 
hardly be matched anywhere. There is no lack of striking thoughts, of bold 
expressions, of sound reasoning, and curious traditions in these collections. 
But these are only like the fragments of a torso, like precious gems set 
in brass and lead. The general character of these works is marked by 
shallow and insipid grandiloquence, by priestly conceit, and antiquarian 
pedantry. It is most important to the historian that he should know how 
soon the fresh and healthy growth of a nation can be blighted by priestcraft 
and superstition. It is most important that we should know that nations 
are liable to these epidemics in their youth as well as in their dotage. 
These works deserve to be studied as the physician studies the twaddle 
of idiots, and the raving of madmen .” 1 

On reading these Brahmanic speculations on the origin of the four 
Varnas and particularly of the Shudras one is very much reminded 
of these words of Prof. Max Muller. All these speculations are really 
the twaddles of idiots and ravings of madmen and as such they are 
of no use to the student of history who is in search of a natural 
explanation of a human problem. 

• • 


1 Max Muller, Ancient Sanskrit Literature (Panini office edition), p. 200. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


42 


CHAPTER III 

THE BRAHMANIC THEORY OF 
THE STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 

SO much for the Brahmanic view of the origin of the Shudra. Turning 
to the Brahmanic view of the civil status of the Shudra, what strikes 
one is the long list of disabilities, accompanied by a most dire system 
of pains and penalties to which the Shudra is subjected by the 
Brahmanic law-givers. 

The disabilities and penalties of the Shudra found in the Samhitas 
and the Brahmanas were few, as may be seen from the following 
extracts: 

I. According to the Kathaka Samhita (xxxi.2) and the Maitrayani 
Samhita (iv.1.3; i.8.3) 

“A shudra should not be allowed to milk the cow whose milk is used 

for Agnihotra.” 

II. The Satapatha Brahmana (iii.1.1.10), the Maitrayani Samita 
(vii.1.1.6) and also the Panchavimsa Brahmana (vi.1.11) say: 

“The Shudra must not be spoken to when performing a sacrifice and 

a Shudra must not be present when a sacrifice is being performed.” 

III. The Satapatha Brahmana (xiv.1.31) and the Kathaka Samhita 
(xi.10) further provide that : 

“The Shudra must not be admitted to Soma drink.” 

IV. The Aitareya Brahmana (vii.29.4) and the Panchavimsa 
Brahmana (vi.1.11) reached the culminating point when they say: 

“Shudra is a servant of another (and cannot be anything else).” 

But what in the beginning was a cloud no bigger than a man’s 
hand, seems to have developed into a storm, which has literally 
overwhelmed the Shudras. For, as will be seen from the extracts given 
from later penal legislation by the Sutrakaras like Apastamba, 
Baudhayana, etc. and the Smritikaras like Manu and others, the 
growth of the disabilities of the Shudras has been at a maddening 
speed and to an extent which is quite unthinkable. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


43 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 43 

The disabilities are so deadening that it would be impossible to 
believe them unless one sees them in cold print. They are, however, 
so numerous that it is impossible to present them in their fullness. 
To enable those, who do not know them, to have some idea of these 
disabilities, I have assembled below in one place illustrative state- 
ments by the different Sutrakaras and Smritikaras relating to the 
disabilities of the Shudras scattered in their Law Books. 

II 

(i) 

(A) The Apastamba Dharma Sutra says : 

“There are four castes — Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras. 

Amongst these, each preceding (caste) is superior by birth to the one 
following 1 : 

For all these, excepting Shudras and those who have committed bad 
actions are ordained (1) the initiation (Upanayana or the wearing of the 
sacred thread), (2) the study of the Veda and (3) the kindling of the sacred 
fire (i.e., the right to perform sacrifices). 2 " 

(B) This is what the Vasishtha Dharma Sutra says: 

“There are four castes (Varna) Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and 
Shudras. 

Three castes, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas (are called) twice- 
born. 

Their first-birth is from the mother; the second from the investiture 
with the sacred girdle. In that (second birth) the Savitri is the mother, 
but the teacher is said to be the father. 

They call the teacher father, because he gives instruction in the Veda. 3 

The four castes are distinguished by their origin and by particular 
sacraments. 

There is also the following passage of the Veda: ‘ The Brahmana was 
his mouth, the Kshatriya formed his arms: the Vaishya his thighs; the 
Shudra was born from his feet. 1 

It has been declared in the following passage of the Veda that a Shudra 
shall not receive the sacraments. ‘He created the Brahmana with the 
Gayatri (metre), the Kshatriya with the Trishtubh, the Vaishya with the 
Jagati, the Shudra without any metre.” 4 

(C) The Manu Smriti propounds the following view on the subject : 

1. Prasna 1, Patala 1, Khanda 1, Sutras 4-5. 

2. Ibid., Sutra 6. 

3. Chapter H, Verses 1-4. 

4 Chapter IV, Verse 3 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“For the prosperity of the worlds, he (the creator) from his mouth, arms, 
thighs and feet created the Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. 1 

The Brahmans, Kshatriya (and) Vaishya constitute the three twice-born 
castes, but the fourth, the Shudra has only one birth.” 2 

(ii) 

(A) The Apastamba Dharma Sutra says: 

“(A Traivarnika) shall never study (the Veda) in a burial ground nor 
anywhere near it within the throw of a Samya. 

If a village has been built over a burial ground or its surface has been 
cultivated as a field, the recitation of the Veda in such a place is not 
prohibited. 

But if that place is known to have been a burial ground, he shall not 
study (there). 

A Shudra and an outcaste are (included by the term) burial-ground, (and 
the rule given, Sutra 6 applies to them). 

Some declare, that (one ought to avoid only to study) in the same house 
(where they dwell). 

But if (a student and) a Shudra woman merely look at each other, the 
recitation of the Veda must be interrupted. 3 

Food touched by a (Brahmana or other high-caste person) who is impure, 
becomes impure but not unfit for eating. 

But what has been brought (be it touched or not) by an impure Shudra 
must not be eaten. 

A Shudra touches him, (then he shall leave off eating).” 4 

(B) The Vishnu Smriti says : 

“He must not cause a member of a twice born caste to be carried out by 
a Shudra (even though he be a kinsman of the deceased). Nor a Shudra by 
a member of a twice-born caste. 

A father and a mother shall be carried out by their sons; (who are equal 
in caste to their parents). 

But Shudras must never carry out a member of a twice-born caste, even 
though he be their father.” 5 

(C) The Vasishtha Dharma Sutra prescribes : 

“Now therefore, we will declare what may be eaten and what may not 
be eaten. 

1 Chapter I, Verse 31. 

2 Chapter X, Verse 4 

3 Prasna 1, Patala 3, Khanda 9, Sutras 6-11. 

4 Prasna 1, Patala 5, Khanda 16, Sutras 21-22. 

5 Chapter XIX, Sutras 1-4 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


45 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 45 


Food given by a physician, a hunter, a woman of bad character, a mace- 
bearer, a thief, an Abhisasta, and eunuch, (or) an outcaste must not be 
eaten. 

Nor that given by a miser, one who has performed the initiatory 
ceremony of a Srauta-sacrifice, a prisoner, a sick person, a seller of the 
Soma plant, a carpenter, a washerman, a dealer in spirituous liquor, a 
spy, an usurer, (or) a cobbler. 

Nor that given by a Shudra . 1 

Some call that Shudra race a burial-ground. 

Therefore the Veda must not be recited in the presence of a Shudra.” 
Now they quote also the (following) verses which Yama proclaimed : 
The wicked Shudra-race is manifestly a burial-ground. Therefore (the 
Veda) must never be recited in the presence of a Shudra . 2 

Some become worthy receptacles of gifts through sacred learning, and 
some through the practice of austerities. But that Brahmana whose 
stomach does not contain the food of a Shudra, is even the worthiest 
receptacle of all . 3 

If a Brahmana dies with the food of a Shudra in his stomach, he will 
become a village pig (in his next life) or be born in the family of that 
Shudra. 

For though a (Brahmana) whose body is nourished by the essence of 
a Shudra’s food may daily recite the Veda, though he may offer (an 
Agnihotra) or mutter (prayers, nevertheless) he will not find the path that 
leads upwards. 

But if, after eating the food of a Shudra, he has conjugal intercourse, 
(even) his sons (begotten on a wife of his own caste) will belong to the 
giver of the food (i.e., to the Shudra) and he shall not ascend to heaven . 4 

(D) The Manu Smriti says : 

“He (Brahmin) may not dwell in the kingdom of a Shudra nor in one 
full of unrighteous people, nor in one invaded by hosts of heretics nor in 
one possessed by low-born men . 5 

A Brahmin who performs a sacrifice for a Shudra should not be invited 
to dine with other Brahmins at a Shraddha ceremony. His company will 
destroy all merit that which may otherwise be obtained from such a 
dinner . 6 

One should carry out by the southern town-gate a dead Shudra, but 
the twice-born by the western, northern and eastern (gates) respectively . 7 

1 Chapter XIV, Verses 1-4 

2 Chapter XVIII, Verses 11-15 

3 Chapter VI, Verses 26. 

4 Chapter VI, Verses 27-29 

5 Chapter IV, Verse 61 

6 Chapter III, Verse 178 

7 Chapter V Verse 92. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(Hi) 

(A) The Apastamba Dharma Sutra says : 

“A Brahmana shall salute stretching forward his right arm on a level 
with his ear, a Kshatriya holding it on a level with the breast, a Vaishya 
holding it on a level with the waist, a Shudra holding it low (and) 
stretching forward the joined hands . 1 

And when returning the salute of (a man belonging) to the first (three) 
castes, the last syllable of the name of the person addressed is produced 
to the length of three moras . 2 

If a Shudra comes as a guest (to a Brahmana) he shall give him some 
work to do. He may feed him, after (that has been performed. To feed 
him without asking him first to do some work is to do him honour.) 

Or the slaves (of the Brahmana householder) shall fetch (rice) from the 
royal stores, and honour the Shudra as a guest .” 3 

(B) The Vishnu Smriti prescribes : 

“The same punishment (payment of hundred Panas) is also ordained 
for hospitably entertaining a Shudra or religious ascetic at an oblation 
to the gods or to the manes .” 4 

(C) The Manu Smriti enjoins that : 

One should consider a Brahmana ten years old and a Kshatriya a 
hundred years old as father and son; but of them the Brahman (is) the 
father. 

Wealth, kindred, age, sects (and) knowledge as the fifth; those are the 
causes of respect, the most important (is) the last (mentioned). 

In whom among the three (higher) castes the most and the best of (those) 
five may be he is here worthy of respect; a Shudra (is not worthy of respect 
on the ground of his wealth or knowledge no matter how high they are. 
It is only on the ground of his age and that too only if) he has attained 
the tenth (decade of his life that he becomes worthy of respect and not 
before .) 5 


1 Prasna 1, Patala 2, Khanda 5, Sutra 16. 

2 Ibid, Sutra 17. 

3 Prasna II, Patala 2, Khanda 4, Sutras 19-20 

4 Chapter V. Sutra 115. 

5 Chapter II, Verses 135-137. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


47 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 47 

For not by years, nor by grey hair, not by wealth, nor kindred (is 
superiority); the seers made the rule — Who knows the Veda completely, 
he is great among us. 

Of Brahmins, superiority (is) by knowledge, but of Kshatriyas by valour, 
of Vaishyas by reason of property (and) wealth, and of Shudras by age. 

One is not, therefore, aged because his head is grey; whoever, although 
a youth, has perused (the Vedas), him the gods consider an elder . 1 

Now a Kshatriya is not called a guest in a Brahmin’s house, nor a 
Vaishya nor a Shudra; neither is a friend, the kinsman, nor a Guru (of 
the householder). (That is, a Brahmin has alone the right to have the 
honour of being treated as a guest in a Brahmin’s house). 

But if a Kshatriya come as a guest to the house after the said Brahmins 
have eaten one should give him food (if) he wishes. 

If a Vaishya (or) Shudra come to the house as guests, the Brahmin 
should give them food but with the servants, using kindness .” 2 


(iv) 

(A) According to the Apastamba Dharma Sutra : 

He who has killed a Kshatriya shall give a thousand cows (to Brahmins 
for the expiation of the act). 

He shall give, a hundred cows for the killing of a Vaishya, (only) ten 
for a Shudra . 3 

(B) According to the Gautama Dharma Sutra : 

“A Kshatriya (shall be fined) one hundred (Karshapanas) if he abuses 
a Brahmana. 

In case of an assault (on a Brahmana) twice as much. 

A Vaishya (who abuses a Brahmana, shall pay) one and a half (times 
as much as a Kshatriya). 

But a Brahmana (who abuses) a Kshatriya (shall pay) fifty (Karshapanas). 


1 Chapter II, Verses 154-156. 

2 Chapter III, Verses 110-112. 

3 Prasna I, Patala 9, Khanda 24, Sutras 1-3. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

One half of that amount (if he abuses) a Vaishya. 

And if he abuses a Shudra nothing .” 1 

(C) According to Brihaspati’s Dharma Shastra : 

“For a Brahmin abusing a Kshatriya, the fine shall be half of a hundred 
(fifty) Panas; for abusing a Vaisya, half of fifty (twenty-five) Panas, for 
abusing a Shudra twelve and a half. 

This punishment has been declared for abusing a virtuous Shudra (i.e., 
a Shudra who accepts his low status and does willingly the duties attached 
to that status) who has committed no wrong; no offence is imputable to 
a Brahmin for abusing a Shudra devoid of virtue. 

A Vaishya shall be fined a hundred (Panas) for reviling a Kshatriya; 
a Kshatriya reviling a Vaishya shall have to pay half of that amount as 
a fine. 

In the case of a Kshatriya reviling a Shudra the fine shall be twenty 
Panas; in the case of a Vaishya, the double amount is declared to be the 
proper fine by persons learned in law. 

A Shudra shall be compelled to pay the first fine for abusing a Vaishya; 
the middling fine for abusing a Kshatriya; and the highest fine for abusing 
a Brahmin .” 2 

(D) According to the Manu Smruti: 

A Kshatriya who reviles a Brahmin ought to be fined one hundred 
(Panas); a Vaishya one hundred and fifty or two hundred, but a Shudra 
ought to receive corporal punishment. 

A Brahmin should be fined fifty if he has thrown insult on a Kshatriya, 
but the fine shall be a half of fifty if on a Vaishya and twelve if on a 
Shudra .” 3 

In the murder of a Kshatriya, one fourth (part) of the penance for slaying 
a Brahman is declared to be the proper penance; an eighth part in the 
case of a Vaishya; and in (the case of) a Shudra (who) lives virtuously, 
one sixteenth part must be admitted (as the proper penance). 

But if one of the highest of the twice-born (a Brahmin) slay a Kshatriya 
involuntarily he may, in order to cleanse himself give a thousand cows 
and a bull. 

Or let him for three years (with senses) subdued and locks braided, 
follow the observances of one who has slain a Brahmin, living in a place 
rather far from the town, his dwelling place the foot of a tree. 

1 Chapter XII, Sutras 8-13. 

2 Chapter XX, Verses 7-11. 

3 Chapter VIII, Verses 267-268 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


49 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 49 

The highest of a twice-born (the Brahmin) should practise just this 
expiation for a year on having slain a Vaishya who lives virtuously and 
give one hundred and one (heads) of cattle. 

The slayer of a Shudra should practise exactly all these observances 
for six months; or he may give to a priest ten white cows and a bull. 1 " 

(E) According to the Vishnu Smriti: 

“With whatever limb an inferior insults or hurts his superior in caste, 
of that limb the king shall cause him to be deprived. 

If he places himself on the same seat with his superior, he shall be 
banished with a mark on his buttocks. 

If he spits on him he shall lose both lips. 

If he breaks wind against him, he shall lose his hind parts. 

If he uses abusive language, his tongue. 

If a low-born man through pride give instruction (to a member of the 
highest caste) concerning his duty, let the king order hot oil to be dropped 
into his mouth. 

If a Shudra man mentions the name or caste of a superior revilingly, 
an iron pin ten inches long shall be thrust into his mouth (red hot ).” 2 


(v) 

(A) According to the Brihaspati Smriti : 

“A Shudra teaching the precepts of religion or uttering the words of 
the Veda, or insulting a Brahmin shall be punished by cutting out his 
tongue .” 3 

(B) According to the Gautama Dharma Sutra : 

“Now if he listens intentionally to (a recitation of) the Veda, his ears 
shall be filled with (molten) tin or lac. 

If he recites (Vedic texts), his tongue shall be cut out. If he remembers 
them, his body shall be split in twain .” 4 

(C) According to the Manu Smriti: 

One who teaches for hire, also one who learns by paying hire (a Shudra) 
teacher and one who learns from him are unfit for being invited at the 
performance in honour of the Devas and Pitris . 5 

1 Chapter XI, Verses 127-131 

2 Chapter V, Sutras 19-25 

3 Chapter XII, Verse 12. 

4 Chapter XX, Sutras 4-6. 

5 Chapter III, Verse 156. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

One may not give advice to a Shudra, nor (give him) the remains (of 
food) or of butter that has been offered. 

And one may not teach him the law or enjoin upon him religious 
observances. 

For he who tells him the law and he who enjoins upon him (religious) 
observances, he indeed together with that (Shudra) sinks into the darkness 
of the hell called Asamvrita . 1 

One should never recite (the Vedas) indistinctly or in the presence of 
a Shudra; nor having recited the Veda at the end of the night, (though) 
fatigued may one sleep again .” 2 


(vi) 

This is what the Manu Smriti says : 

“A Brahmin may take possession of the goods of a Shudra with perfect 
peace of mind, for, since nothing at all belongs to this Shudra as his own, 
he is one whose property may be taken away by his master . 3 

Indeed, an accumulation of wealth should not be made by a Shudra 
even if he is able to do so, for the sight of mere possession of wealth 
by a Shudra injures the Brahmin .” 4 


(vii) 

Here is the advice of the Manu Smriti to the king : 

“He who can claim to be a Brahmin merely on account of his birth, 
or he who only calls himself a Brahmin, may be, if desired, the declarer 
of law for the king, but a Shudra never. 

If a king looks on while a Shudra gives a judicial decision, his realm 
sinks into misfortune, like a cow in a quagmire. 

A realm which consists chiefly of Shudras and is overrun by unbelievers 
and destitute of twice-born men is soon totally destroyed, oppressed by 
famine and disease .” 5 


(viii) 

(A) The Apastamba Dharma Sutra says: 

“And those who perform austerities, being intent on fulfilling the sacred 
laws. And a Shudra who lives by washing the feet (of the Brahmin). 

1 Chapter IV, Verses 78-81. 4 Chapter X, Verse 129. 

2 Chapter IV, Verse 99. 5 Chapter VIII, Verses 20-22. 

3 Chapter VIII, Verse 417. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


51 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 51 

Also blind, dumb, deaf and diseased persons (as long as their infirmities 
last) are exempt from taxes . 1 

To serve the other three castes is ordained for the Shudra. 

The higher the caste which he serves the greater is the merit .” 2 

(B) The Manu Smriti has the following: 

“Now, for the sake of preserving all this creation, the most glorious 
(being) ordained separate duties for those who sprang from (his) mouth, 
arm, thigh and feet. 

For Brahmins he ordered teaching, study, sacrifices and sacrificing (as 
priests) for others, also giving and receiving gifts. 

Defence of the people, giving (alms), sacrifice, also study, and absence 
of attachment to objects of sense, in short for a Kshatriya. 

Tending of cattle, giving (alms), sacrifice, study, trade, usury, and also 
agriculture for a Vaishya. 

One duty the Lord assigned to a Shudra — service to those (before- 
mentioned) classes without grudging .” 3 

(ix) 

(A) The Apastamba Dharma Sutra says : 

“A man of one of the first three castes (who commits adultery) with 
a woman of the Shudra caste shall be banished. 

A Shudra (who commits adultery) with a woman of one of the first three 
castes shall suffer capital punishment .” 4 

(B) The Gautama Dharma Sutra says : 

If (the Shudra) has criminal intercourse with an Aryan woman, his organ 
shall be cut off and all his property be confiscated. 

If (the woman had) a protector (i.e., she was under the guaradian-ship 
of some person) he (the Shudra) shall be executed after having undergone 
the punishments prescribed above . 5 

(C) The Manu Smriti says : 

If a man (of the Shudra caste) makes love to a girl of the highest caste 
he deserves corporal punishment . 6 

A Shudra cohabiting with a woman of twice-born castes, whether she 
be guarded or not guarded, is (to be) deprived of his member and of all 
his property if she be not guarded and of everything if she is guarded . 7 

1. Prasna II, Patala 10, Khanda 26, Sutras 14-16. 

2. Prasna I, Patala I, Khanda I, Sutras 7-8. 

3. Chapter I, Verses 87-91. 

4. Prasna II, Patala 10, Khanda 27, Sutras 8-9. 


5 Chapter XII, Sutras 2-3. 

6 Chapter VIII, Verse 366. 

7 Chapter VIII, Verse 374. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

For twice-born men, at first, a woman of the same caste is approved 
for marrying; but of those who act from lust, those of lower caste may 
in order (be wives). 

A Shudra woman alone (is) a wife for a Shudra; both she and a woman 
of his own caste (are) legally (wives) of a Vaishya; they two and also a 
woman of his own caste (are wives) of a Kshatriya, both they and a woman 
of his own caste(are wives) of a Brahmin. 

A Shudra wife is not indicated in any history for a Brahmin and 
Kshatriya, even though they be in distress. 

Twice-born men marrying a (Shudra) woman out of infatuation will 
surely bring quickly (their) families and descendants to the condition of 
Shudras . 1 

A Brahmin having taken a Shudra woman to his bed goes the lower 
course; having begotten on her a son, he is surely deprived of his 
Brahminhood. 

Now of (a man) whose offerings towards gods, manes, and guests depend 
on her, the manes and gods eat not that offering nor does he go to heaven. 

An expiation is not prescribed for him who has drunk the moisture on 
a Shudra woman’s lips, who has been reached by her breath, and who 
has also begotten a son on her . 2 


(x) 

(A) The Vasishtha Dharma Sutra says : 

“One may know that bearing grudges, envy, speaking untruths, speaking 
evil of Brahmins, backbiting and cruelty are the characteristics of a 
Shudra .” 3 

(B) The Vishnu Smriti prescribes that : 

(The name to be chosen should be) auspicious in the case of a Brahmin. 
Indicating power in the case of a Kshatriya. 

Indicating wealth in the case of a Vaishya. 

And indicating contempt in the case of a Shudra . 4 

(C) The Gautama Dharma Sutra says : 

“The Shudra belongs to the fourth caste, which has one birth (only). 

1. Chapter III, Verses 12-15. 

2. Ibid, Verses 17-19. 

3. Chapter VI, Verse 24. 

4. Chapter XXVII, Sutras 6-9. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


53 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 53 
And serves the higher (castes). 

From them he shall seek to obtain his livelihood. 

He shall use their cast-off shoes. 

And eat the remnants of their food. 

A Shudra who intentionally reviles twice-bom men by Criminal abuse, 
or criminally assaults them with blows, shall be deprived of the limb with 
which he offends. 

If he assumes a position equal to that of twice-born men in sitting, 
in lying down, in conversation or on the road, he shall undergo (corporal 
punishment)” 1 

(D) The Manu Smriti follows suit and says : 

“But if a Brahmin through avarice, and because he possesses the power, 
compel twice-born men, who have received the initiation (into the caste 
order), to do the work of a slave when they do not wish it, he shall be 
fined six hundred panas by the king. 

But a Shudra, whether bought or not bought (by the Brahmin) may be 
compelled to practise servitude, for that Shudra was created by the self- 
existent merely for the service of the Brahmin. 

Even if freed by his master, the Shudra is not released from servitude; 
for this (servitude) is innate in him; who then can take it from him. 2 

Just in proportion as one pursues without complaining the mode of life 
(practised) by the good, so free from blame, he gains both this and the 
otherworld. 3 

Now the supreme duty of a Shudra and that which ensures his bliss 
is merely obedience toward clelebrated priests who understand the Veda 
and live as householders. 

If he be pure, obedient to the higher (castes), mild in speech, without 
conceit, and always submissive to the Brahmin, he attains (in the next 
transmigration) a high birth. 4 

Now a Shudra desiring some means of subsistence may serve a 
Kshatriya, so(is the rule); or the Shudra (if) anxious to support life, (may 
do so by) serving a wealthy Vaishya. 

But he should serve the Brahmins for the sake of heaven, or for the sake 
of both (heaven and livelihood); for by him (for whom) the word Brahmin (is 
always) uttered is thus attained the state of completing all he ought to do. 

1. Chapter X. Sutras 50, 56-59 and Chapter XII, Sutras 1,7. 

2. Chapter VIII, Verses 412-414. 

3. Chapter X, Verse 128. 

4. Chapter IX, Verses 334-335. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Merely to serve the Brahmins is declared to be the most excellent 
occupation of a Shudra; for if he does anything other than this it profits 
him nothing. 

His means of life should be arranged by those Brahmins out of their 
own household (goods) in accordance with what is fitting after examining 
his ability, cleverness, and (the amount) the dependents embrace. 

The leaving of food should be given (to him) and the old clothes, so 
too the blighted part of the grain, so too the old furniture . 1 

Let a Brahmin’s name be auspicious, a Kshatriya’s full of power, let 
a Vaishya’s mean wealth, a Shudra’s however be contemptible. 

Let a Brahmin’s (distinctive title) imply prosperity, a Kshatriya’s 
safeguard, a Vaishya’s wealth, a Shudra’s service . 2 

If (a man) of one birth assault one of the twice-born castes with virulent 
words, he ought to have his tongue cut, for he is of the lowest origin. 

If he makes mention in an insulting manner of their name and caste, 
a red-hot iron rod, ten fingers long, should be thrust into his mouth. 

If this man through insolence gives instruction to the priests in regard 
to their duty, the king should cause boiling hot oil to be poured into his 
mouth and ear . 3 

If a man of the lowest birth should with any member injure one of the 
highest station, even that member of this man shall be cut (off); this is 
an ordinance of Manu. 

If he lift up his hand or his staff (against him), he ought to have his 
hand cut off; and if he smites him with his feet in anger, he ought to 
have his feet cut off. 

If a low-born man endeavours to sit down by the side of a high-born 
man, he should be banished after being branded on the hip, or (the king) 
may cause his backside to be cut off. 

If through insolence he spit upon him, the king should cause his two 
lips to be cut off; and if he makes water upon him, his penis, and if he 
breaks wind upon him, his anus. 

If he seize him by the locks, let the king without hesitation cause both 
his hands to be cut off, (also if he seize him) by the feet, the beard, the 
neck or the testicles. 


1. Chapter X, Verses 121-125. 

2. Chapter II, Verses 31-32. 

3. Chapter VIII, Verses 270-72. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


55 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 55 

A man who tears (another’s) skin and one who causes blood to be seen 
ought to be fined five hundred (Panas), if he tears the flesh (he should 
be fined) six niskas, but if he breaks a bone he should be banished . 1 

(D) The Narada Smriti says: 

Men of the Shudra caste, who prefer a false accusation against a member 
of a twice-born Aryan caste, shall have their tongue split by the officers 
of the king, and he shall cause them to be put on stakes. 

A once-born man (or Shudra) who insults members of a twice-born caste 
with gross invectives, shall have his tongue cut off; for he is of low origin. 

If he refers to their name or caste in terms indicating contempt, an 
iron-rod, ten angulas long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth. 

If he is insolent enough to give lessons regarding their duty to Brahmins, 
the king shall order hot oil to be poured into his mouth and ears. 

With whatever limb a man of low caste offends against a Brahmin, that 
very limb of him shall be cut off, such shall be the atonement for his 
crime. 

A low-born man, who tries to place himself on the same seat with his 
superior in caste, shall be branded on his hip and banished, or (the king) 
shall cause his backside to be gashed. 

If through arrogance he spits on a superior, the king shall cause both 
his lips to be cut off; if he makes water on him, the penis; if he breaks 
wind against him, the buttocks .” 2 


Ill 

Such were the laws made against the Shudras by the Brahmanic 
lawgivers. The gist of them may be summarized under the following 
heads : 

(1) That the Shudra was to take the last place in the social order. 

(2) That the Shudra was impure and therefore no sacred act should 
be done within his sight and within his hearing. 

(3) That the Shudra is not to be respected in the same way as 
the other classes. 

(4) That the life of a Shudra is of no value and anybody may kill 
him without having to pay compensation and if at all of small value 

1. Chapter VIII, Verses 279-284. 

2. Chapter XV, Verses 22-27. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as compared with that of the Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaishya. 

(5) That the Shudra must not acquire knowledge and it is a sin 
and a crime to give him education. 

(6) That a Shudra must not acquire property. A Brahmin can take 
his property at his pleasure. 

(7) That a Shudra cannot hold office under the State. 

(8) That the duty and salvation of the Shudra lies in his serving 
the higher classes. 

(9) That the higher Classes must not inter-marry with the Shudra. 
They can however keep a Shudra woman as a concubine. But if the 
Shudra touches a woman of the higher classes he will be liable to 
dire punishment. 

(10) That the Shudra is born in servility and must be kept in 
servility for ever. 

Anyone who reads this summary will be struck by two consider- 
ations. He will be struck by the consideration that Shudra alone has 
been selected by the Brahmanic law-givers as a victim for their law- 
making authority. The wonder must be all the greater when it is 
recalled that in the ancient Brahmanic literature the oppressed class 
in the ancient Indo-Aryan society was the Vaishya and not the 
Shudra. In this connection a reference may be made to the Aitareya 
Brahmana. The Aitareya Brahmana in telling the story of King 
Vishvantara and the Shyaparna Brahmanas refers to the sacrificial 
drink to which the different classes are entitled. In the course of the 
story, it speaks of the Vaishya in the following terms : 

“Next, if (the priest brings) curds, that is the Vaishya’s draught with 

it thou shalt satisfy the Vaishyas. One like a Vaishya shall be born in 

thy line, one who is tributary to another, who is to be used (lit. eaten) 

by another, and who maybe oppressed at will . 1 

The question is: why was the Vaishya let off and why the fury 
directed towards the Shudras ? 

He will also be struck by the close connection of the disabilities 
of the Shudra with the privileges of the Brahmin. The Shudra is 
below the Traivarnikas and is contrasted with the Traivarnikas. That 
being so, one would expect all the Traivarnikas to have the same rights 
against the Shudras. But what are the facts? The facts are that the 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas have no rights worth speaking of against the 
Shudras. The only Traivarnika who has special rights and privileges 

1 Muir, Vol. 1, p. 436-40. 

42 Chapter XII, Sutras 2-3. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


57 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 57 

is the Brahmin. For instance, if the Shudra is guilty of an offence 
against the Brahmin, the Brahmin has the privilege of demanding 
a higher punishment than what a Kshatriya or a Vaishya could. A 
Brahmin could take the property of the Shudra without being guilty 
of an offence if he needed it for the purpose of performing a sacrifice. 
A Shudra should not accumulate property because he thereby hurts 
the Brahmin. A Brahmin should not live in a country where the king 
is a Shudra. Why is this so? Had the Brahmin any cause to regard 
the Shudra as his special enemy? 

There is one other consideration more important than these. It is, 
what does the average Brahmin think of these disabilities of the 
Shudras? That they are extraordinary in their conception and 
shameful in their nature will be admitted by all. Will the Brahmin 
admit it? It would not be unnatural if this catalogue of disabilities 
may not make any impression upon him. In the first place, by long 
habit and usage his moral sense has become so dulled that he has 
ceased to bother about the how and why of these disabilities of the 
Shudras. In the second place, those of them who are conscious of them 
feel that similar disabilities have been imposed on particular classes 
in other countries and there is therefore nothing extraordinary nor 
shameful in the disabilities of the Shudras. It is the second attitude 
that needs to be exposed. 

This attitude is a very facile one and is cherished bacause it helps 
to save reputation and slave conscience. It is, however, no use leaving 
things as they are. It is absolutely essential to show that these 
disabilities have no parallel anywhere in the world. It is impossible 
to compare the Brahmanic Law with every other legal system on the 
point of rights and disabilities. A comparison of the Brahmanic Law 
with the Roman Law ought to suffice. 

IV 

It will be well to begin this comparison by noting the classes which 
under the Roman Law had rights and those which suffered from 
disabilities. The Roman jurists divided men into five categories: (1) 
Patricians and Plebians; (2) Freemen and Slaves; (3) Citizens and 
Foreigners; (4) Persons who were sui juris and persons who were 
alieni juris and (5) Chirstians and Pagans. 

Under the Roman Law; persons who were privileged were: 
(1) Patricians; (2) Freemen; (3) Citizens; (4) Sui juris and 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(5) Christians. As compared to these, persons who suffered disabilities 
under the Roman Law were: (1) the Plebians; (2) Slaves; 

(3) Foreigners; (4) Persons who were alieni juris and (5) Pagans. 

A Freeman, who was a citizen under the Roman Law, possessed 
civil rights as well as political rights. The civil rights of a citizen 
comprised rights of connubium and commercium. In virtue of the 
connubium, the citizen could contract a valid marriage according to 
the jus civile, and acquire the rights resulting from it, and particularly 
the paternal power and the civil relationship called agnation, which 
was absolutely necessary to enable him in law to succeed to the 
property of persons who died intestate. In virtue of the commercium 
he could acquire and dispose of property of all kinds, according to 
the forms and with the peculiar privileges of the Roman Law. The 
political rights of the Roman citizen included jus suffragii and jus 
honorum, the right to vote in public elections and the right to hold 
office. 

The slave differred from the Freeman in as much as he was owned 
by the master and as such had no capacity to acquire rights. 

Foreigners, who were called Peregrine, were not citizens and had 
none of the political or civil rights which went with citizenship. A 
Foreigner could obtain no protection unless he was under the 
protection of a citizen. 

The alieni juris differed from sui juris in as much as the former 
were subject to the authority of another person, while the latter were 
free from it. This authority was variously called (1) Potestas, (2) 
Manus and (3) Mancipium, though they had the same effect. Potestas 
under the Roman Law fell into two classes. Persons subject to 
Potestas were (1) slaves, (2) children, (3) wife in Manus, 

(4) debtor assigned to the creditor by the Court and (5) a hired 
gladiator. Potestas gave to one in whom it was vested rights to 
exclusive possession of those to whom it extended and to vindicate 
any wrong done to them by anyone else. 

The correlative disabilities which persons alieni juris suffered as 
a result of being subject to Potestas were: (1) they were not free, 
(2) they could not acquire property and (3) they could not directly 
vindicate any wrong or injury done to them. 

The disabilities of the Pagans began with the advent of 
Christianity. Originally, when all the Romans followed the same 
Pagan worship, religion could occasion no difference in the 
enjoyment of civil rights. Under the Christian Emperors, heretics and 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


59 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 59 

apostates as well as Pagans and Jews, were subjected to vexatious 
restrictions, particularly as regards their capacity to succeed to 
property and to act as witnesses. Only orthodox Christians who 
recognised the decisions of the four oecumenical councils had the full 
enjoyment of civil rights. 

This survey of rights and disabilities of the Roman Law may well 
give comfort to Hindus that the Brahmanic Law was not the only 
law which was guilty of putting certain classes under disabilities, 
although the disabilities imposed by the Roman Law have nothing 
of the cruelty which characterizes the disabilities imposed by the 
Brahmanic Law. But when one compares the principles of the Roman 
Law with those of the Brahmanic Law underlying these disabilities, 
the baseness of the Brahmanic Law becomes apparent. 

Let us first ask: What was the basis of rights and disabilities under 
the Roman Law. Even a superficial student of Roman Law knows 
that they were based upon (1) Caput and (2) Existimatio. 

Caput meant the civil status of a person. Civil status among the 
Romans had reference chiefly to three things; liberty, citizenship and 
family. The status libertatis consisted of being a freeman and not 
a slave. If a freeman was also a Roman citizen, he enjoyed the status 
civitatis. Upon this quality depended not only the enjoyment of 
political rights, but the capacity of participating in the jus civile. 
Finally, the status familice consisted in a citizen belonging to a 
particular family, and being capable of enjoying certain rights in 
which the members of that family, in their quality of agnates, could 
alone take part. 

If an existing status came to be lost or changed, the person suffered 
what was called a capitis diminutio, which extinguished either 
entirely or to some extent his former legal capacity. There were three 
changes of state or condition attended with different consequences, 
called maxima, media, and minima. The greatest involves the loss 
of liberty, citizenship, and family; and this happened when a Roman 
citizen was taken prisoner in war, or condemned to slavery for his 
crimes. But a citizen who was captured by the enemy, on returning 
from captivity, was restored to all his civil rights jure postliminii. 

The next change of status, consisted of the loss of citizenship and 
family rights, without any forfeiture of personal liberty; and this 
occurred when a citizen became a member of another state. He was 
then forbidden the use of fire and water, so as to be forced to quit the 
Roman territory, or was sentenced to deportation under the empire. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Finally, when a person ceased to belong to a particular family, 
without losing his liberty or citizenship, he was said to suffer the 
least change of state, as for instance, where one sui juris came under 
the power of another by arrogation, or a son who had been under 
the patria potestas was legally emancipated by his father. 

Citizenship was acquired first by birth. In a lawful marriage the 
child followed the condition of the father, and became a citizen, if 
the father was so at the time of conception. If the child was not the 
issue of justoe nuptioe, it followed the condition of the mother at the 
time of its birth. Secondly, by manumission, according to the 
formalities prescribed by law, the slave of a Roman citizen became 
a citizen. This rule was modified by the laws. Elia Sentia and Junia 
Norbana, according to which, in certain cases, the freedman acquired 
only the status of a foreigner, peregrinus dedititius or of a Latin, 
Latinus Junianus. Justinian restored the ancient principle, according 
to which every slave, regularly enfranchised, became in full right a 
Roman citizen. Thirdly, the right of citizenship was often granted as 
a favour, either to a whole community or to an individual, by the 
people or the senate during the republic, and by the reigning prince 
during the empire; and this was equivalent to what the moderns call 
naturalisation. 

Citizenship was lost — Firstly, by the loss of liberty — as, for 
instance, when a Roman became a prisoner of war; secondly, by 
renouncing the character of Roman citizen, which took place when 
anyone was admitted a citizen of another state; thirdly, by a sentence 
of deportation or exile, as a punishment for crime. 

The civil status of a person under the Roman Law may or may 
not be civis optimo jure. Civis optimo jure included not only capacity 
for civil rights but also capacity for political rights such as jus 
suffragii et honorum, i.e., the right to vote and the capacity to hold 
a public office. Capacity for political rights depended upon existimatio. 
Existimatio means reputation in the eye of the law. A Roman citizen 
may have caput as well as existimatio . On the other hand, a Roman 
may have caput but may not have existimatio. Whoever had caput 
as well as existimatio had civil rights as well as political rights. 
Whoever had caput but had no existimatio could claim civil rights 
only. He could not claim political rights. 

A person’s existimatio was lost in two ways. It was lost by loss 
of freedom or by conviction for an offence. If a person lost his freedom 
his existimatio was completely extinguished. Loss of existimatio by 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


61 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 61 

conviction for offence varied according to the gravity of the 
offence . 1 If the offence was serious the diminution of his existimatio 
was called infamia. If the offence was less grave it was called 
turpitudo. Infamia resulted in the extinguishment of existimatio. 
Under the Roman Law a defendant, in addition to ordinary damages, 
was subjected to infamia. Condemnation for theft, robbery, injuria 
or fraud, entailed infamy. So a partner, a mandatarius, a depositarins, 
tutor, a mortgagee (in contractus fiducioe) if condemned for wilful 
breach of duty, was held to be infamous. 

The consequence of infamia was exclusion from political rights , 2 
not merely from office (honours), but even from the right to vote in 
elections ( suffragium ). 

From this brief survey of the basis of rights and disabilities in 
Roman Law, it will be clear that the basis was the same for all. They 
did not differ from community to community. Rights and disabilities 
according to Roman Law were regulated by general considerations, 
such as caput and existimatio. Whoever had caput and existimatio 
had rights. Whoever lost his caput and his existimatio suffered 
disabilities. What is the position under the Brahmanic Law? There 
again, it is quite clear that rights and disabilities were not based 
on general uniform considerations. They were based on communal 
considerations. All rights for the first three Varnas and all disabili- 
ties for the Shudras was the principle on which the Brahmanic Law 
was based. 

The protagonists of Brahmanic Laws may urge that this compari- 
son is too favourable to Roman Law and that the statement that 
Roman Law did not distribute rights and liabilities on communal 
basis is not true. This may be conceded. For so far as the relation 
between the Patricians and Plebians was concerned the distribution 
of rights and liabilities was communal. But in this connection the 
following facts must be noted. 


1. Such as robbery, theft, perjury, fraud, appearing on the public stage as an 
actor or gladiator, ignominious expulsion from the army, gaining a living by aiding 
in prostitution and other disreputable occupations and other variety of acts involving 
gross moral turpitude. 

2. There were other consequences of infamia such as exclusion from the office of 
attorney, disability to act on behalf of another in a law suit or giving evidence. Infamia 
was inflicted in two ways, either by the censors or by the judgement of a Court of 
Law. It was in the power of the censors, in superintending public morality, to deprive 
senators of their dignity, to remove knights from the equestrian order and even to 
strip a citizen of all his political rights by classing him among the aerarii. The censors 
also put a nota censoria opposite to a man’s name in the roll of citizens; and this 
might be done upon their own responsibility; without special inquiry, though they 
generally acted in accordance with public opinion. The nota censoria produced no effect 
except during the magistracy of the censor who imposed it. In this respect it differed 
essentially from infamy, which was perpetual, unless the stigma was removed by the 
prerogative of the people or the Emperor. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


62 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In the first place, it must be noted that Plebians were not slaves. 
They were freemen in as much as they enjoyed jus commercii or the 
right to acquire, hold and transfer property. Their disabilities 
consisted in the denial of political and social rights. In the second 
place, it must be noted that their disabilities were not permanent. 
There were two social disabilities from which they suffered. One arose 
from the interdict on intermarriage between them and the Patricians 
imposed by the Twelve Tables. 1 This disability was removed in B.C. 
445 by the passing of the Canulenian Law which legalized intermar- 
riage between Patricians and Plebians. The other disability was their 
ineligibility to hold the office of Pontiffs and Augurs in the Public 
Temples of Rome. This disability was removed by the Ogulnian Law 
passed in B.C. 300. 

As to the political disabilities of the Plebians they had secured 
the right to vote in popular assemblies (jus suffragii) under the 
Constitution of Servius Tullius the Sixth King of Rome. The political 
disabilities which had remained unredressed were those which related 
to the holding of office. This too was removed in course of time after 
the Republic was established in B.C. 509. The first step taken in this 
direction was the appointment of Plebian Tribunes in B.C. 494; the 
Questorship was opened to them, formally in B.C. 421; actually in 
B.C. 409; the Consulship in B.C. 367; the curule-aedileship in B.C. 
366; the dictatorship in B.C. 356; the Censorship in B.C 351; and 
the Praetorship in B.C. 336. The Hortensian Law enacted in B.C. 
287 marked a complete triumph for the Plebians. By that law the 
resolutions of the Assembly of the tribes were to be directly and 
without modification, control or delay, binding upon the whole of the 
Roman people. 

This marks a complete political fusion of Patricians and Plebians 
on terms of equality. 

Not only were the Plebians placed on the same footing as to 
political capacity and social status with the Patricians but the road to 
nobility was also thrown open to them. In Roman society, birth and 
fortune were the two great sources of rank and personal distinction. 
But in addition to this, the office of Curule Magistracy was also a 
source of ennoblement to the holder thereof. Every citizen, whether 
Patrician or Plebian, who won his way to a Curule Magistracy, from 
that Edile upwards, acquired personal distinction, which was trans- 
mitted to his descendants, who formed a class called Nobiles, or 


1. It was older than the Twelve Tables. The Twelve Tables only recognized it. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


63 


THE SHUDRAS : THE BRAHMANIC .... STATUS OF THE SHUDRAS 63 

men known, to distinguish them from the ignobiles, or people who 
were not known. As the office was thrown open to the Plebians, many 
Plebians 1 had become nobles and had even surpassed the Patricians 
in point of nobility. 

It may be that the Roman Law did recognise communal distinction 
in distributing rights and disabilities. The point is that the disabili- 
ties of the Plebians were not regarded as permanent. Although they 
existed they were in course of time removed. That being so, the 
protagonists of Brahmanic Law cannot merely take solace in having 
found a parallel in the Roman Law but have to answer why the 
Brahmanic Law did not abolish the distinction between the 
Traivarnikas and the Shudras as the Roman Law did by equating 
the Plebians with the Patricians? One can therefore contend that the 
Roman Law of rights and disabilities was not communal while the 
Brahmanic Law was. 

This is not the only difference between the Roman Law and the 
Brahmanic Law. There are two others. One is equality before law 
in criminal matters. The Roman Law may not have recognized 
equality in matters of civil and political rights. But in matters of 
criminal law it made no distinction between one citizen and another, 
not even between Patrician and Plebian. The same offence the same 
punishment, no matter who the complainant and who the accused 
was. Once an offence was proved, the punishment was the same. What 
do the Dharma Sutras and the Smritis do? They follow an entirely 
different principle. For the same offence the punishment varies 
according to the community of the accused and the community of the 
complainant. If the complainant is a Shudra and the accused belonged 
to any one of the three classes the punishment is less than what 
it would be if the relations were reversed. On the other hand, if the 
complainant was Traivarnika and the accused a Shudra, the punish- 
ment is far heavier than in the first case. This is another barbarity 
which distinguishes the Brahmanic Law from the Roman Law. 

The next feature of the Roman Law which distinguishes it from 
the Brahmanic Law is most noteworthy. It relates to the extinction 
of disabilities. Two points need be borne in mind. First is that the 
disabilities under the Roman Law were only contingent. So long as 
certain conditions lasted, they gave rise to certain disabilities. The 


1. A Plebian who first attained a Curule office and became the founder of a noble 
family was called by the Remans a novus homo or new man. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-03 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

moment the conditions changed, the disabilities vanished and a step 
in the direction of equality before law was taken. The second point 
is that the Roman Law never attempted to fix the conditions for ever 
and thereby perpetuate the disabilities. On the other hand, it was 
always ready to remove the conditions to which these disabilities were 
attached as is evident in the case of the Plebians, the Slaves, the 
Foreigners and the Pagans. 

If these two points about the disabilities under the Roman Law 
are borne in mind, one can at once see what mischief the Dharma 
Sutras and the Smritis have done in imposing the disabilities upon 
the Shudras. The imposition of disabilities would not have been so 
atrocious if the disabilities were dependent upon conditions and if 
the disabled had the freedom to outgrow those conditions. But what 
the Brahmanic Law does is not merely to impose disabilities but it 
tries to fix the conditions by making an act which amounts to a breach 
of those conditions to be a crime involving dire punishment. Thus, 
the Brahmanic Law not only seeks to impose disabilities but it 
endeavours to make them permanent. One illustration will suffice. 
A Shudra is not entitled to perform Vedic sacrifices as he is not able 
to repeat the Vedic Mantras. Nobody would quarrel with such a 
disability. But the Dharma Sutras do not stop here. They go further 
and say that it will be a crime for a Shudra to study the Vedas or 
hear it being pronounced and if he does commit such a crime his 
tongue should be cut or molten lead should be poured into his ear. 
Can anything be more barbarous than preventing a man to grow out 
of his disability? What is the explanation of these disabilities? Why 
did the Brahmanic Law-givers take such a cruel attitude towards the 
Shudras? The Brahmanic Law books merely state the disabilities. 
They say that the Shudras have no right to Upanayana. They say 
that the Shudras shall hold no office. They say that the Shudras shall 
not have property. But they do not say why. The whole thing is 
arbitrary. The disabilities of the Shudra have no relation to his 
personal conduct. It is not the result of infamy. The Shudra is 
punished just because he was a Shudra. This is a mystery which 
requires to be solved. As the Brahmanic Law books do not help us 
to solve it, it is necessary to look for explanation elsewhere. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


65 


CHAPTER IV 

SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 

I 

FROM what has been said before, it is clear that the Brahmanic 
writers do not give us any clue as to who the Shudras were and how 
they came to be the fourth Varna. It is, therefore, necessary to turn 
to the Western writers and to see what they have to say about the 
subject. The Western writers have a definite theory about the origin 
of the Shudras. Though all of them are hot agreed upon every aspect 
of the theory, there are points on which there seems to be a certain 
amount of unity among them. They comprise the following : 

(1) The people who created the Vedic literature belonged to the 
Aryan race. 

(2) This Aryan race came from outside India and invaded India. 

(3) The natives of India were known as Dasas and Dasyus who 
were racially different from the Aryans. 

(4) The Aryans were a white race. The Dasas and Dasyus were 
a dark race. 

(5) The Aryans conquered the Dasas and Dasyus. 

(6) The Dasas and Dasyus after they were conquered and enslaved 
were called Shudras. 

(7) The Aryans cherished colour prejudice and therefore formed the 
Chaturvarnya whereby they separated the white race from the black 
race such as the Dasas and the Dasyus. 

These are the principal elements in the Western theory about the 
origin and position of the Shudras in the Indo-Aryan society. 
Whether it is valid or not is another matter. But this much must 
certainly be said about it that after reading the Brahmanic theories 
with their long and tedious explanations attempting to treat a social 
fact as a divine dispensation, one cannot but feel a certain amount 
of relief in having before oneself a theory, which proceeds to give 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a natural explanation of a social fact. One can do nothing with the 
Brahmanic theories except to call them senseless ebullitions of a silly 
mind. They leave the problem as it is. With the modern theory, one 
is at least on the road to recover one’s way. 

To test the validity of the theory, the best thing to do is to examine 
it piece by piece and see how far each is supported by evidence. 

The foundation on which the whole fabric of the theory rests is 
the proposition that there lived a people who were Aryan by race. 
It is in the fitness of things therefore to grapple with this question 
first. 

What is this Aryan race? Before we consider the question of Aryan 
race we must be sure as to what we mean by the word “race”. It 
is necessary to raise this question because it is not impossible to 
mistake a people for a race. The best illustration of such a mistake 
is the Jews. Most people believe that the Jews are a race. To the 
naked eye, they appear to be so. But what is the verdict of the 
experts ? This is what Prof. Ripley 1 has to say about the Jews : 

“Our final conclusion, then, is this: This is paradoxical yet true, we 
affirm. The Jews are not a race, but only a people after all. In their faces 
we read its confirmation; while in respect of their other traits, we are 
convinced that such individuality as they possess — by no means inconsid- 
erable — is of their own making from one generation to the next, rather 
than a product of an unprecedented purity of physical descent.” 

What is a race? A race may be defined as a body of people 
possessing certain typical traits which are hereditary. There was a 
time when it was believed that the traits which constitute a race 
are: (1) the form of the head, (2) the colour of the hair and eyes, 
(3) the colour of the skin, and (4) the stature. To-day the general 
view is that pigmentation and stature are traits, which vary according 
to climate and habitat, and consequently they must be ruled out as 
tests for determining the race of the people. The only stable trait 
is the shape of the human head — by which is meant the general 
proportions of length, breadth and height and that is why anthro- 
pologists and ethnologists regard it as the best available test of race. 

The use of head-forms for determining the race to which an 
individual belongs has been developed by anthropologists into an 
exact science. It is called anthropometry. This science of anthropom- 
etry has devised two ways of measuring the head form: (1) cephalic 
index, and (2) facial index. The index is the mark of the race. 


1. Ripley W. E., The Races of Europe, p. 400. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


67 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 67 

Cephalic index is the breadth of the head above the ears expressed 
in percentage of its length from forehead to back. Assuming that this 
length is 100, the width is expressed as a fraction of it. As the head 
becomes proportionately broader — that is more fully rounded, viewed 
from the top down — this cephalic index increases. When it rises above 
80, the head is called brachycephalic. When it falls below 75, the 
term dolichocephalic is applied to it. Indices between 75 and 80 are 
characterized as mesocephalic. These are technical terms. They 
constantly crop up in literature dealing with questions of race and 
if one does not know what they denote it obviously becomes very 
difficult to follow the discussion intelligently. It would not therefore 
be without advantage if I were to stop to give their popular 
equivalents. The popular equivalent of mesocephalic is medium- 
headed, having a medium cephalic Index, the breadth of the cranium 
being between three-fourths and four-fifths of the length. Doli- 
chocephalic means long-headed, having a low cephalic index, the 
breadth of the cranium being below four-fifths of the length. 

Facial index is the correlation between the proportions of the head 
and the form of the face. In the majority of cases, it has been found 
that a relatively broad head is accompanied by a rounded face, in 
which the breadth back of the cheek bones is considerable as 
compared with the height from forehead to chin. Lack of uniformity 
in the mode of taking measurements has so far prevented extended 
observations fit for exact comparison. All the same, it has been found 
safe to adopt the rule, long head, oval face: short-head and round 
face. 

Applying these measures of anthropometry, Prof. Ripley, an 
authority on the question of race, has come to the conclusion that 
the European people belong to three different races in terms of 
cephalic and facial index. His conclusions are summarized in the 
table on the next page. 1 

Is there an Aryan race in the physical sense of the term? There 
seem to be two views on the subject. One view is in favour of the 
existence of the Aryan race. According to it : 2 

The Aryan type., is marked by a relatively long (dolichocephalic) head; 
a straight finely-cut (leptorrhine) nose; a long symmetrically narrow face; 
well developed regular features and a high facial angle. The stature is 
fairly high — and the general build of the figure well-proportioned and 
slender rather than massive. 

1. Ripley, Races of Europe, p. 121. 

2. Ibid Vol. I, p. 121 


EUROPEAN RACIAL TYPES 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


68 


68 



D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


69 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 69 

The other view is that of Prof. Max Muller. According to him, the 
word is used in three different senses. This is what he, in his lectures 
on the Science of Language, says : 

In ar or ara, I recognise one of the oldest names of the earth, as the 
ploughed land, lost in Sanskrit but preserved in Greek as (era) so that 
Arya would have conveyed originally the meaning of landholder, cultivator 
of the land, while Vaishya from Vis meant householder, Ida the daughter 
of Manu is another name of the cultivated earth and probably a modi- 
fication of Ara. 

The second sense in which it was used was to convey the idea of 
ploughing or tilling the soil. As to this, Prof. Max Muller makes the 
following observations : 

I can only state that the etymological signification of Arya seems to 
be: One who ploughs or tills. The Aryans would seem to have chosen this 
name for themselves as opposed to the nomadic races, the Turanians, 
whose original name Tura implies the swiftness of the horsemen. 

In the third sense, the word was used as a general name for the 
Vaishyas, i.e., the general body of the people, who formed the whole 
mass of the people. For this, Prof. Max Muller relies on Panini (iii. 
1,103) for his authority. Then, there is the fourth sense, which the 
word got only towards the later period, in which sense it means ‘of 
noble origin’. 

What is however of particular importance is the opinion of 
Prof. Max Muller on the question of the Aryan race. This is what 
he says on the subject: 1 

There is no Aryan race in blood; Aryan, in scientific language is utterly 
inapplicable to race. It means language and nothing but language; and 
if we speak of Aryan race at all, we should know that it means no more 
than... Aryan speech. 

k k k 

I have declared again and again that if I say Aryas, I mean neither 
blood nor bones, nor hair nor skull; I mean simply those who speak an 
Aryan language. The same applies to Hindus, Greeks, Romans, Germans, 
Celts, and Slavs. When I speak of them I commit myself to no anatomical 
characteristics. The blue-eyed and fair-haired Scandinavians may have been 
conquerors or conquered, they may have adopted the language of their darker 
lords or their subjects, or vice versa. I assert nothing beyond their language, 
when I call them Hindus, Greeks, Romans, Germans, Celts and Slavs; and 
in that sense, and in that sense only, do I say that even the blackest Hindus 
represent an earlier stage of Aryan speech and thought than the fairest 
Scandinavians. This may seem strong language, but in matters of such 
importance we cannot be too decided in our language. To me, an ethnologist 
who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan blood, Aryan eyes and hair, is as great 
a sinner as linguist who speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a 

1 Biography of Words, pp. 89 and 120-21. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

brachycephalic grammar. It is worse than a Babylonian confusion of 

tongues — it is down-right theft. We have made our own terminology for 

the classification of language; let ethnologists make their own for the 

classification of skulls, and hair and blood. 

The value of this view of Prof. Max Muller will be appreciated by 
those who know that he was at one time a believer in the theory 
of Aryan race and was largely responsible for the propagation of 
it. 

The two views are obviously not in harmony. According to one 
view, the Aryan race existed in a physiological sense with typical 
hereditary traits with a fixed cephalic and facial index. According 
to Prof. Max Muller, the Aryan race existed in a philological sense, 
as a people speaking a common language. 

In this conflict of views one may well ask: what is the testimony 
of the Vedic literature? As examination of the Vedic literature shows 
that there occur two words in the Rig Veda — one is Arya (3TFf) with 
a short ‘a’ and the other is Arya (37pf) with a long ‘a’. The word 
Arya (3TFT) with a short ‘a’ is used in the Rig Veda 1 in 88 places. 
In what sense is it used? The word 2 is used in four different senses; 
as (1) enemy, (2) respectable person, (3) name for India, and (4) 
owner, Vaishya or citizen. 

The word (3IFf) with a long ‘a’ is used in the Rig Veda in 31 places. 3 
But in none of these is the word used in the sense of race. 

From the foregoing discussion, the one indisputable conclusion 
which follows is that the terms ‘Arya’ and ‘Arya’ which occur in the 
Vedas have not been used in the racial sense at all. 

One may also ask: what is the evidence of anthropometry? the 
Aryan race is described as long-headed. This description is not 
enough. For as will be seen from the table given by Prof. Ripley, 
there are two races which are long-headed. The question which of 
the two is the Aryan race still remains open. 

II 

Let us take the next premise — namely, that the Aryans came from 
outside India, invaded India, and conquered the native tribes. It 
would be better to take these questions separately. 

1. For a list of the references in the Rig Veda, see Apendix 1. 

2. For a list of references showing in which place the word is used and in what 
sense, see Appendix II 

3. For a list of references, see Appendix III. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


71 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 71 

From where did the Aryan race come into India? On the question 
of locating the original home of the Aryan race, there is a bewildering 
variety of views and options. According to Benfey, the original home 
of the Aryan race must be determined by reference to the common 
vocabulary. His views on the subject have been well summarized by 
Prof. Isaac Taylor 1 in the following words : 

“The investigation of the vocabulary common to the whole of the Aryan 
languages might yield a clue to the region inhabited by the Aryans before 
the linguistic separation. He contended that certain animals, such as the 
bear and the wolf, and certain trees, such as the beech and the birch with 
which the primitive Aryans must have been acquainted, are all indigenous 
to the temperate zone, and above all, to Europe, whereas the characteristic 
animals and trees of Southern Asia, such as the lion, the tiger and the 
palm were known only to the Indians and the Iranians. He urged that 
the absence from the primitive Aryan vocabulary of common names for 
the two great Asiatic beasts of prey, the lion and the tiger, or for the 
chief Asiatic beast of transport, the camel, is difficult to explain on the 
theory of the migration of the Aryans from the region eastward of the 
Caspian. That the Greeks called the lion by its Semitic name, and the 
Indians by a name which cannot be referred to any Aryan root, argues 
that the lion was unknown in the common home of Greeks and Indians. 

k k k 

Benfey’s declaration speedily bore fruit, and Geiger forthwith ranged 
himself in the same camp, but placing the cradle of the Aryans, not as Benfey 
had done in the region to the North of the Black Sea, but more to the north- 
west, in Central and Western Germany. Geiger’s contribution to the argument 
was not without its value. He bases his conclusions largely on the tree names 
which belong to the primitive Aryan vocabulary. In addition to the fir, the 
willow, the ash, the alder, and the hazel, he thinks the names of the birch, 
the beech and the oak are specially decisive. Since the Greek (phegos) which 
denotes the oak is the linguistic equivalent of the Teutonic beech and of the 
Latin fague he draws the conclusion that the Greeks migrated from a land 
of beeches to a land of oaks, transferring the name which denoted the tree 
with ‘edible’ fruit from the one tree to the other.” 

Another school holds that the original home of the Aryan race was 
in Caucasia, because the Caucasians like the Aryans are blonds, have 
a straight, a sharp nose and a handsome face. On this point, the 
view of Prof. Ripley is worth quoting. This is what Prof. Ripley 2 has 
to say on the subject : 

The utter absurdity of the misnomer Caucasian, as applied to the blue- 
eyed and fair-headed ‘Aryan’ (?) race of Western Europe, is revealed by 
two indisputable facts. In the first place, this ideal blond type does not 
occur within many hundred miles of Caucasia; and, secondly, nowhere 
along the great Caucasian chain is there a single native tribe making use 
of a purely inflectional or Aryan language. 

k k k 

1 Issac Taylor, The Origin of the Aryans, pp. 24-26. 

2 Ripley : Races of Europe, pp. 436-437. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Even the Ossetes, whose language alone is possibly inflectional, have 
not had their claims to the honour of Aryan made positively clear as yet. 
And even if Ossetian be Aryan, there is every reason to regard the people 
as immigrants from the direction of Iran, not indigenous Caucasians at 
all. Their head form, together with their occupation of territory along the 
only highway — the Pass of Darriel — across the chain from the South, give 
tenability to the hypothesis. At all events, whether the Ossetes be Aryan 
or not, they little deserve pre-eminence among the other peoples about 
them. They are lacking both in the physical beauty for which this region 
is justly famous, and in courage as well, if we may judge by their reputation 
in yielding abjectly and without shadow of resistance to the Russians. 

•k k k 

It is not true that any of these Caucasians are even ‘somewhat typical’. 

As a matter of fact they could never be typical of anything. The name 
covers nearly every physical type and family of language of the Eur-Asian 
continent except, as we have said, that blond, tall, ‘Aryan’ speaking one 
to which the name has been specifically applied. It is all false; not only 
improbable but absurd. The Caucasus is not a cradle — it is rather a grave — 
of peoples, of languages, of customs and of physical types. Let us be assured 
of that point at the outset. Nowhere else in the world probably is so 
heterogeneous a lot of people, languages and religions gathered together 
in one place as along the chain of the Caucasus mountains.” 

Mr. Tilak has suggested that the original home of the Aryan race 
was in the Arctic region. His theory may be summarized in his own 
words. He begins by taking note of the astronomical and climatic 
phenomenon in the region round about the North Pole. He finds 1 that 
there are : 

“Two sets of characteristics, or differentia; one for an observer stationed 
exactly at the terrestrial North Pole, and the other for an observer located 
in the Circum-Polar regions, or tracts of land between the North Pole and 
the Arctic circle.” 

Mr. Tilak calls these two sets of differentia; as Polar and 
CircumPolar, and sums them up as follows : 

I. The Polar Characteristics 

(1) The sun rises in the south. 

(2) The stars do not rise and set; but revolve or spin round and round, 
in horizontal planes, completing one round in 24 hours. The northern 
celestia hemisphere is alone overhead and visible during the whole year; 
and the souther or lower celestial world is always invisible. 

(3) The year consists only of one long day and one long night of six 
months each. 

(4) There is only one morning and one evening, or the sun rises and sets only 
once a year. But the twilight, whether of the morning or of the evening, lasts 
continuously for about two months, or 60 periods of 24 hours each. The ruddy light 


1 Tilak B. G., The Arctic Home in the Vedas, 58-60. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


73 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 73 


of the morn, or the evening twilight, is not again confined to a particular 
part of the horizon (eastern or western) as with us; but moves, like the stars 
at the place, round and round along the horizon, like a potter’s wheel, 
completing one round in every 24 hours. These rounds of the morning light 
continue to take place, until the orb of the sun comes above the horizon; 
and then the sun follows the same course for six months, that is, moves, 
without setting, round and round the observer, completing one round every 
24 hours. 

II. The Circum-Polar Characteristics 

(1) The sun will always be to the south of the zenith of the observer, but 
as this happens even in the case of an observer stationed in the temperate 
zone, it cannot be regarded as a special characteristic. 

(2) A large number of stars are circum-polor, that is, they are above the 
horizon during the entire period of their revolution and hence always visible. 
The remaining stars rise and set as in the temperate zone, but revolve in 
more oblique circles. 

(3) The year is made up of three parts: (i) one long continuous night, 
occurring at the time of the winter solstice, and lasting for a period, greater 
than 24 hours and less than six months, according to the latitude of the place; 

(ii) one long continuous day to match, occurring at the time of the summer 
solstice; and (iii) a succession of ordinary days and nights during the rest 
of the year, a nycthemeron, or a day and a night together, never exceeding 
a period of 24 hours. The day, after the long continuous night, is at first 
shorter than the night, but goes on increasing until it develops into the long 
continuous day. At the end of the long day, the night is, at first, shorter 
than the day, but, in its turn, it begins to gain over the day, until the 
commencement of the long continuous night, with which the year ends. 

(4) The dawn, at the close of the long continuous night, lasts for several 
days, but its duration and magnificence is proportionally less than at the 
North Pole, according to the latitude of the place. For places, within a few 
degrees of the North Pole, the phenomenon of revolving morning light will 
still be observable during the greater part of the duration of the dawn. The 
other dawns viz., those between ordinary days and nights, will, like the dawns 
in the temperate zone, only last for a few hours. The sun, when he is above 
the horizon during the continuous day, will be seen revolving, without setting, 
round the observer, as at the Pole, but in oblique and not horizontal circles, 
and during the long night he will be entirely below the horizon, while during 
the rest of the year he will rise and set, remaining above the horizon for 
a part of 24 hours, varying according to the position of the sun in the ecliptic. 

Summing up the position as analysed by him, Mr. Tilak concludes 
by saying : 

“Here we have two distinct sets of differentiae or special characteristics 
of the Polar and Circum-Polar regions — characteristics which are not found 
anywhere else on the surface of the globe. Again as the Poles of the earth 
are the same to-day as they were millions of years ago, the above astronomical 
characteristics will hold good for all times, though the Polar climate may 
have undergone violent changes in the Pleistocene period.” 

Having noted the phenomenon in the Arctic region, Mr. Tilak 
proceeds to argue that : 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“If a Vedic description or tradition discloses any of the characteristics 
mentioned above, we may safely infer that the tradition is Polar or 
Circumi-Polar in origin, and the phenomenon, if not actually witnessed 
by the poet, was at least known to him by tradition faithfully handed down 
from generation to generation. Fortunately there are many such passages 
or references in the Vedic literature, and, for convenience, these may be 
divided into two parts; the first comprising those passages which directly 
describe or refer to the long night, or the long dawn; and the second 
consisting of myths and legends which corroborate and indirectly support 
the first.” 

Mr. Tilak is satisfied that the description of natural phenomenon 
and the myths and legends contained in the Vedas tally with the 
natural phenomenon as it exists near the North Pole and concludes 
that the Vedic poets i.e., the Vedic Aryans must have had the Arctic 
region as their home. 

This is of course a very original theory. There is only one point 
which seems to have been overlooked. The horse is a favourite animal 
of the Vedic Aryans. It was most intimately connected with their life 
and their religion. That the queens vied with one another to copulate 
with the horse in the Ashvamedha Yajna 1 shows what place the horse 
had acquired in the life of the Vedic Aryans. Question is : was the 
horse to be found in the Arctic region? If the answer is in the negative, 
the Arctic home theory becomes very precarious. 

Ill 

What evidence is there of the invasion of India by the Aryan race 
and the subjugation by it of the native tribes? So far as the Rig Veda 
is concerned, there is not a particle of evidence suggesting the 
invasion of India by the Aryans from outside India. As Mr. P. T. 
Srinivasa Iyengar 2 points out: 

“A careful examination of the Mantras where the words Arya, Dasa and 
Dasyu occur, indicates that they refer not to race but to cult. These words 
occur mostly in Rig Veda Samhita where Arya occurs about 33 times in 
mantras which contain 153,972 words on the whole. The rare occurrence 
is itself a proof that the tribes that called themselves Aryas were not 
invaders that conquered the country and exterminated the people. For an 
invading tribe would naturally boast of its achievements constantly.” 

So far the testimony of the Vedic literature is concerned, it is 
against the theory that the original home of the Aryans was outside 
India. The language in which reference to the seven rivers is made in 

1 See Yajur Veda with Madhavachiya’s Bhashya. 

2 Life in Ancient India in the Age of the Mantras, pp. 11-12. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


75 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 75 


the Rig Veda (x.75.5) is very significant. As Prof. D. S. Triveda says 1 — 
the rivers are addressed as ‘my Ganges, my Yamuna, my Saraswati’ 
and so on. No foreigner would ever address a river in such familiar 
and endearing terms unless by long association he had developed an 
emotion about it. 

As to the question of conquest and subjugation, references can 
undoubtedly be found in the Rig Veda where Dasas and Dasyus are 
described as enemies of the Aryas and there are many hymns in which 
the Vedic rishis have invited their gods to kill and annihilate them. 
But before drawing any conclusion from it in favour of conquest and 
subjugation by the Aryans, the following points must be taken into 
consideration. 

First is the paucity of references in the Rig Veda to wars between 
the Aryans on the one hand and the Dasas or Dasyus on the other. 
Out of the 33 places in which the word occurs in the Rig Veda only 
in 8 places is it used in opposition to Dasas and only in 7 places 
is it used in opposition to the word Dasyus. This may show the 
occurrence of sporadic riots between the two. It is certainly not 
evidence of a conquest or subjugation. 

The second point about the Dasas is that whatever conflict there 
was between them and the Aryans, the two seem to have arrived 
at a mutual settlement, based on peace with honour. This is borne 
out by references in the Rig Veda showing how the Dasas and Aryans 
have stood as one united people against a common enemy. Note the 
following verses from the Rig Veda : 

Rig Veda — vi. 33.3; 

vii. 83.1; 
viii 51.9; 

X 102.3. 

The third point to note is that whatever the degree of conflict, it 
was not a conflict of race. It was a conflict which had arisen on 
account of difference of religions. That this conflict was religious and 
not racial is evidenced by the Rig Veda itself. Speaking of the Dasyus, 
it 2 says : 

“They are avrata, without (the Arya) rites (R.V., i. 51.8, 9; i. 132. 4; iv.41. 

2; vi. 14, 3); apavrata (R.V., v.42,2), anyavrata of different rites (R.V., viii. 59, 

11; x.22, 8), Anagnitra fireless (R.V., v. 189, 3), ayajyu, ayajvan, non-sacrifices 

(R.V., i. 131, 44; i.33, 4; viii. 59, 11), abrambha, without prayers (or also not 

1 The Original Home of the Aryans’ by D. S. Triveda, Annals of the Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, Vol. XX, p. 62. 

2 Iyengar, Ibid,,, p. 13. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

having Brahmana priest (R.V., iv. 15,9; x. 105,8). anrichah, without Riks 
(R.V., x.105, 8), Brahmadvisha, haters of prayer (or Brahmans) R.V., 
v.42,9), and anindra, without Indra, despisers of Indra, (R.V., i. 133,1: v.2,3; 
vii 18; 6; x 27, 6; x.48, 7). ‘They pour no milky draughts they heat no 
cauldron’ (R.V., iii.53, 4). They give no gifts to the Brahmana (R.V., v.7, 
10 ).” 

Attention may also be drawn to the Rig Veda x.22.8 which says : 

“We live in the midst of the Dasyu tribes, who do not perform sacrifices 
nor believe in anything. They have their own rites and are not entitled 
to be called men. 0! thou, destroyer of enemies, annihilate them and injure 
the Dasas.” 

In the face of these statements from the Rig Veda, there is 
obviously no room for a theory of a military conquest by the Aryan 
race of the non-Aryan races of Dasas and Dasyus. 

IV 

So much about the Aryans, their invasion of India and their 
subjugation of the Dasas and Dasyus. The consideration so far 
bestowed upon the question has been from the Aryan side of the issue. 
It might be useful to discuss it from the side of the Dasas and the 
Dasyus. In what sense are the names Dasa and Dasyu used? Are 
they used in a racial sense? 

Those who hold that the terms Dasa and Dasyu are used in the 
racial sense rely upon the following circumstances: (1) The use in 
the Rig Veda of the terms Mridhravak and Anasa as epithets of 
Dasyus. (2) The description in the Rig Veda of the Dasas as being 
of Krishna Varna 

The term Mridhravak occurs in the following places in the Rig 
Veda : 


(1) Rig Veda, 

i. 

174.2; 

(2) Rig Veda, 

V. 

32.8; 

(3) Rig Veda, 

vii. 

6.3; 

(4) Rig Veda, 

vii. 

18.3. 

What does the adjective Mridhravak mean? Mridhravak means one 


who speaks crude, unpolished language. Can crude unpolished lan- 
guage be regarded as evidence of difference of race? It would be 
childish to rely upon this as a basis of consciousness of race difference. 

The term Anasa occurs in Rig Veda v.29.10. What does the word 
mean? There are two interpretations. One is by Prof. Max Muller. 
The other is by Sayanacharya. According to Prof.. Max Muller, it 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


77 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 77 

means ‘one without nose ‘or’ one with a flat nose’ and has as such 
been relied upon as a piece of evidence in support of the view that 
the Aryans were a separate race from the Dasyus. Sayanacharya says 
that it means ‘mouthless,’ i.e., devoid of good speech. This difference 
of meaning is due to difference in the correct reading of the word 
Anasa.. Sayanacharya reads it as an-asa while Prof. Max Muller reads 
it as a-nasa. As read by Prof. Max Muller, it means without nose. 
Question is : which of the two readings is the correct one? There 
is no reason to hold that Sayana’s reading is wrong. On the other 
hand there is every thing to suggest that it is right. In the first place, 
it does not make non-sense of the word. Secondly, as there is no other 
place where the Dasyus are described as noseless, there is no reason 
why the word should be read in such a manner as to give it an 
altogether new sense. It is only fair to read it as a synonym of 
Mridhravak. There is therefore no evidence in support of the 
conclusion that the Dasyus belonged to a different race. 

Turning to Dasas, it is true that they are described as Krishna 
Yoni, in Rig Veda vi.47.21. But there are various points to be 
considered before one can accept the inference which is sought to be 
drawn from it. First is that this is the only place in the Rig Veda 
where the phrase Krishna Yoni is applied to the Dasas. Secondly, 
there is no certainty as to whether the phrase is used in the literal 
sense or in a figurative sense. Thirdly, we do not know whether it 
is a statement of fact or a word of abuse. Unless these points are 
clarified, it is not possible to accept the view that because the Dasas 
are spoken of as Krishna Yoni, they therefore, belonged to a dark 
race. 

In this connection, attention may be drawn to the following verses 
from the Rig Veda: 

1. Rig Veda, vi.22.10. — “Oh, Vajri, thou hast made Aryas of Dasas, good 
men out of bad by your power. Give us the same power so that with it 
we may overcome our enemies.” 

2. Rig Veda, x.49.3, (says Indra). — “I have deprived the Dasyus of the 
title of Aryas.” 

3. Rig Veda, i. 151.8 — “Oh, Indra, find out who is an Arya and who 
is a Dasyu and separate them.” 

What do these verses indicate? They indicate that the distinction 
between the Aryans on the one hand and the Dasas and Dasyus on 
the other was not a racial distinction of colour or physiognomy. That 
is why a Dasa or Dasyu could become an Arya. That is why Indra 
was given the task to separate them from the Arya. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

That the theory of the Aryan race set up by Western writers falls 
to the ground at every point, goes without saying. This is somewhat 
surprising since Western scholarship is usually associated with 
thorough research and careful analysis. Why has the theory failed? 
It is important to know the reasons why it has failed. Anyone who 
cares to scrutinize the theory will find that it suffers from a double 
infection. In the first place, the theory is based on nothing but 
pleasing assumptions and inferences based on such assumptions. In 
the second place, the theory is a perversion of scientific investigation. 
It is not allowed to evolve out of facts. On the contrary the theory 
is preconceived and facts are selected to prove it. 

The theory of the Aryan race is just an assumption and no more. 
It is based on a philological proposition put forth by Dr. Bopp in 
his epoch-making book called Comparative Grammar which appeared 
in 1835. In this book, Dr. Bopp demonstrated that a greater number 
of languages of Europe and some languages of Asia must be referred 
to a common ancestral speech. The European languages and Asiatic 
languages to which Bopp’s proposition applied are called Indo- 
Germanic. Collectively, they have come to be called the Aryan 
languages largely because Vedic language refer to the Aryas and is 
also of the same family as the Indo-Germanic. This assumption is 
the major premise on which the theory of the Aryan race is based. 

From this assumption are drawn two inferences: (1) unity of race, 
and (2) that race being the Aryan race. The argument is that if the 
languages are descended from a common ancestral speech then there 
must have existed a race whose mother tongue it was and since the 
mother tongue was known as the Aryan tongue the race who spoke 
it was the Aryan race. The existence of a separate and a distinct 
Aryan race is thus an inference only. From this inference, is drawn 
another inference which is that of a common original habitat. It is 
argued that there could be no community of language unless people 
had a common habitat permitting close communion. Common original 
habitat is thus an inference from an inference. 

The theory of invasion is an invention. This invention is necessary 
because of a gratuitous assumption which underlies the Western 
theory. The assumption is that the Indo-Germanic people are the 
purest of the modern representatives of the original Aryan race. Its 
first home is assumed to have been somewhere in Europe. These 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


79 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 79 

assumptions raise a question: How could the Aryan speech have come 
to India: This question can be answered only by the supposition that 
the Aryans must have come into India from outside. Hence the 
necessity for inventing the theory of invasion. 

The third assumption is that the Aryans were a superior race. 
This theory has its origin in the belief that the Aryans are a 
European race and as a European race it is presumed to be superior 
to the Asiatic races. Having assumed its superiority, the next logical 
step one is driven to take is to establish the fact of superiority. 
Knowing that nothing can prove the superiority of the Aryan race 
better than invasion and conquest of native races, the Western 
writers have proceeded to invent the story of the invasion of India 
by the Aryans and the conquest by them of the Dasas and Dasyus. 

The fourth assumption is that the European races were white 1 
and had a colour prejudice against the dark races. The Aryans being 
a European race, it is assumed that it must have had colour 
prejudice. The theory proceeds to find evidence for colour prejudice 
in the Aryans who came into India. This it finds in the Chaturvarnya — 
an institution by the established Indo-Aryans after they came to 
India and which according to these scholars is based upon Varna 
which is taken by them to mean colour. 

Not one of these assumptions is borne out by facts. Take the 
premise about the Aryan race. The theory does not take account of 
the possibility that the Aryan race in the physiological sense is one 
thing and an Aryan race in the philological sense quite different, and 
that it is perfectly possible that the Aryan race, if there is one, in 
the physiological sense may have its habitat in one place and that 
the Aryan race, in the philological sense, in quite a different place. 
The theory of the Aryan race is based on the premise of a common 
language and it is supposed to be common because it has a structural 
affinity. The assertion that the Aryans came from outside and invaded 
India is not proved and the premise that the Dasas and Dasyus are 
aboriginal tribes 2 of India is demonstrably false. 

Again to say that the institution of Chaturvarnya is a reflexion 
of the innate colour prejudice of the Aryans is really to assert too 
much. If colour is the origin of class distinction, there must be four 
different colours to account for the different classes which comprise 
Chaturvarnya. Nobody has said what those four colours are and who 

1. For a discussion as to who the Dasas and Dasyus were, see Chapter 6. 

2. For a discussion whether in their origin the European races were white or 
dark see the observations of Prof. Ripley, infra, p. 76. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

were the four coloured races who were welded together in 
Chaturvarnya. As it is, the theory starts with only two opposing 
people, Aryas and Dasas — one assumed to be white and the other 
assumed to be dark. 

The originators of the Aryan race theory are so eager to establish 
their case that they have no patience to see what absurdities they 
land themselves in. They start on a mission to prove what they want 
to prove and do not hesitate to pick such evidence from the Vedas 
as they think is good for them. 

Prof. Michael Foster has somewhere said that ‘hypothesis is the 
salt of science.’ Without hypothesis there is no possibility of fruitful 
investigation. But it is equally true that where the desire to prove 
a particular hypothesis is dominant, hypothesis becomes the poison 
of science. The Aryan race theory of Western scholars is as good an 
illustration of how hypothesis can be the poison of science as one 
can think of. 

The Aryan race theory is so absurd that it ought to have been 
dead long ago. But far from being dead, the theory has a cosiderable 
hold upon the people. There are two explanations which account for 
this phenomenon. The first explanation is to be found in the support 
which the theory receives from Brahmin scholars. This is a very 
strange phenomenon. As Hindus, they should ordinarily show a 
dislike for the Aryan theory with its express avowal of the superiority 
of the European races over the Asiatic races. But the Brahmin scholar 
has not only no such aversion but he most willingly hails it. The 
reasons are obvious. The Brahmin believes in the two-nation theory. 
He claims to be the representative of the Aryan race and he regards 
the rest of the Hindus as descendants of the non-Aryans. The theory 
helps him to establish his kinship with the European races and share 
their arrogance and their superiority. He likes particularly that part 
of the theory which makes the Aryan an invader and a conqueror 
of the non-Aryan native races. For it helps him to maintain and justify 
his overlordship over the non-Brahmins. 

The second explanation why the Aryan race theory is not dead is 
because of the general insistence by European scholars that the word 
Varna means colour and the acceptance of that view by a majority 
of the Brahmin scholars. Indeed, this is the mainstay of the Aryan 
theory. There is no doubt that as long as this interpretation of the 
Varna continues to be accepted, the Aryan theory will continue to 
live. This part of the Aryan theory is therefore very important and 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


81 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 81 

calls for fuller examination. It needs to be examined from three 
different points of view: (1) Were the European races fair or dark? 
(2) Were the Indo-Aryans fair? and (3) What is the original meaning 
of the word Varna ? 

On the question of the colour of the earliest Europeans Prof. Ripley 
is quite definite that they were of dark complexion. Prof. Ripley goes 
on to say: 1 

“We are strengthened in this assumption that the earliest Europeans 
were not only long-headed but also dark complexioned, by various points 
in our enquiry thus far. We have proved the prehistoric antiquity of the 
living Cro-Magnon type in Southern France; and we saw that among these 
peasants, the prevalence of black hair and eyes is very striking. And 
comparing types in the British Isles we saw that everything tended to show 
that the brunet populations of Wales, Ireland and Scotland constituted the 
most primitive stratum of population in Britain. Furthermore, in that 
curious spot in Garfagnana, where a survival of the ancient Ligurian 
population of Northern Italy is indicated, there also are the people 
characteristically dark. Judged, therefore, either in the light of general 
principles or of local details, it would seem as if this earliest race in Europe 
must have been very dark.... It was Mediterranean in its pigmental 
affinities, and not Scandinavian.” 

Turning to the Vedas for any indication whether the Aryans had 
any colour prejudice, reference may be made to the following passages 
in the Rig Veda : 

In Rig Veda, i. 117.8, there is a reference to Ashvins having brought 
about the marriage between Shyavya and Rushati. Shyavya is black 
and Rushati is fair. 

In Rig Veda, i. 117.5, there is a prayer addressed to Ashvins for 
having saved Vandana who is spoken as of golden colour. 

In Rig Veda, ii.3.9, there is a prayer by an Aryan invoking the 
Devas to bless him with a son with certain virtues but of (pishanga) 
tawny (reddish brown) complexion. 

These instances show that the Vedic Aryans had no colour 
prejudice. How could they have? The Vedic Aryans were not of one 
colour. Their complexion varied; some were of copper complexion, 
some white, and some black. Rama the son of Dasharatha has been 
described as Shyama i.e., dark in complexion, so is Krishna the 
descendant of the Yadus, another Aryan clan. The Rishi Dirghatamas, 
who is the author of many mantras of the Rig Veda must have been 
of dark colour if his name was given to him after his complexion. 
Kanva is an Aryan rishi of great repute. But according to the 
description given in Rig Veda — x.31.11 — he was of dark colour. 

1 Prof. Ripley : Races of Europe, p. 466 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To take up the third and the last point, namely, the meaning of 
the word Varna 1 Let us first see in what sense it is used in the Rig 
Veda. The word Varna is used 2 in the Rig Veda in 22 places. Of these, 
in about 17 places the word is used in reference to deities such as 
Ushas, Agni, Soma, etc., and means lustre, features or colour. Being 
used in connection with deities, it would be unsafe to use them for 
ascertaining what meaning the word Varna had in the Rig Veda when 
applied to human beings. There are four and at the most five places 
in the Rig Veda where the word is used in reference to human beings. 
They are : 

1) i. 104.2; 

2) i. 179.6; 

3) ii. 12.4; 

4) iii.34.5; 

5) ix.71.2. 

Do these references prove that the word Varna is used in the Rig 
Veda in the sense of colour and complexion? 

Rig veda, iii.34.5 seems to be of doubtful import. The expression 
‘caused Shukla Varna to increase’ is capable of double interpretation. 
It may mean Indra made Ushas throw her light and thereby increase 
the white colour, or it may mean that the hymn-maker being of white 
complexion, people of his i.e., of white colour increased. The second 
meaning would be quite far-fetched for the simple reason that the 
expansion of the white colour is the effect and lightening of Ushas 
is the cause. 

Rig Veda, ix.71.2 the expression ‘abandons Asura Varna’ is not 
clear, reading it in the light of the other stanzas in the Sukta. The 
Sukta belongs to Soma Pavamana. Bearing this in mind, the expres- 
sion ‘abandons Asura Varna’ must be regarded as a description of 
Soma. The word Varna as used here is indicative of roopa. The second 
half of the stanza says: ‘he throws away his black or dark covering 
and takes on lustrous covering.’ From this it is clear that the word 
Varna is used as indicative of darkness. 

Rig Veda, i. 179.6 is very helpful. The stanza explains that Rishi 
Agastya cohabitated with Lopamudra in order to obtain praja, children 
and strength and says that as a result two Varnas prospered. It is 
not clear from the stanza, which are the two Varnas referred to in 
the stanzas, although the intention is to refer to Aryas and Dasas. 

1 On what follows, see Maharashtra Dnyanakosha, Vol. Ill pp. 39-42. 

2 See Appendix VI, p. 216. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


83 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 83 

Be that as it may, there is no doubt that the Varna in the stanza 
means class and not colour. 

In Rig Veda, i. 104.2 and Rig Veda, ii.12.4 are the two stanzas in 
which the word Varna is applied to Dasa. The question is: What does 
the word Varna mean when applied to Dasa? Does it refer to the 
colour and complexion of the Dasa, or does it indicate that Dasas 
formed a separate class? There is no way of arriving at a positive 
conclusion as to which of the two meanings is correct. 

The evidence of the Rig Veda is quite inconclusive. In this 
connection, it will be of great help to know if the word occurs in 
the literature of the Indo-Iranians and if so, in what sense. 1 

Fortunately, the word Varna does occur in the Zend Avesta. It takes 
the form of Varana or Varena. It is used specifically in the sense 
of “Faith, Religious doctrine, Choice of creed or belief.” It is derived 
from the root Var which means to put faith in, to believe in. One 
comes across the word Varana or Varena in the Gathas about six 
times used in the sense of faith, doctrine, creed or belief. 

It occurs in Gatha Ahunavaiti — Yasna Ha 30 Stanza 2 which when 
translated in English reads as follows : 

“Give heed with your ears and contemplate the highest Truth I proclaim; 

with your illumined mind introspect. Each man for himself must determine 

his (Avarenao) faith. Before the Great Event, let each individually be 

awake to the Truth we teach.” 

This is one of the most famous strophes of the Gatha where 
Zarathushtra exhorts each one individually to use reasoning faculty 
and freedom of choice in the selection of his or her faith. The words 
occurring here are ‘Avarenao vichithahy a,’ Avarenao meaning faith, 
belief and vichi- thahya meaning ‘of discriminating, of selecting of 
determining’. 

It occurs in Gatha Ahunavati — Yasna Ha 31 Stanza 11. The word 
used is Vareneng accusative plural of Varena meaning ‘belief, faith.’ 
In this stanza, Zarathushtra propounds the theory of the creation of 
man. After speaking about man’s creation being completed, in the 
last half line Zarathushtra says “voluntary beliefs are given (to man)” 

It occurs in Gatha Ushtavaiti — Yasna Ha 45 Stanza 1 in the form 
of Varena. In the last line of this strophe, Zarathushtra says ‘owing 
to sinful belief (or evil faith) the wicked is of evil tongue (or invested 
tongue)’. 

1 The information relating to the meaning of the word ‘Varna’ in the Indo-Iranian 
literature, I owe to my friend Dastur Bode, who is well-versed in it. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It occurs in Gatha Ushtavaiti — Yasna Ha 45 Stanza 2 in the same 
form as above Varena in the clear sense of faith, religion, belief, etc. 
In this stanza, Zarathushtra is propounding his philosophy of good 
and evil and speaking of dual aspects of human mind. In this stanza, 
the two mentalities — the good mentality and the evil mentality — are 
speaking to each other saying “Neither in thought, word, intelligence, 
faith (or religion or creed) utterance, deed, conscience nor soul do 
we agree.” 

It occurs in Gatha Spenta Mainyu, — Yasna Ha 48 Stanza 4 in the 
form of Vareneng meaning religion, faith (root Vere Persian gervidan 
= to have faith in). In this stanza Zarathushtra says that “Whosoever 
will make his mind pure and holy and thus keep his conscience pure 
by deed and word, such man’s desire is in accordance with his faith 
(religion, belief).” 

It occurs in Gatha Spenta Mainyu, — Yasna Ha 49 Stanza 3 as 
Varenai in dative case meaning ‘religion’. In the same stanza occurs 
the word Thaeshai which also means religion, creed, religious law. 
These two words Varenai and Tkaesha occurring in the same stanza 
strengthens our argument, as the word Tkaesha clearly means 
religion as is found in the compound Ahuratkaesha meaning ‘The 
Ahurian religion’. This word Tkaesha is translated in Pahlavi as Kish 
which means religion. 

In Vendidad (a book of Zarathushtrian sanitary law written in 
Avesta language) we come across a word Anyo Varena. Here Anyo 
means other and Varena means religion, thus a man of different 
religion, faith, belief is spoken of as Anyo -Varena. Similarly, we come 
across in Vendidad the word Anyo-Tkaesha also meaning a man of 
different religion. 

We come across many verbal forms in the Gatha derived from this 
root, e.g., Ahunavaiti Gatha Yasna Ha, 31, Stanza 3. Zarathushtra 
declares Ya jvanto vispeng vauraya; here the verb vauraya means I 
may cause to induce belief, faith (in God) (in all the living ones). 
In Yasna Ha, 28: Stanza 5, we come across the verb vauroimaidi, 
‘We may give faith to.’ We come across another interesting form of 
this word in Gatha Vahishtaishtish, Yasna Ha, 53, Stanza 9 Duz- 
Varenaish. It is instrumental plural. The first part Duz means wicked, 
false and Varenai means believer. Thus the word means “A man 
belonging to false or wicked religion or a false or wicked believer.” 

In the Zarathushtrian Confession of Faith, which forms Yasna Ha, 
we come across the word Fravarane meaning ‘I confess my faith, 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-04 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 


85 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS VERSUS ARYANS 85 

my belief in Mazdayasno Zarathushtrish ‘Mazda worshipping Zara- 
thushtrian Religion’. This phrase occurs in almost all the Zara- 
thushtrian prayers. There is yet another form in the Zarathushtrian 
Confession Yasna, 12, Ya-Varena. Here Ya is relative pronoun 
meaning which and Varena — faith, religion. Thus, the word means 
‘the religion to which’. This form Ya Varena is used nine times in 
Yasna 12, and it is used in the clear sense of faith or religion. Here 
again the word Varena is placed along with the word Tkaesha which 
means religion. 

A very interesting reference is found in Yasna 16 Zarathushtrahe 
varenemcha tkaeshemcha yazamaide. Here the Varena and Tkaesha 
of Zarathushtra is worshipped. It is quite clear from the use of these 
corresponding and correlative words that the faith and religion of 
Zarthushtra is meant. The translation of the above line is ‘We worhsip 
the faith and religion of Zarathushtra.’ 

This evidence from the Zend Avesta as to the meaning of the word 
Varna leaves no doubt that it originally meant a class holding to 
a particular faith and it had nothing to do with colour or complextion. 

The conclusions that follow from the examination of the Western 
theory may now be summarized. They are: 

(1) The Vedas do not know any such race as the Aryan race. 

(2) There is no evidence in the Vedas of any invasion of India 
by the Aryan race and its having conquered the Dasas and Dasyus 
supposed to be natives of India. 

(3) There is no evidence to show that the distinction between 
Aryans, Dasas and Dasyus was a racial distinction. 

(4) The Vedas do not support the contention that the Aryas were 
different in colour from the Dasas and Dasyus. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


86 


CHAPTER V 

ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 

ENOUGH has been said to show how leaky is the Aryan theory 
expounded by Western scholars and glibly accepted by their Brahmin 
fellows. Yet, the theory has such a hold on the generality of people 
that what has been said against it may mean no more than scotching 
it. Like the snake it must be killed. It is therefore necessary to pursue 
the examination of the theory further with a view to expose its 
hollowness completely. 

Those who uphold the theory of an Aryan race invading India and 
conquering the Dasas and Dasyus fail to take note of certain verses 
in the Rig Veda. These verses are of crucial importance. To build 
up a theory of an Aryan race marching into India from outside and 
conquering the non-Aryan native tribes without reference to these 
verses is an utter futility. I reproduce below the verses I have in 
mind : 

(1) Rig Veda, vi. 33.3. — “Oh, Indra, Thou hast killed both of our 
opponents, the Dasas and the Aryas.” 

(2) Rig Veda, vi.60.3. — “Indra and Agni — these protectors of the good 
and righteous suppress the Dasas and Aryas who hurt us.” 

(3) Rig Veda, vii.81.1. — “Indra and Varuna killed the Dasas and Aryas 
who were the enemies of Sudas and thus protected Sudas from them.” 

(4) Rig Veda, viii.24.27. — “Oh you, Indra, who saved us from the hands 
of the cruel Rakshasas and from the Aryas living on the banks of the Indus, 
do thou deprive the Dasas of their weapons.” 

(5) Rig Veda, x.38.3. — “Oh you much revered Indra, those Dasas and 
Aryas who are irreligious and who are our enemies, make it easy for us 
with your blessings to subdue them. With your help we shall kill them.” 

(6) Rig Veda, x.86.19. — Oh, You Mameyu, you give him all powers who 
prays you. With your help we will destroy our Arya and our Dasyu enemies. 

Anyone who reads these verses, notes what they say calmly and 
coolly and considers them against the postulates of the Western 
theory will be taken aback by them. If the authors of these verses 
of the Rig Veda were Aryas then the idea which these verses convey 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


87 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 87 

is that there were two different communites of Aryas who were not 
only different but oppose and inimical to each other. The existence 
of two Aryas is not a mere matter of conjecture or interpretation. 
It is a fact in support of which there is abundant evidence. 

II 

The first piece of such evidence to which attention may be invited, 
is the discrimination which existed for a long time in the matter of 
the recognition of the sacred character of the different Vedas. All 
students of the Vedas know that there are really two Vedas: (1) the 
Rig Veda and (2) the Atharva Veda. The Sama Veda and the Yajur 
Veda are merely different forms of the Rig Veda. All students of the 
Vedas know that the Atharva Veda was not recognised by the 
Brahmins as sacred as the Rig Veda for a long time. Why was such 
a distinction made? Why was the Rig Veda regarded as sacred? Why 
was the Atharva Veda treated as vulgar? The answer, I like to 
suggest, is that the two belonged to two different races of Aryans 
and it is only when they had become one that the Atharva Veda came 
to be regarded on a par with the Rig Veda. 

Besides this, there is enough evidence, scattered through the whole 
of the Brahmanic literature, of the existence of two different ideolo- 
gies, particularly relating to creation, which again points to the 
existence of two different Aryan races. Reference to one of these has 
already been made in Chapter 2. It remains to draw attention to the 
second type of ideology. 

To begin with the Vedas. The following ideology is to be found in 
the Taittiriya Samhita : 

T.S., 1 vi.5.6.1. — “Aditi, desirous of sons, cooked, a Brahmaudana oblation 
for the gods, the Sadhyas. They gave her the remnant of it. This she ate. 
She conceived seed. Four Adityas were born to her. She cooked a second 
(oblation). She reflected, ‘from the remains of the oblation these sons have 
been born to me. If I shall eat (the oblation) first, more brilliant (sons) 
will be born to me.’ She ate it first; she conceived seed; an imperfect egg 
was produced from her. She cooked a third (oblation) for the Adityas, 
repeating the formula ‘may this religious toil have been undergone for my 
enjoyment.’ The Adityas said, ‘Let us choose a boon; let anyone who is 
produced from this be ours only; let anyone of his progeny who is 
prosperous be for us a source of enjoyment.’ In consequence the Aditya 
Vivasvat was born. This is his progeny, namely, men. Among them he alone 
who sacrifices is prosperous, and becomes a cause of enjoyment to the 
gods.” 


1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 26. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Turning to the Brahmanas. The stories of creation contained in 
the Satapatha Brahmanas are set out below : 

S.B., 1 i.8.1. 1. — In the morning they brought to Manu water for washing, 
as men are in the habit of bringing it to wash with the hands. As he was 
thus washing, a fish came into his hands (which spake to him) ‘preserve me; 

I shall save thee.’ (Manu enquired) ‘From what wilt thou save me?’ (The fish 
replied) ‘A flood shall sweep away all these creatures; from it will I rescue 
thee.’ (Manu asked) ‘How (shall) thy preservation (be effected)?’ The fish said 
: ‘So long as we are small, we are in great peril, for fish devours fish; thou 
shalt preserve me first in a jar. When I grow too large for the jar, then thou 
shalt dig a trench, and preserve me in that. When I grow too large for the 
trench, then thou shalt carry me away to the ocean. I shall then be beyond 
the reach of danger. Straight, away he became a large fish; for he waxes 
to the utmost. (He said) ‘Now in such and such a year, then the flood will 
come; thou shalt embark in the ship when the flood rises, and I shall deliver 
thee from it.’ Having thus preserved the fish, Manu carried him away to the 
sea. Then in the same year which the fish had enjoined, he constructed a 
ship and resorted to him. When the flood rose, Manu embarked in the ship. 
The fish swam towards him. He fastened the cable of the ship to the fish’s 
horn. By this means he passed over this northern mountain. The fish said, 

‘I have delivered thee; fasten the ship to a tree. But lest the water should 
cut thee off whilst thou art on the mountain, as much as the water subsides 
so much shalt thou descend after it.’ He accordingly descended after it as 
much (as it subsided). Wherefore also this, viz., ‘Manu’s descent’ is (the name) 
of the northern mountain. Now the flood had swept away all these creatures, 
so Manu alone was left here. Desirous of offspring, he lived worshipping and 
toiling in arduous religious rites. Among these he also sacrificed with the 
paka offering. He cast clarified butter, thickened milk, whey and curds as 
an oblation into the waters. Thence in a year a woman was produced. She 
rose up as it were unctuous. Clarified butter adheres to her steps. Mitra and 
Varuna met her. They said to her ‘who art thou?’ ‘Manu’s daughter’ (she 
replied). Say (thou art) ours’ (they rejoined). ‘No’, she said, ‘I am his who 
begot me.’ They desired a share in her. She promised that, or she did not 
promise that; but passed onward. She came to Manu. Manu said to her, ‘who 
art thou?’ ‘Thy daughter’ she replied. ‘How, glorious one ‘asked Manu,’ (art 
thou) my daughter?’ ‘Thou hast generated me,’ she said,’ from those oblations, 
butter, thick milk, whey and curds, which thou didst cast into the waters. 

I am a benediction. Apply me in the sacrifice. If thou wilt employ me in 
the sacrifice, thou shalt abound in offspring and cattle. Whatever benediction 
thou will ask through me, shall accrue to thee.’ He (accordingly) introduced 
her (as) that (which comes in) the middle of the sacrifice; for that is the middle 
of the sacrifice which (comes) between the introductory and concluding forms. 
With her he lived worshipping and toiling in arduous religious rites, desirous 
of offspring. With her he begot this offspring which is this offspring of Manu. 
Whatever benediction he asked with her, was all vouchsafed to him. This is 
essentially that which is Ida. Whosoever, knowing this, lives with Ida, begets 


1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 181-184. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


89 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 89 


this offspring which Manu begot. Whatever benediction he asks with her, 
is all vouchsafed to him.” 

(2) S.B., 1 vi.1.2.11. — “Wherefore they say, ‘Prajapati having created those 
worlds was supported upon the earth. For him these herbs were cooked 
as food. That (food) he ate. He became pregnant He created the gods from 
his upper vital airs, and mortal offspring from his lower vital airs. In 
whatever way he created, so he created. But Prajapati created all this, 
whatever exists.” 

(3) S.B., 2 vii.5.2.6. — Prajapati was formerly this (universe), one only. He 
desired.’ Let me create food, and be propagated.’ He formed animals from 
his breath, a man from his soul, a horse from his eye, a bull from his 
breath, a sheep from his ear, a goat from his voice. Since he formed animals 
from his breaths, therefore men say,’ the breaths are animals.’ The soul 
is the first of the breaths. Since he formed a man from his ‘soul’ therefore 
they say ‘man is the first of the animals, and the strongest.’ The soul 
is all the breaths; for all the breaths depend upon the soul. Since he formed 
man from his soul, therefore they say,’ man is all the animals;’ for all 
these are man’s.” 

(4) S.B., 3 x. 1.3.1. — “Prajapati created living beings. From his upper vital airs 
he created the gods: from his lower vital airs mortal creatures. Afterwards 
he created death a devourer of creatures.” 

(5) S.B., 4 xiv.4.2.1. — “This universe was formerly soul only, in the form of 
Purusha. Looking closely, he saw nothing but himself (or soul). He first said,’ 
This is I.’ Then he became one having the name of I. Hence even now a 
man, when called, first says, ‘this is I, ‘and then declares the other name 
when he has. In as much as he, before (purvah ) all this, burnt up ( aushat ) 
all sins, he (is called), purusha. The man who knows this burns up the person 
who wishes to be before him. He was afraid. Hence a man when alone is 
afraid. This (being) considered that ‘there is no other thing but myself; of 
what am I afraid?’ Then his fear departed. For why should he have feared? 
It is of a second person that people are afraid. He did not enjoy happiness. 
Hence a person when alone does not enjoy happiness. He desired a second. 
He was so much as a man and a woman when locked in embrace. He caused 
this same self to fall as under into two parts. Thence arose a husband and 
wife. Hence Yajnavalkya has said that ‘this one’s self is like the half of a 
split pea.’ Hence the void is filled up by woman. He cohabited with her. From 
them Men were born. She reflected ‘how does he, after having produced me 
from himself, cohabit with me? Ah! let me disappear’; she became a cow, 
and the other a bull; and he cohabited with her. From them kine were 
produced. The one became a mare, the other a stallion, the one a she-ass, 
the other a male-ass. He cohabited with her. From them the class of animals 
with undivided hoofs were produced. The one became a she-goat, the other 
a he-goat, the one a ewe, the other a ram. He cohabited with her. From them 
goats and sheep were produced. In this manner pairs of all creatures 
whatsoever down to ants, were produced. 

1 Muir. Vol. I, p. 30. 

2 Muir. Vol. I. p. 24. 

3 Muir, Vol. I, p. 31. 

4 Muir. Vol. I, p. 25. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Taittiriya Brahmana has the following : 

T.B., 1 ii.2.9.1. — “At first this (universe) was not anything. There was neither 
sky, nor earth, nor air. Being non-existent, it resolved ‘let me be.’ It became 
fervent. From that fervour smoke was produced. It again became fervent. From 
that fervour fire was produced. It again became fervent. From that fervour 
light was produced. It again became fervent. From that fervour flame was 
produced. It again became fervent. From that fervour rays were produced. 
It again became fervent. From that fervour blazes were produced. It again 
became fervent. It became condensed like a cloud. It clove its bladder. That 
became the sea. Hence men do not drink of the sea. For they regard it as 
like the place of generation. Hence water issues forth before an animal when 
it is being born. After that the Dasahotri (a particular formula) was created. 
Prajapati is the Dasahotri. That man succeeds, who thus knowing the power 
of austere abstraction (or fervour) practises it. This was then water, fluid. 
Prajapati wept (exclaiming). ‘For what purpose have I been born, if (I have 
been born) from this which forms no support.’ That which fell into the waters 
became the earth. That which he wiped away, became the air. That which 
he wiped away, upward, became the sky. From the circumstance that he wept 
( arodit ), these two regions have the name of rodasi, (words). They do not 
weep in the house of the man who knows this. This was the birth of these 
worlds. He who thus knows the birth of these worlds, incurs no suffering 
in these worlds. He obtained this (earth as a) basis. Having obtained (this 
earth as a) basis, he desired. ‘May I be propagated.’ He practised austere 
fervour. He became pregnant. He created Asuras from his abdomen. To them 
he milked out food in an earthen dish. He cast off that body of his. It became 
darkness. He desired ‘May I be propagated.’ He practised austere fervour. 
He became pregnant. He created living beings (prajah ) from his organ of 
generation. Hence they are the most numerous because he created them from 
his generative organ. To them he milked out milk in a wooden dish. He cast 
off that body of his. It became moonlight. He desired ‘May I be propagated.’ 
He practised austere fervour. He became pregnant. He created the seasons 
from his armpits. To them he milked out butter in a silver dish. He cast 
off that body of his. It became the period which connects day and night. He 
desired ‘May I be propagated.’ He practised austere fervour. He became 
pregnant. He created the gods from his mouth. To them he milked out Soma 
in a golden dish. He cast off that body of his. It became day. These are 
Prajapati’s milkings. He who thus knows, milks out offspring. ‘Day (diva) has 
come to us:’ this (exclamation expresses) the godhead of the gods. He who 
thus knows the godhead of the gods, obtains the gods. This is the birth of 
days and nights. He who thus knows the birth of days and nights, incurs 
no suffering in the days and nights. Mind (or soul, manas) was created from 
the non-existent. Mind created Prajapati. Prajapati created offspring. All this, 
whatever exists, rests absolutely on mind. This is that Brahma called 
Svovasyasa. For the man who thus knows, (Ushas), dawning, dawns more 
and more bright; he becomes prolific in offspring, and (rich) in cattle; he 
obtains the rank of Parameshthin.” 

(3) T.B., 2 ii.3.8.1. — “Prajapati desired, ‘May I propagate.’ He practised 
austerity. He became pregnant. He became yellow brown. Hence a woman when 

1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 28-29. 

2 Muir, Vol. I, p. 23. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


91 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 91 


pregnant, being yellow, becomes brown. Being pregnant with a foetus, he 
became exhausted. Being exhausted he became blackish-brown. Hence an 
exhausted person becomes blackish-brown. His breath became alive. With 
that breath ( asu ) he created Asuras. Therein consists the Asura-nature 
of Asuras. He who thus knows this Asura-nature of Asuras becomes a man 
possessing breath. Breath does not forsake him. Having created the Asuras 
he regarded himself as a father. After that he created the Fathers (Pitris). 
That constitutes the fatherhood of the Fathers. He who thus knows the 
fatherhood of the Fathers, becomes as a father of his own; the Fathers 
resort to his oblation. Having created the Fathers, he reflected. After that 
he created men. That constitutes the manhood of men. He who knows the 
manhood of men, becomes intelligent. Mind does not forsake him. To him, 
when he was creating men, day appeared in the heaven. After that he 
created the gods. This constitutes the godhead of the gods. To him who 
thus knows the godhead of the gods, day appears in the heavens. These 
are the four streams, viz; gods, men, fathers and Asuras. In all of these 
water is like the air.” 

(4) T.B., 1 iii.2.3.9. — “This Shudra has sprung from non-existence.” 

The following explanation of the origin of creation is given by the 
Taittiriya Aranyaka : 

T.A., 2 i. 12.3.1. — “This is water, fluid. Prajapati alone was produced on a 
lotus leaf. Within, in his mind, desire arose, ‘Let me create this.’ Hence 
whatever a man aims at in his mind, he declares by speech, and performs 
by act. Hence this verse has been uttered, ‘Desire formerly arose in it, which 
was the primal germ of mind, (and which) sages, searching with their intellect, 
have discovered in the heart as the bond between the existent and the non- 
existent’ (Rig Veda x. 129.4). That of which he is desirous comes to the man 
who thus knows. He practised austere fervour. Having practised austere 
fervour, he shook his body. From its flesh the rishis (called) Arunas, Ketus 
and Vatarasanas arose. His nails became the Vaikhanasas, his hairs the 
Valakhilyas. The fluid (of his body became) a tortoise moving amid the waters. 

He said to him ‘ Thou hast sprung from my skin and flesh.’ ‘No,’ replied the 
tortoise,’ I was here before.’ In that (in his having been ‘before’ purvam) 
consists the manhood of a man (purusha ). Becoming a man Purusha with a 
thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet (R.V.x.90.1) he arose. Prajapati 
said to him, ‘thou wert produced before me; do thou first make this.’ He took 
water from this in the cavity of his two hands and placed it on the east, 
repeating the text, ‘so be it, 0 Sun.’ From thence the sun arose. That was 
the eastern quarter. Then Aruna Ketu placed (the water) to the south, saying 
‘so be it, 0 Agni.’ Thence Agni arose. That was the southern quarter. Then Aruna 
Ketu placed (the water) to the west, saying ‘so be it, 0 Vayu.’ Thence arose 
Vayu. That was the western quarter. Then Aruna Ketu placed (the water) 
to the north, saying ‘so be it, 0 Indra.’ Then arose Indra. That is the northern 
quarter. Then Aruna Ketu placed (the water) in the centre, saying ‘so be it, 

0 Pushan.’ Thence arose Pushan. That is this quarter. The Aruna Ketu placed 
(the water) above saying ‘so be it, gods.’ Thence arose gods, men, 


1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 21. 

2 Muir, Vol. I, p. 32. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Fathers, Gandharvas and Apsaras. That is the upper quarter. From the drops 
which fell apart arose the Asuras, Rakshasas, and Pisachas. Therefore they 
perished, because they were produced from drops. Hence this text has been 
uttered; ‘when the great waters became pregnant, containing wisdom, and 
generating Svayambhu, from them were created these creations. All this was 
produced from the waters. Therefore all this is Brahma Svayambhu.’ Hence 
all this was as it were loose, as it were unsteady. Prajapati was that. Having 
made himself through himself, he entered into that. Wherefore this verse has 
been uttered; ‘Having formed the world, having formed existing things and 
all intermediate quarters, Prajapati the first born of the ceremonial entered 
into himself with himself.’ ” 


VI 

The Mahabharata has its own contribution to make to the subject. 

It propounds the theory of creation by Manu. 

The Vanaparvan 1 says: 

“There was a great rishi, Manu, son of Vivasvat, majestic, in lustre equal 
to Prajapati. In energy, fiery vigour, prosperity and austere fervour he 
surpassed both his father and his grand father. Standing with uplifted arm, 
on one foot, on the spacious Badari, he practised intense austere fervour. 
This direful exercise he performed with his head downwards, and with 
unwinking eyes, for 10,000 years. Once, when, clad in dripping rags, with 
matted hair, he was so engaged, a fish came to him on the banks of the 
Chirini, and spake:’ Lord, I am a small fish; I dread the stronger ones, 
and from them you must save me. For the stronger fish devour the weaker; 
this has been immemorially ordained as our means of subsistence. Deliver 
me from this flood of apprehension in which I am sinking, and I will requite 
the deed.’ Hearing this, Manu filled with compassion, took the fish in his 
hand, and bringing him to the water threw him into a jar bright as a 
moonbeam. In it the fish, being excellently tended, grew; for Manu treated 
him like a son. After a long time he became very large and could not be 
contained in the jar. Then, seeing Manu he said again:’ In order that I 
may thrive, remove me elsewhere.’ Manu then took him out of the jar, 
brought him to a large pond, and threw him in. There he continued to 
grow for very many years. Although the pond was two yojanas long and 
one yojana broad, the lotus-eyed fish found in it no room to move; and 
again said to Manu.’ Take me to Ganga, the dear queen of the ocean- 
monarch; in her I shall dwell; or do as thou thinkest best, for I must 
contentedly submit to thy authority, as through thee I have exceedingly 
increased.’ Manu accordingly took the fish and threw him into the river 
Ganga. There he waxed for some time, when he again said to Manu, From 
my great bulk I cannot move in the Ganga; be gracious and remove me quickly 
to the ocean.’ Manu took him out of the Ganga; and cast him into the sea. 
Although so huge, the fish was easily borne, and pleasant to touch and smell, 
as Manu carried him. When he had been thrown into the ocean he said 
to Manu:’ Great Lord, thou hast in every way preserved me; now hear 


1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 199-201. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


93 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 93 

from me what thou must do when the time arrives. Soon shall all these 
terrestrial objects, both fixed and moving, be dissolved. The time for the 
purification of the worlds has now arrived. I therefore inform thee what is 
for thy greatest good. The period dreadful for the universe, moving and fixed, 
has come. Make for thyself a strong ship, with a cable attached; embark in 
it with the seven rishis and stow in it, carefully preserved and assorted, all 
the seeds which have been described of old by Brahmins. When embarked 
in the ship, look out for me. I shall come recognizable by my horn. So shalt 
thou do; I greet thee and depart. These great waters cannot be crossed over 
without me. Distrust not my word. ‘Manu replied,’ I shall do as thou hast 
said. ‘After taking mutual leave they departed each on his own way. Manu 
then, as enjoined, taking with him the seeds’ floated on the billowy ocean 
in the beautiful ship. He then thought on the fish, which knowing his desire, 
arrived with all speed, distinguished by a horn. When Manu saw the horned 
leviathan, lofty as a mountain, he fastened the ship’s cable to the horn. Being 
thus attached the fish dragged the ship with great rapidity transporting it 
across the briny ocean which seemed to dance with its waves and thunder 
with its waters. Tossed by the tempests, the ship whirled like a reeling and 
intoxicated woman. Neither the earth nor the quarter of the world appeared; 
there was nothing but water, air, and sky. In the world thus confounded, 
the seven rishis, Manu and the fish were beheld. So, for very many years, 
the fish, unwearied, drew the ship over the waters; and brought it at length 
to the highest peak of Himavat. He then, smiling gently, said to the rishis,’ 
Bind the ship without delay to this peak.’ They did so accordingly. And that 
highest peak of Himavat is still known by the name of Naubandhana (‘the 
Binding of the Ship’.} The friendly fish (or god, animisha ) then said to the 
rishis,’ I am the Prajapati Brahma, than whom nothing higher can be reached. 

In the form of a fish I have delivered you from this great danger. Manu 
shall create all living beings, gods, asuras, men, with all worlds, and all things 
moving and fixed. By my favour and through severe austere fervour he shall 
attain perfect insight into his creative work, and shall not become bewildered.’ 
Having thus spoken, the fish in an instant disappeared. Manu, desirous to 
call creatures into existence and bewildered in his work, performed a great 
act of austere fervour; and then began visibly to create all living beings.” 

The Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata gives a somewhat different 
version of the story of creation : 1 

“Vaishampayana said : I shall, after making obeisance to Svayambhu relate 
to thee exactly the production and destruction of the gods and other beings. 
Six great rishis are known as the mind-born sons of Brahma, viz., Marichi, 
Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. Kasyapa was the son of Marichi: 
and from Kasyapa sprang these creatures. There were born to Daksha thirteen 
daughters of eminent rank, Adili, Diti, Danu, Kala, Danayu, Simuka, Krodha, 
Pradha, Visva, Vinata, Kapila and Muni. Kadru also was of the number. These 
daughters had valorous sons and grandsons innumerable. 

Daksha, the glorious rishi, tranquil in spirit, and great in austere fervour, 
sprang from the right thumb of Brahma. From the left thumb sprang that great 
Muni’s wife on whom he begot fifty daughters. Of these he gave ten to Dharma, 


1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 122-126. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


94 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


twentyseven to Indu (Soma), and according to the celestial system, thirteen 
to Kasyapa. Pitamaha’s descendant Manu, the god and the lord of creatures, 
was his (it does not clearly appear whose) son. The eight Vasus, whom I 
shall detail, were his sons. Dividing the right breast of Brahma, the glorious 
Dharma (Righteousness), issued in a human form, bringing happiness to all 
people. He had three eminent sons, Sama, Kama, and Harsha (Tranquillity, 
Love, and Joy), who are the delight of all creatures, and by their might support 
the world .... Arushi, the daughter of Manu, was the wife of that sage 
(Chyavana, son of Bhrigu)... There are two other sons of Brahma, whose mark 
remains in the world, Dhatri, and Vidhatri, who remained with Manu. Their 
sister was the beautiful goddess Lakshmi, whose home is the lotus. Her mind- 
born sons are the steeds who move in the sky... When the creatures who 
were desirous of food, had devoured one another, Adharma (Uprighteousness) 
was produced, the destroyer of all beings. His wife was Nirriti, and hence 
the Rakshasas are called Nairritas, or the offspring of Nirriti. She had three 
dreadful sons, continually addicted to evil deeds, Bhaya, Mahabhaya (Fear 
and Terror) and Mrityu (Death) the ender of beings. He has neither wife, 
nor any son, for he is the ender.” 

“Born all with splendour, like that of great rishis, the ten sons of Prachetas 
are reputed to have been virtuous and holy; and by them the glorious beings 
were formerly burnt up by the fire springing from their mouths. From them 
was born Daksha Prachetasa; and from Daksha, the Parent of the world (were 
produced) these creatures. Cohabiting with Virini, the Muni Daksha begot 
a thousand sons like himself, famous for their religious observances, to whom 
Narada taught the doctrine of final liberation, the unequalled knowledge of 
the Sankhya. Desirous of creating offspring, the Prajapati Daksha next formed 
fifty daughters, of whom he gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, and 
twenty-seven devoted to the regulation of time to Indu (Soma)... On Dakshayani, 
the most excellent of his thirteen wives, Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, begot 
the Adityas, headed by Indra and distinguished by their energy, and also 
Vivasvat. To Vivasvat was born a son, the mighty Yama Vaivasvata. To 
Martanda (i.e., Vivasvat, the Sun) was born the wise and mighty Manu, and 
also the renowned Yama, his (Manu’s) younger brother. Righteous was this 
wise Manu, on whom a race was founded. Hence this (family) of men became 
known as the race of Manu. Brahmins, Kshatriyas, and other men sprang 
from this Manu. From him, 0 king, came the Brahmin conjoined with the 
Kshatriya. Among them the Brahmins, children of Manu, held the Veda with 
the Vedangas. The children of Manu are said to have been Vena, Dhrishnu, 
Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, Ha the eighth, Prishadra 
the ninth, who was addicted to the duties of a Kshatriya, and Nabhagarishta, 
the tenth. Manu had also fifty other sons; but they all, as we have heard, 
perished in consequence of mutual dissensions. Subsequently, the wise 
Pururavas was born of Ha, who, we heard, was both his mother and his 
father.” 


VII 

The Ramayana also deals with the subject of creation. One account 
of it will be found in the second Kanda. 1 It says : 


1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 115. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


95 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 95 


“Perceiving Rama to be incensed, Vasishtha replied: ‘Jabali also knows 
the destruction and renovation of this world. But he spoke as he did from 
a desire to induce you to return. Learn from me, lord of the earth, this 
(account of) the origin of the world. The universe was nothing but water. 

In it the earth was fashioned. Then Brahma Svayambhu came into 
existence, with the deities. He next, becoming a boar, raised up the earth, 
and created the entire world, with the saints, his sons, Brahma, the 
eternal, unchanging, and undecaying, was produced from the ether (akasa). 
From him sprang Marichi, of whom Kasyapa was the son. From Kasyapa 
sprang Vivasvat: and from him was descended Manu, who was formerly 
the lord of creatures (Prajapati). Ikshvaku was the son of Manu, and to 
him this prosperous earth was formerly given by his father. Know that 
this Ikshvaku was the former king in Ayodhya.” 

There is besides this another story of creation. It occurs in the 
third Kanda and is in the following terms : 1 

“Having heard the words of Rama, the bird (Jatayu) made known to 
him his own race, and himself, and the origin of all beings. ‘Listen while 
I declare to you from the commencement all the Prajapatis (lords of 
creatures) who came into existence in the earliest time. Kardama was the 
first, then Vikrita, Sesha, Samsraya, the energetic Bahuputra, Sthanu, 
Marichi, Atri, the strong Kratu, Pulastya, Angiras, Prachetas, Pulaha, 
Daksha, then Vivasvat, Arishtanemi, and the glorious Kasyapa, who was 
the last. The Prajapati Daksha is famed to have had sixty daughters. Of 
these Kasyapa took in marriage eight elegant maidens, Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Kalaka, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu and Anala. Kasyapa, pleased, then, said 
to these maids:’ ye shall bring forth sons like me, preservers of the three 
worlds.’ Aditi, Dili, Danu and Kalaka assented; but the others did not 
agree. Thirty-three gods were borne by Aditi, the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, 
and the two Asvins. ‘Manu, (wife) of Kasyapa, produced men, Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras. ‘Brahmins were born from the mouth, 
Kshatriyas from the breast, Vaishyas from the thighs, and Shudras from 
the feet’ so says the Veda. Anala gave birth to all trees with pure fruits.” 

VIII 

As an illustration of what the Puranas have to say, I extract the 
following passages from the Vishnu Purana : 2 

“Before the mundane egg existed the divine Brahma Hiranyagarbha the 
eternal originator of all worlds, who was the form and essence of Brahma, who 
consists of the divine Vishnu, who again is identical with the Rik, Yajus, Saman 
and Atharva-Vedas. From Brahma’s right thumb was born the Prajapati Daksha; 
Daksha had a daughter Aditi; from her was born Vivasvat; and from him sprang 
Manu. Manu had sons called Ikshvaku, Nriga, Dhrishta, Saryati, Narishyanta, 
Pramsu, Nabhaganedishta, Karusha, and Prishadhra. Desirous of a son, Manu 
sacrificed to Mitra and Varuna. but in consequence of a wrong invocation 


1 Muir, I, p. 116. 

2 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 220-221. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


through an irregularity of the hotri-priest a daughter called Ila was born. 
Then through the favour of Mitra and Varuna she became to Manu a son 
called Sudyumna. But being again changed into a female through the wrath 
of Isvara (Mahadeva) she wandered near the hermitage of Budha the son 
of Soma (the Moon); who becoming enamoured of her had by her a son called 
Pururavas. After his birth, the god who is formed of sacrifice, of the Rik, 
Yajus, Saman, and Atharva Vedas, of all things, of mind, of nothing, he who 
is in the form of the sacrificial Male, was worshipped by the rishis of infinite 
splendour who desired that Sudyumna should recover his manhood. Through 
the favour of this god Ila became again Sudyumna.” 

The Vishnu Purana then proceeds to give the following particulars 
regarding the sons of Manu : 

“(i) Prishadhra became a Shudra in consequence of his having killed 
his religious preceptor’s cow. 

(ii) From Karusha the Karushas, Kshatriyas of great power were 
descended. 

(iii) Nabhaga, the son of Nedishta became a Vaishya.” 

The above is the story of the Solar race. The Vishnu Purana 1 has 
also a parallel story relating to the Lunar race which according to 
it sprang from Atri just as the Solar race from Manu : 

“Atri was the son of Brahma, and the father of Soma (the moon), whom 
Brahma installed as the sovereign of plants, Brahmins and stars. After 
celebrating the rajasuya sacrifice, Soma became intoxicated with pride, and 
carried off Tara (Star), the wife of Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, whom, 
although admonished and entreated by Brahma, the gods, and rishis, Soma 
refused to restore. Soma’s part was taken by Usanas; and Rudra, who had 
studied under Angiras, aided Brihaspati. A fierce conflict ensued between the 
two sides supported respectively by the gods and the Daityas, etc., Brahma 
interposed, and compelled Soma to restore Tara to her husband. She had, 
however, in the meantime become pregnant, and bore a son Budha (the planet 
Mercury), of whom when strongly urged, she acknowledged Soma to be the 
father. Pururavas 2 was the son of this Budha by Ila, the daughter of Manu. 
Pururavas 3 had six sons, of whom the eldest was Ayus. Ayus had five sons; 
Nahusha, Kshattravriddha, Rambha, Raji and Anenas. 

Kshattravriddha had a son Sunahotra who had three sons, Kasa, Lesa 
and Gritsamada. From the last sprang Saunaka, who originated the system 
of four castes. Kasa had a son, Kasiraja, of whom again Dirghatamas was 
the son, as Dhanvantari was of Dirghatamas.” 

Compare these ideologies of creation with those set out in Chapter 
2 and what do we find? I think the result of comparison may be set 
down in the following propositions: (1) one is sacerdotal in 

1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 225-226. 

2 The loves of Pururavas and the Apsara Urvasi, are related in the Satapatha 
Brahmanas, xi. 5.1.11; in the Vishnu Purana, vi. 6.19. ff; in the Bhagavata Purana, ix. 
14; and in the Harivamsa, section 26. The Manabharata, AcLip, section 75, alludes to 
Pururavas as having been engaged in a contest with the Brahmins. This passage will 
be quoted hereafter. 

3 Vishnu Purana, iv.7.1. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


97 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 97 

colour and character, the other is secular; (2) one refers to a human 
being Manu as the progenitor, the other refers to God Brahma or 
Prajapati as the originator; (3) one is historical in its drift, the other 
is supernatural; (4) one speaks of the deluge, the other is completely 
silent about it; (5) one aims at explaining the four Varnas, the other 
aims at explaining the origin of society only. 

These differences are many and fundamental. Particularly funda- 
mental seems to be the difference in regard to Chaturvarnya. The 
sacerdotal ideology recognizes it, but the secular ideology does not. 
It is true that an attempt is made to combine the two by explaining, 
as is done in the Ramayana and the Puranas, how Manu’s progeny 
developed into four Varnas. But obviously this is an attempt to mould 
the two ideologies into one. This attempt is deliberate and calculated. 
But the difference between the two ideologies is so fundamental that 
inspite of this attempt they persist as two separate ideologies. All 
that has happened is that instead of one we have two explanations 
of Chaturvarnya, supernatural Chaturvarnya produced by Purusha, 
and natural Chaturvarnya as developed among Manu’s sons. That the 
result should be so clumsy shows that the two ideologies are 
fundamentally different and irreconcilable. It is a pity that the 
existence of two such ideologies recorded in the Brahmanic literature 
has not been noticed by scholars who have dealt with the subject. 
But the fact of their existence and their significance cannot be 
ignored. What is the significance of the existence of two such 
ideologies fundamentally different and irreconcilable? To me, it seems 
that they are the ideologies of two different Aryan races — one 
believing in Chaturvarnya and the other not believing in 
Chaturvarnya — who at a later stage became merged into one. If this 
reasoning is well-founded then this difference in ideologies disclosed 
by the Brahmanic literature furnishes further evidence in support 
of the new theory. 


EX 

The third and the most unimpeachable evidence in support of my 
view comes from the anthropometrical survey of the Indian people. 
Such a survey was first made by Sir Herbert Risley in 1901. On the 
basis of cephalic index, he came to the conclusion that the people of 
India were a mixture of four different races: (1) Aryan, (2) Dravidian, 
(3) Mongolian, and (4) Scythian. He even went to the length of 
defining the areas where they were massed. The survey was a very 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rough one. His conclusions have been tested by Dr. Guha in 1936. 
His Report on the subject forms a very valuable document in the field 
of Indian anthropology. The map 1 prepared by Dr. Guha on which 
he has plotted so to say the distribution of the Indian people according 
to their head measurements throws a flood of light on the racial 
composition of the people of India. Dr. Guha’s conclusion is that the 
Indian people are composed’of two racial stocks: (1) longheaded, and 
short-headed, and that the long-headed are in the interior of India 
and the short-headed are on the outskirts. 

The evidence of skulls found in different parts of India also goes 
to confirm this. This is how Dr. Guha sums up the evidence on this 
point : 

“The accounts of the human remains from prehistoric sites given above, 
though extremely meagre, with the exception of those of the Indus Valley, 
enable us nevertheless to visualise the broad outlines of the racial history 
of India in these times. From the beginning of the 4th Millennium B.C. 
North-western India seems to have been in the occupation of a long-headed 
race with a narrow prominent nose. Side by side with them we find the 
existence of another very powerfully built race also long-headed, but with 
lower cranial vault, and equally long-faced and narrow nose, though the 
latter was not so high pitched as that of the former. 

A third type with broader head and apparently Armenoid affinities also 
existed, but its advent occurred probably somewhat later judged by the 
age of the site as Harappa from which most of these latter type of skulls 
came.” 

Speaking in terms of the Alpine and the Mediterranean race, one 
can say that the Indian people are composed of two stocks: (1) The 
Mediterranean or the long-headed race, and (2) the Alpine or the 
short-headed race. 

About the Mediterranean race, certain facts are admitted. It is 
admitted that it is a race which spoke the Aryan language. It is 
admited that its home was in Europe round about the Mediterranean 
basin and from thence it migrated to India. From its localization, 
it is clear that it must have come to India before the entry of the 
Alpine race. 

Similar facts about the Alpine race remain to be ascertained. First 
is about the home of the Alpine race and second is about its native 
speech. According to Prof. Ripley, the home of the Alpine race was 
in Asia somewhere in the Himalayas. His reasons may be given in 
his own words. Says Prof. Ripley : 2 

1 See Appendix V 

2 Races of Europe, pp. 473-74 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


99 


THE SHUDRAS : ARYANS AGAINST ARYANS 99 


“What right have we for the assertion that this infiltration of population 
from the East 1 it was not a conquest, everything points to it as a gradual 
peaceful immigration, often merely the settlement of unoccupied territory — 
marks the advent of an overflow from the direction of Asia? The proof 
of this rests largely upon our knowledge of the people of that continent, 
especially of the Pamir region, the Western Himalayan highlands. Just 
here on the ‘ roof of the world,’ where Max Muller and the early philologists 
placed the primitive home of Aryan civilization, a human type prevails 
which tallies almost exactly with our ideal Alpine or Celtic European race. 
The researches of De Ujfalvy, Topinard, and others localize its peculiar 
traits over a vast territory hereabouts. The Galchas, mountain Tadjiks, 
and their fellows are grey-eyed, dark-haired, stocky in build, with cephalic 
indexes ranging above 86 for the most part. From this region a long chain 
of peoples of a similar physical type extends, uninterruptedly westward 
over Asia Minor and into Europe. The only point which the discovery of 
a broad area in Western Asia occupied by an ideal Alphine type settles, 
is that it emphasises the affinities of this peculiar race. It is no proof 
of direct immigration from Asia at all, as Tappeiner observes. It does, 
however, lead us to turn our eyes eastward when we seek for the origin 
of the broad-headed type. Things vaguely point to an original ethnic base 
of supplies somewhere in this direction. It could not lie westward, for 
everywhere along the Atlantic the race slowly disappears, so to speak. That 
the Alpine type approaches all the other human millions on the Asiatic 
continent, in the head form especially, but in hair, colour and stature as 
well, also prejudices us in the matter; just as the increasing long- 
headedness and extreme brunetness of our Mediterranean race led us 
previously to derive it from some type parent to that of the African Negro. 
These points are then fixed; the roots of the Alpine race run eastward; 
those of the Mediterranean type towards the south.” 

On the question of its language there is a certain amount of 
dispute 1 as to who introduced the Aryan language in Europe, whether 
the Nordics (the purest of the Indo-Germans) or the Alpines. But there 
is no dispute that the language of the Alpine race was Aryan and 
therefore it is entitled to be called Aryan race in philological sense. 

X 

From the foregoing statement of facts, it will be seen that there is 
a solid foundation in anthropometry and history, in support of the 
Rig Veda that there were in India two Aryan races and not one. Having 
regard to this, one cannot refuse to admit that here there is a direct 
conflict between the Western theory and the testimony of the Rig 
Veda. Whereas the Western theory speaks of one Aryan race, the Rig 


1 Madison Grant, ‘The Passing of the Great Race’ (1922), pp. 238-239. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-05 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


100 


100 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Veda speaks of two Aryan races. The Western theory is thus in 
conflict with the Rig Veda on a major issue. The Rig Veda being the 
best evidence on the subject the theory which is in conflict with it 
must be rejected. There is no escape. 

This conflict on the major issue also creates a conflict on the issue 
of invasion and conquest. We do not know which of the two Aryan 
races came to India first. But if they belonged to the Alpine race 
then its home being near the Himalayas, there is no room for the 
theory of invasion from outside. As to the conquest of the native 
tribes, assuming it to be a fact, the matter is not quite so simple 
as Western writers have supposed. On the footing that the Dasas 
and Dasyus were racially different from the Aryans, the theory of 
conquest must take account not merely of a possible conquest of Dasas 
and Dasyus by Aryans but also of a possible conquest of Aryans by 
Aryans. It must also explain which of the two Aryans conquered the 
Dasas and Dasyus if they conquered them at all. 

The Western theory, it is clear, is only a hurried conclusion drawn 
from insufficient examination of facts and believed to be correct 
because it tallied with certain pre-conceived notions about the 
mentality of the ancient Aryans which they were supposed to have 
possessed on no other grounds except that their alleged modern 
descendants, namely, the Indo Germanic races are known to possess. 
It is built on certain selected facts which are assumed to be the only 
facts. It is extraordinary that a theory with such a slender and 
insecure foundation in fact should have been propounded by Western 
scholars for serious scholars and should have held the field for such 
a long time. In the face of the discovery of new facts set out in this 
Chapter the theory can no longer stand and must be thrown on the 
scrap heap. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


101 


CHAPTER VI 
SHUDRAS AND DAS AS 

IT has been shown how untenable the Western theory is. The only 
part of the theory that remains to be considered is : who are the 
Shudras? Mr. A. C. Das 1 says : 

“The Dasas and the Dasyus were either savages or non-Vedic Aryan 
tribes. Those of them that were captured in war were probably made slaves 
and formed the Shudra caste.” 

Mr. Kane , 2 another Vedic scholar and upholder of the Western 
theory, holds the view that : 

“The word ‘Dasa’ in later literature means a ‘serf or a slave’. It follows 
that the Dasa tribes that we see opposed to the Aryas in the Rig Veda 
were gradually vanquished and were then made to serve the Aryas. In 
the Manusmriti (VIII, 413) the Shudra is said to have been created by 
God for service (dasya) of the Brahmana. We find in the Tai. Samhita, 
the Tai. Brahmana and other Brahmana works that the Shudra occupied 
the same position that he does in the Smritis. Therefore it is reasonable 
to infer that the Dasas or Dasyus conquered by the Aryans were gradually 
transformed into the Shudras.” 

According to this view the Shudras are the same as Dasas and 
Dasyus and further the Shudras were the non-Aryan original 
inhabitants of India and were in a primitive and a savage state of 
civilization. It is these propositions which we must now proceed to 
examine. 

To begin with the first proposition. It is not one proposition but 
is really two propositions rolled in one. One is that the Dasas and 
Dasyus are one and the same people. The other is that they and the 
Shudras are one and the same people. 

That the Dasas and Dasyus are one and the same people is a 
proposition of doubtful validity. Such references to them as are to 
be found in the Rig Veda are not decisive. In some places the terms 
Dasa and Dasyu are used in a way as though there was no 


1 Rig Vidic Culture, p. 133. 

2 Dharma Shastra, II (I). P. 33. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

difference between the two. Shambara, Shushna, Vritra and Pipru 
are described both as Dasas and Dasyus. Both Dasas and Dasyus 
are described as the enemies of Indra and Devas and specially the 
Ashvins. The cities of both Dasas as well as of the Dasyus are 
described to have been levelled down by Indra and Devas. The defeat 
of both Dasas as well as Dasyus is described as producing the same 
effect, namely, release of water and the emergence of light. In 
describing the release of Dabhiti both are referred to, at one place 
he is said to have been released from the Dasas and at another place 
he, is said to have been released from the Dasyus. 

While these references suggest that the Dasas and Dasyus were 
the same, there are other references which suggest that they were 
different. This is clear from the fact that the Dasas are referred to 
separately in 54 places and Dasyus are referred to separately in 
78 places. Why should there be so many separate references if they 
did not form two distinct entities? The probability is that they refer 
to two different communities. 

About the second proposition that the Shudras are the same as 
the Dasas and Dasyus, one can definitely say that it is without any 
foundation whatsoever. 

To make out a case that the Shudras are the same as the Dasas 
and Dasyus an attempt is made to treat the word Shudra as a 
derivative word. The word is said to be derived from Shuc (sorrow) 
and dru (overcome) and means one overcome by sorrow. In this 
connection reliance is placed on the story told in the Vedanta Sutra 
(i.3.34) of Janasruti who is said to have been overcome by sorrow 
on hearing the contemptuous talk of the flamingoes about himself. 1 
The same derivation is given by the Vishnu Purana. 2 

How far are these statements well-founded? To say that Shudra 
is not a proper name but is a derivative word is too silly for words. 
The Brahmanic writers excel everybody in the art of inventing false 
etymologies. There is no word for which they will not design some 
sort of etymology. Speaking of the different etymologies of the word 
Upanishad given by Brahmanic writers, Prof. Max Muller 3 said : 

“These explanations seem so wilfully perverse that it is difficult to understand 

the unanimity of native scholars. We ought to take into account, however, that 

very general tendency among half-educated people, to acquiesce in any 

1 Referred to in Kane’s Dharma Shastra, II (I), p. 155. 

2 Muir, Vol. 1. p. 97. 

3 Upanishads, Introduction, pp. lxxix-lxxxi. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


103 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 103 

etymology which accounts for the most prevalent meaning of a word. The 
Aranyakas abound in such etymologies, which probably were never in- 
tended as real etymologies, in our sense of the word, but simply as plays 
on words, helping to account somehow for their meaning.” 

This warning equally well applies to the attempt of the Vedanta 
Sutra and of the Vayu Purana to make the word Shudra a derivative 
word suggesting that it meant a ‘sorrowful people’ and we must 
therefore reject it as being absurd and senseless. 

We have, however, direct evidence in support of the proposition 
that Shudra is a proper name of a tribe or a clan and is not a 
derivative word as is sought to be made out. 

Various pieces of evidence can be adduced in favour of this 
proposition. The historians of Alexander’s invasion of India have 
described a number of republics as free, independent and autonomous 
whom Alexander encountered. These are, no doubt, formed of different 
tribes and were known by the name borne by those tribes. Among 
these is mentioned a people called Sodari. They were a fairly 
important tribe, being one of those which fought Alexander though 
it suffered a defeat at his hands. Lassen identified them with the 
ancient Shudras. Patanjali at 1.2.3 of his Mahabhasya mentions 
Shudras and associates them with the Abhiras. The Mahabharata in 
Chapter XXXII of the Sabha parvan speaks of the republic of the 
Shudras-. The Vishnu Purana as well as the Markandeya Purana and 
the Brahma Purana refer to the Shudras as a separate tribe among 
many other tribes and fix their location in the Western part of the 
country above the Vindhyas. 1 


II 

Let us now turn to the second proposition and examine the various 
elements of which it is composed. There are two elements in the 
proposition. First is : Are the words Dasyus and Dasas used in the 
racial sense indicative of their being non-Aryan tribes? The second 
element is that assuming they were, is there anything to indicate 
that they were the native tribes of India? Unless and until these two 
questions are answered in the affirmative, there is no possibility of 
identifying the Dasyus and Dasas with the Shudras. 

About the Dasyus, there is no evidence to show that the term is 
used in a racial sense indicative of a non-Aryan people. On the other 

1 See References in Tribes in Ancient India by B. C. Law, p. 350 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


hand, there is positive evidence in support of the conclusion that 
it was used to denote persons who did not observe the Aryan form 
of religion. In this connection, reference may be made to Verse 23 
of Adhyaya 65 of the Shantiparvan of the Mahabharata. It reads 
as follows : 

hcfciuj-^ 7^qcr:| 

IVFTTVTt dtidHI 1 1 

The verse says : “In all the Varnas and in all the Ashramas, one 
finds the existence of Dasyus.” 

What is the origin of the word Dasyu it is difficult to say. But 
a suggestion 1 has been put forth that it was the word of abuse used 
by the Indo-Aryans to the Indo-Iranians. There is nothing unnatural 
or far-fetched in this suggestion. That the two had come into conflict 
is borne out by history. It is therefore quite possible for the Indo- 
Aryans to have coined such a contemptuous name for their enemies. 
If this is true, then Dasyus cannot be regarded as the natives of India. 

Regarding the Dasas, the question is whether there is any 
connection between them and the Azhi-Dahaka of the Zend Avesta. 
The name Azhi-Dahaka is a compound name which consists of two 
parts. Azhi means serpent, dragon and Dahaka comes from root Dah 
meaning ‘ to sting, to do harm’. Thus Azhi-Dahaka meaning a stinging 
dragon. It is a proper name of a person commonly known in Indo- 
Iranian traditions as Zohak. He is mentioned in Yasht literature 
many a time. He is credited to have lived in Babylon where he had 
built a palace. He is also credited to have built a great observatory 
in Babylon. This mighty devil Azhi-Dahaka was created by the Arch- 
demon Angra Mainyu in order to destroy the kingdom of holiness 
of the corporeal world. This Azhi-Dahaka went to war against Yima 
the renowned king of the Indo-Iranians and not only vanquished him, 
but killed him in battle. 

Yima is always spoken of in Avesta as Kshaeta meaning shining 
or ruling. Root Kshi has two meanings, to shine or to rule. There 
is another ephithet commonly used for Yima and that is Hvanthwa 
meaning ‘possessing good flock’. This Avesta Yima Khshaita became 
in later Persian language Jamshid. According to traditions, king 
Jamshid son of Vivanghvant was the great hero of the Iranian history, 
the founder of a great Persian civilization. He was a king of the 
Peshdiadyan dynasty. In Yasna 9 and 5 (Koema Yashi) it is stated 


1 I am sorry, I have lost the reference. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


105 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 105 

that ‘Vivanshas’ was the first man who unceremoniously pounded 
Hasma (Sk. Sasma) in this corporeal world and the boon he received 
was: to him was born a son nobly who was Yima the shining and 
of good flock, who was most glorious amongst the living ones, who 
was like a glowing sun amongst mankind, during whose kingship he 
made noblemen and cattle (animals) immortal, made waters and trees 
undrying. He possessed undiminishing (ever fresh) divine glory. 
During the kingship of famous Yima there was neither extreme cold 
nor extreme heat, there was no old age, death and envy. 

Is Dahaka of the Zenda Aveshta the same as Dasa of the Rig Veda? 
If similarity in name can be relied upon as evidence, then obviously 
it points to their being the names of one and the same person. Dasa 
in Sanskrit can easily be Daha in Aveshta since sa in the former 
is natural conversion to ha in the latter. If this were the only evidence 
the suggestion that Dasa of the Rig Veda and Dahaka of the Zenda 
Avesta are the same could have been no better than a conjecture. 
But there is other and more cogent evidence which leaves no doubt 
about their identity. In Yasna Ha 9 (which is the same as Horn Yashe) 
Azhi-Dahaka is spoken of as ‘three mouthed, three-headed and six- 
eyed’. What is striking is that this physical description of Dahaka 
in Aveshta is exactly similar to the description of Dasa in Rig Veda 
(x.99.6) where he is also described as having three heads and six 
eyes 1 If the suggestion that the Dasa in the Rig Veda is the same 
as Dahaka in the Aveshta, is accepted, then obviously the Dasas were 
not native tribes aboriginal to India. 

Ill 

Were they savages? The Dasas and Dasyus were not a primitive 
people. They were as civilized as the Aryans and in fact more powerful 
than the Aryans. Such is the testimony of the Rig Veda. It is well 
epitomized by Mr. Iyengar when he says that : 

“The Dasyus lived in cities (R.V., i.53.8; i. 103.3) and under kings the names 
of many of whom are mentioned. They possessed ‘accumulated wealth’ (R.V., 
viii.40.6) in the form of cows, horses and chariots (R.V., ii.15.4) which though 
kept in ‘hundred-gated cities’ (R.V., x.99.3), Indra seized and gave away to his 
worshippers, the Aryas (R.V., i. 176.4). The Dasyus were wealthy (R.V., i.33.4) 
and owned property ‘in the plains and on the hills’ (R.V., x. 69. 6). They were 
‘adorned with their array of gold and jewels’ (R.V., i.33.8). They owned many 


1 For the identification of Dasa with Dahaka I am indebted to the Maharashtra 
Dnyana Kosha, Vol. III. p. 53. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

castles (R.V., i.33.13; viii.17.14). The Dasyu demons and the Arya gods 
alike lived in gold, silver and iron castles (SS.S., vi.23; A.V., v.28.9; R.V., 
ii.20.8). Indra overthrew for his worshipper, Divodasa, frequently men- 
tioned in the hymns, a ‘hundred stone castles’ (R.V., iv.30.20) of the 
Dasyus. Agni, worshipped by the Arya, gleaming in behalf of him, tore 
and burnt the cities of the fireless Dasyus. (R.V., vii.5.3).Brihaspati broke 
the stone prisons in which they kept the cattle raided from the Aryas (R.V., 
iv.67.3). The Dasyus owned chariots and used them in war like the Aryas 
and had the same weapons as the Aryas (R.V., viii.24.27; iii.30.5; ii. 15.4)” 

That the Dasas and Dasyus were the same as the Shudras is a 
pure figment of imagination. It is only a wild guess. It is tolerated 
because persons who make it are respectable scholars. So far as 
evidence is concerned, there is no particle of it, which can be cited 
in support of it. As has been said before, the word Dasa occurs in 
the Rig Veda 54 times and Dasyu 78 times. The Dasas and the Dasyus 
are sometimes spoken together. The word Shudra occurs only once 
and that too in a context in which the Dasas and Dasyus have no 
place. In the light of these considerations, it is difficult to say how 
anyone in his senses can say that Shudras are the same as the Dasas 
and Dasyus. Another fact which is to be noted is that the names 
Dasas and Dasyus completely disappear from the later Vedic litera- 
ture. It means they were completely absorbed by the Vedic Aryans. 
But it is quite different with the Shudras. The early Vedic literature 
is very silent about them. But the later Vedic literature is full of 
them. This shows that the Shudras were different from the Dasas 
and Dasyus. 


IV 

Were the Shudras non-Aryans? Mr. Kane says: 1 

“A clear line of demarcation was kept between the Arya and the Shudra 
in the times of the Brahmana works and even in the Dharmasutras. The 
Tandya Brahmana speaks of a mock fight: ‘the Shudra and Arya fight on 
a hide; out of the two they so arrange that the Arya colour becomes the 
victor.’ The Ap. Dh. S. (I, i. 3. 40-41) says that a brahmachari if he cannot 
himself eat all the food he has brought by begging, may keep it near an 
Arya (for his use) or he may give it to a Shudra who is a Dasa (of his 
teacher). Similarly, Gautama x.69 used the word ‘anarya’ for Shudra.” 

On the question of the line of demarcation; between the Shudras 
and Aryans, the matter needs to be carefully examined. 


1 Kane, Dhartna Shastra, II (I), p. 35. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


107 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 107 

The strength of the argument that the Shudras were non-Aryans 
is to be found in the following statements : 

A.V., iv.20.4. — “The thousand-eyed god shall put this plant into my 
right hand; with that do I see everyone, the Shudra as well as the Arya.” 

Kathaka Samhita, xxxiv.5 — “The Shudra and the Arya quarrel about 
the skin. The gods and the demons quarrelled about the sun; the gods 
won it (the sun). (By this act of quarrelling with Shudras) the Arya makes 
the Arya Varna win, makes himself successful. The Arya shall be inside 
the altar, the Shudra outside the altar. The skin shall be white, circular- 
the form of the sun.” 

Vajasaneyi Samhita, xxiii. 30-31 — “When a deer eats the barley in the 
field, the (owner of the field) is not pleased with the nourished animal; 
when a Shudra woman has an Arya as a lover, (the husband) does not 
long for (the consequent) prosperity.” 

When a deer eats barley, the (owner of the field) does not approve of 
the nourished animal. When a Shudra is the lover of an Arya woman, the 
(husband) does not consent to the prosperity. 

These stanzas, which speak of the Shudra and the Arya as 
separate and opposed form the foundation of the theory that the 
Shudras are non-Aryans. To say the least, such a conclusion would 
be a very hasty one. Two considerations must be borne in mind before 
any conclusion is drawn from the aforementioned statements. In the 
first place, it must be borne in mind that according to what has 
been said before and according to the evidence of the Rig Veda, there 
are two categories of Aryans, the Vedic and the non-Vedic. Given 
this fact, it would be quite easy for an Arya of one class to speak 
of an Arya of another class, as though the two were separate and 
opposed. Interpreted in this way, the above statements, in which 
Shudras are set against the Aryans, do not mean that they were 
not Aryas. They were Aryas of a different sect or class. 

That this is possible can be seen from the following statements 
in the sacred literature of the Hindus: 

(1) A.V., xix.32.8. — “Make me, Oh, Darbha (grass), dear to the Brahmin, 
and the Rajanya (i.e., Kshatriya), to the Shudra and to the Arya and to 
him whom we love and to everyone who is able to see.” 

(2) A.V., xix.62.1. — “Make me beloved among the gods, make me beloved 
among the princes; make me dear to everyone who sees, to the Shudra 
and to the Arya” 

(3) Vajasaneyi Samhita, xviii.48. — “(Oh, Agni), give to us lustre among 
Brahmins, give us lustre among kings; lustre among Vaishyas and among 
Shudras; give to me lustre added to lustre.” 

(4) Vajasaneyi Samhita, xx.17. — “Whatever sin we have committed in the 
village, in the forest, in the assembly, with our senses, against the Shudra or 
against the Arya, whatever sin one of us (two, the sacrificer and his wife) has 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


108 


108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

committed in the matter of his duty (towards the other), — of that sin, 
you are the destroyer.” 

(5) Vajasaneyi Samhita, xviii.48. — “As I speak these auspicious words to 
the people, to the Brahmin and the Rajanya, to the Shudra and to the 
Arya and to my own enemy, may I be dear to the gods and to the giver 
of dakshinas here in this world. May this desire of mine be granted. May 
that (enemy of mine) be subjected to me.” 

What do these statements show? The first one makes a distinction 
between the Brahmins and the Aryas. Can it be said that the 
Brahmins were non-Aryans? The other statements pray for the love 
and goodwill of the Shudras. If the Shudra was a primitive aboriginal 
non-Aryan, is such a prayer conceivable? The statements on which 
reliance is placed do not prove that the Shudras were non-Aryans. 

That the Dharma Sutras call the Shudra Anarya and the state- 
ments in the Vajasaneyi Samhita pouring scorn on the Shudra 
woman, do not mean anything. There are two arguments against 
accepting the testimony of the Dharma Sutra. In the first place, as 
will be shown later, the Dharma Sutras and other treatises are books 
written by the enemies of the Shudra. As such, they have no 
evidentiary value. It is also doubtful whether such anti-Shudra 
statements are mere imprecations or statements of facts as they 
existed. They seem to contradict facts reported in other works. 

The Dharma Sutras say that a Shudra is not entitled to the 
Upanayana ceremony and the wearing of the sacred thread. But in 
Samskara Ganapati there is an express provision declaring the 
Shudra to be eligible for Upanayana. 1 

The Dharma Sutras say that a Shudra has no right to study the 
Vedas. But the Chhandogya Upanishad (iv:l-2) relates the story of 
one Janasruti to whom Veda Vidya was taught by the preceptor 
Raikva. This Janasruti was a Shudra. What is more is that Kavasha 
Ailusha, 2 was a Shudra. He was a Rishi and the author of several 
hymns of the Tenth Book of the Rig Veda. 

The Dharma Sutras say that a Shudra has no right to perform 
Vedic ceremonies and sacrifices. But Jaimini, the author of the Purva 
Mimamsa 3 mentions an ancient teacher by name Badari — whose work 
is lost — as an exponent of the contrary view that even Shudras could 
perform Vedic sacrifices. The Bharadvaja Srauta Sutra (v.28) admits 
that there exists another school of thought which holds that 

1 Referred to by Max Muller, in Ancient Sanskrit Literature (1860). p. 207. 

2 Ibid, p. 58. 

3 Adhyaya 6, Pada I, Sutra 27. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


109 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 109 

a Shudra can consecrate the three sacred fires necessary for the 
performance of a Vedic sacrifice. Similarly, the commentator of the 
Katyayana Srauta Sutra (1.4.16) admits that there are certain Vedic 
texts which lead to the inference that the Shudra was eligible to 
perform Vedic rites. 

The Dharma Sutras say that a Shudra is not entitled to the sacred 
drink of Soma. But in the story of the Ashvins, there is definite 
evidence that the Shudra had a right to the divine drink of Soma. 
The Ashvins, as the story goes, once happened to behold Sukanya 
when she had just bathed and when her person was bare. She was 
a young girl married to a Rishi by name Chyavana who at the time 
of marriage was so old as to be dying almost any day. The Ashvins 
were captivated by the beauty of Sukanya and said “Accept one of 
us for your husband. It behoveth thee not to spend thy youth 
fruitlessly.” She refused, saying “I am devoted to my husband.” They 
again spoke to her and this time proposed a bargain: “We two are 
the celestial physicians of note. We will make thy husband young 
and graceful. Do thou then select one of us as thy husband.” She 
went to her husband and communicated to him the terms of the 
bargain. Chyavana said to Sukanya “Do thou so”; and the bargain 
was carried out and Chyavana was made a young man by the Ashvins. 
Subsequently, a question arose whether the Ashvins were entitled 
to Soma, which was the drink of the Gods. Indra objected saying that 
the Ashvins were Shudras and therefore not entitled to Soma. 
Chyavana, who had received perpetual youth from the Ashvins, set 
aside the contention and compelled Indra to give them Soma. 1 

There is another reason why the evidence of the Dharma Sutras 
that the Shudras are non-Aryans should not be accepted. In the first 
place, it is contrary to the view taken by Manu. In the decision of 
the issue whether the Shudra was an Aryan or a non-Aryan, the 
following verses from Manu require to be carefully considered : 

“If a female of the caste sprung from a Brahmana and a Shudra female, 
bear (children) to one of the highest castes, the inferior (tribe) attains the 
highest caste within the seventh generation.” 

“(Thus) a Shudra attains the rank of a Brahmana and (in a similar 
manner) a Brahmana sinks to the level of a Shudra; but know that it 
is the same with the offspring of a Kshatriya or of a Vaishya.” 

“If (a doubt) should arise, with whom the pre-eminence (is, whether) with him 
whom an Aryan by chance begot on a non-Aryan female, or (with the son) of 


1 V. Fausboll, Indian Mythology, pp. 128-134. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
a Brahmana woman by a non-Aryan;” 

The decision is as follows : ‘He who was begotten by an Aryan on 
a non-Aryan female, may become (like to) an Aryan by his virtues; he 
whom an Aryan (mother) bore to a non Aryan father (is and remains) 
unlike to an Aryan.’” 1 

Verse 64 from Manu is also to be found in Gautama Dharma Sutra 
(uv.22). There seems to be some controversy as to the correct inter- 
pretation of this verse. In summing up the different interpretations, 
Buhler says : 

“According to Medh., Gov., Kull., and Ragh., the meaning is that, if the 
daughter of a Brahmana and of a Shudra female and her descendants all 
marry Brahmanas, the offspring of the sixth female descendant of the 
original couple will be a Brahmana. While this explanation agrees with 
Haradatta’s comment on the parallel passage of Gautama, Nar. and Nan. 
take the verse very differently. They say that if a Parasava, the son of 
a Brahmana and of a Shudra female, marries a most excellent Parasava 
female, who possesses a good moral character and other virtues, and if 
his descendants do the same, the child born in the sixth generation will 
be a Brahmana. Nandana quotes in support of his view, Baudhayana 
i. 16. 13- 14 (left out in my translation of the Sacred Books of the East, ii, 
p.197)... ‘(offspring) begotten by a Nishada on a Nishadi, removes within 
five generations the Shudrahood; one may initiate him (the fifth descen- 
dant); one may sacrifice for the sixth.’ This passage of Baudhayana the 
reading of which is supported by a new MS from Madras clearly shows 
that Baudhayana allowed the male offspring of Brahmanas and Shudra 
females to be raised to the level of Aryans. It is also not impossible that 
the meaning of Manu’s verse may be the same, and that the translation 
should be, ‘if the offspring of a Brahmana and of a Shudra female begets 
children with a most excellent (male of the Brahmana caste or female of 
the Parasava tribe), the inferior (tribe) attains the highest caste in the 
seventh generation.” 

Whatever be the interpretation, the fact remains that in the seventh 
generation 2 a Shudra under certain circumstances could become a 
Brahmin. Such a conception would have been impossible if the Shudra 
was not an Aryan. 

That the Shudra is a non-Aryan is contrary to the view taken by 
the school of Arthashastra. As a representative of that school, the 
opinion of Kautilya on that question is of great value. In laying down 
the law of slavery, Kautilya says: 3 

The selling or mortgaging by kinsmen of the life of a Shudra who is not a 
born slave, and has not attained majority, but is Arya in birth shall be punished 

1 Chapter X, verses 64-67. 

2 The rule which requires that for establishing his nobility a man must be able 
to trace his six uninterrupted degrees of unsullied lineage of not merely free-born, 
but full-born, appears to be a universal rule in ancient times. — See W. E. Hearn, 
The Aryan Household, Chapter VIII. 

3 Book HI, Chapter 13. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


111 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 111 

with a fine of 12 panas. 

Deceiving a slave of his money or depriving him of the privileges he 
can exercise as an Arya (Aryabhava) shall be punished with half the fine 
(levied for enslaving the life of an Arya). 

Failure to set a slave at liberty on the receipt of a required amount 
of ransom shall be punished with a fine of 12 panas; putting a slave under 
confinement for no reason (samrodhaschakaranat) shall likewise be pun- 
ished. 

The offspring of a man who has sold himself off as a slave shall be 
an Arya. A slave shall be entitled not only to what he has earned himself 
without prejudice to his master’s work but also to the inheritance he has 
received from his father. 

Here is Kautilya, who calls the Shudra an Aryan in the most 
emphatic and express terms possible. 

V 

Coming to the question of Shudras having been made slaves, it 
is nonsense, if not mendacious. It is founded on two assumptions. 
First is that the Dasas are described as slaves in the Rig Veda. The 
second is that the Dasas are the same as Shudras. 

It is true that the word Dasa is used in the Rig Veda in the sense 
of slave or servant. But the word in this sense occurs in only 5 places 
and no more. But even if it did occur more than five times, would 
it prove that the Shudras were made slaves? Unless and until it is 
proved that the two were the same people, the suggestion is absurd. 
It is contrary to known facts. 

Shudras participated in the coronation of kings. In the post-vedic 
or the period of the Brahmanas, the coronation of a king was in reality 
an offer of sovereignty by the people to the king. This was done by 
the representatives of the people called Ratnis who played a very 
important part in the investiture of the king. The Ratnis were so- 
called because they held the Ratna (jewel), which was a symbol of 
sovereignty. The king received his sovereignty only when the Ratnis 
handed over to him the jewel of sovereignty, and on receiving his 
sovereignty the king went to the house of each of the Ratnis and 
made an offering to him. It is a significant fact that one of the Ratnis 
was always a Shudra. 1 

Nilakantha, the author of Nitimayukha, describes the coronation 
ceremony of a later time. According to him, the four chief ministers, 
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, consecrated the new king. 

1 On this point see Jayasswal, Hindu Polity (1943), pp. 200-201. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Then the leaders of each Varna and of the castes lower still, 
consecrated him with holy water. Then followed acclamation by the 
twice-born. 1 

That the Shudras were invited to be present at the coronation 
of the king along with Brahmins is evidenced by the description of 
the coronation of Yudhishthira, the eldest brother of the Pandavas, 
which is given in the Mahabharata. 2 

Shudras were members of the two political assemblies of ancient 
times, namely, the Janapada and Paura and as a member of these 
the Shudra was entitled to special respect even from a Brahmin. 3 

This was so even according to the Manusmriti (vi.61) as well as 
to the Vishnu Smriti (xxi.64). Otherwise there is no meaning in Manu 
saying that a Brahmin should not live in a country where the king 
is a Shudra. That means Shudras were kings. 

In the Shanti Parvan of the Mahabharata, 4 Bhishma in his lessons 
on Politics to Yudhishthira says : 

“I shall, however, tell thee what kinds of ministers should be appointed 
by thee. Four Brahmins learned in the Vedas, possessed of a sense of 
dignity, belonging to the Snataka order, and of pure behaviour, and eight 
Kshatriyas, all of whom should be possessed of physical strength and 
capable of wedding weapons, and one and twenty Vaishyas, all of whom 
should be possessed of wealth, and three Shudras, everyone of whom should 
be humble and of pure conduct and devoted to his daily duties, and one 
man of the Suta caste, possessed of a knowledge of the Puranas and the 
eight cardinal virtues should be thy ministers.” 

This proves that the Shudras were ministers and that they were 
almost equal to the Brahmins in number. 5 

The Shudras were not poor and lowly. They were rich. This fact 
is testified by the Maitrayani Samhita (iv.2.7.10) and the Panchavimsa 
Brahmana (vi.1.11). 6 

There are two other aspects to this question. What significance can 
there be to the enslavement of the Shudras, assuming it was a fact? 
There would be some significance if the Aryans did not know slavery 
or were not prepared to turn the Aryans into slaves. But the fact 
is that the Aryans knew slavery and permitted the Aryans to be made 
slaves. This is clear from Rig Veda, (vii.86.7;viii. 19.36 and viii.56.3). 

1 See Jayaswal, Hindu Polity (1943), p. 223. 

2 Mahabharata, Sabha Parvan, Chapter XXXIII, Verses 41-42. 

3 See Jayaswal, -Hindu Polity, p. 248. 

4 Roy’s Translation, Vol. II, p. 197 

5 Bhishma believed in communal representation. 

6 Referred to in the Vedic Index, Vol. II, p. 390. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-06 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>9-l 1-2013 


113 


THE SHUDRAS : SHUDRAS AND DASAS 113 


That being so, why should they particularly want to make slaves 
of the Shudras? What is more important is why should they make 
different laws for the Shudra slaves? 

In short, the Western theory does not help us to answer our 
questions, who were the Shudras and how did they become the fourth 
Varna? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


114 


CHAPTER VII 

WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 


WHO were the Shudras if they were not a non-Aryan aboriginal 
race? This question must now be faced. The theory I venture to 
advance may be stated in the following three propositions: 

(1) The Shudras were Aryans. 

(2) The Shudras belonged to the Kshatriya class. 

(3) The Shudras were so important a class of Kshatriyas that 
some of the most eminent and powerful kings of the ancient 
Aryan communities were Shudras. 

This thesis regarding the origin of the Shudras is a startling if 
not a revolutionary thesis. So startling it is that not many people 
will be ready to accept it, even though there may be enough evidence 
to support it. My obligation is to produce the evidence, leaving the 
people to judge its worth. 

The primary piece of evidence on which this thesis rests is a 
passage which occurs in Verses 38-40 of Chapter 60 of the Shanti 
Parvan of the Mahabharata. It reads as follows : 

“It has been heard by us that in the days of old a Shudra of the name 

of Paijavana gave a Dakshina (in his own sacrifice) consisting of a hundred 

thousand Purnapatras according to the ordinance called Aindragni.” 

The important statements contained in this passage are three : 

(1) that Paijavana was a Shudra, (2) that this Shudra Paijavana 
performed sacrifices, and (3) the Brahmins performed sacrifices for 
him and accepted Dakshina from him. 

The passage quoted above is taken from Mr. Roy’s edition of the 
Mahabharata. The first thing is to ascertain whether the text is 
accurate or whether there are any variant readings. As regards the 
authenticity of his text, this is what Mr. Roy 1 says : 


1 Quoted in Sukthankar Memorial Edition, Vol. I, pp. 43-44. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


115 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 115 

“As far as my edition is concerned it is substantially based on that of 
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, published about forty-five years ago under 
the superintendence of a few learned Pandits of Bengal aided, as I believe, 
by an English Orientalist of repute. Manuscripts had been procured from 
all parts of India (the South unexcepted) and these were carefully collated. 
Although edited with such care, I have not, however, slavishly followed 
the Society’s edition. I have compared it carefully with the Maharajah of 
Burdwan’s text in the Bengalee character which was edited with still 
greater care. About 18 manuscripts procured from different parts of India 
(the South not excepted) were carefully collated by the Burdwan Pandits 
before they admitted a single sloka as genuine.” 

Prof. Sukthankar, the erudite editor of the critical edition of the 
Mahabharata, after examining many editions of the Mahabharata, 
concluded by saying that : l 

“The editio princeps (Calcutta — 1856) remains the best edition of the 
Vulgate, after the lapse of nearly a century.” 

Although the authenticity of Mr. Roy’s edition of the Mahabharata 
cannot be doubted, it would not be unreasonable if critics were to 
say that they would like to know what other manuscript support there 
is behind this text, which is made the basis of this new theory of 
the origin of the Shudras. In undertaking such an inquiry it is 
necessary to point to two considerations. One 2 is that there is no such 
thing as a Mahabharata manuscript in the sense of complete sets 
of manuscripts covering all the eighteen Parvans. Each Parvan is 
treated as a separate unit with the result that the number of copies 
of the different Parvans to be found differ by a vast margin. 
Consequently, the number of manuscripts to be taken as a basis for 
deciding which is the correct text must vary with each Parvan. 

The second 3 consideration to which attention must be drawn is the 
fact that the text of the Mahabharata has been handed down in two 
divergent forms; a Northern and a Southern recension, texts, typical 
of the Aryavarta and the Dakshinapatha. 

It is obvious that an examination of manuscript support must be 
based upon collation from a fair number of manuscripts and a fair 
distribution of the manuscripts between the Northern and the 
Southern recensions. Bearing these considerations in mind, the results 


1 Quoted in Sukthankar Memorial Edition, Vol. I, p. 131. 

2 Sukthankar, op. cit., p. 14. 

3 Ibid., pp. 9-42. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of the collation 1 of the text of Shloka 38 of the 60th chapter of the 
Shanti Parvan of the Mahabharata with which we are primarily 
concerned from different manuscripts is presented below : 

1. ‘dFT (K) S 

Shudrah Paijavano nama 

2. ^FTl ^TFT (M/l:M/2) S 

Shudrah Pailavano nama 


3. ^TTP 
Shudrah Yailanano nama 

4. ^TTP 
Shudrah Yaijanano nama 

5. ^sOPh TFT 

Shudropi Yajane nama 

6. it'dd'h ‘dFT 
Shudrah Paunjalka nama 

7. ^1 ^TFT 

Shuddho Vaibhavano nama 


(M/3 : M/4) S 

(F) 

(L) 

(TC) S 

(G) N 


8. 'ja ^TTP (A, D/2) 

Pura Vaijavano nama 

9. 'ja ^hh! ^ttp (M) n 

Pura Yaijanano nama 


Here is the result of the collation of nine manuscripts. Are nine 
manuscripts enough for constituting a text which has a number of 
variant readings? It is true that the number of manuscripts taken 
for the critical edition of the different Parvans of the Mahabharata 
exceeds nine. For the entire Mahabharata the minimum number of 
manuscripts taken for constituting the text is only ten. 2 It cannot 
therefore be contended that nine is an insufficient number. The nine 
manuscripts fall into two geographical divisions, Northern and Southern. 
Ml, M2, M3, M4 and TC belong to the Southern recension. A, M, G, 
D2 belong to the Northern recension. The selections of the manuscripts 
therefore satisfy the two tests which experts have laid down. 


1 I am grateful to the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute for allowing me 
to use their collation sheet. Letters in brackets indicate the index number given by 
the Institute to the manuscript. N or S indicate whether the manuscript comes from 
the North or South. K is Kumbhakonam. 

2 Sukthankar, Vol. I, p. 14. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


117 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 117 

A scrutiny of the readings shows that : 

(1) there is a variation in the description of Paijavana; 

(2) there is a variation in the name of Paijavana; 

(3) of the nine texts, six agree in describing him as a Shudra. 
One describes him as Shuddha and two instead of speaking 
of the class to which he belonged refer to the time when 
he lived and use the word ‘Pura’; 

(4) with regard to the name, there is no agreement between 
any two of the nine manuscripts. Each gives a different 
reading. 

Given this result, the question is what is the real text? Taking 
first the texts relating to the name, it is obvious that this is not 
a matter in which the question of meaning is involved. It does not 
raise any questions such as interpretation versus emendation or of 
giving preference to a reading which suggests how other readings 
might have arisen. The question is which is the correct name and 
which readings are scriptoral blunders committed by the scribes. 
There seems to be no doubt that the correct text is Paijavana. It 
is supported by both the recensions, Southern as well as Northern. 
For Vaijavano in No. 8 is the same as Paijavano. All the rest are 
variations which are due to the ignorance of the scribes in not being 
able to read the original copy correctly and then trying to constitute 
the text in their own way. 

Turning to the description of Paijavana, the change from Shudrah 
to Pura, it must be granted, is not accidental. It appears to be 
deliberate. Why this change has occurred it is difficult to say 
categorically. Two things apear to be quite clear. In the first place, 
the change appears to be quite natural. In the second place, the 
change does not militate against the conclusion that Paijavana was 
a Shudra. The above conclusion will be obvious if the context, in which 
verses 38-40 occur, is borne in mind. The context will be clear from 
the following verses which precede them: 

“The Shudra should never abandon his master whatever the nature or 
degree of the distress into which the latter may fall. If the master loses his 
wealth, he should with excessive zeal be supported by the Shudra servant 
A Shudra cannot have any wealth that is his own. Whatever he possesses 
belongs to his master. Sacrifice has been laid down as a duty of the three 
other orders. It has been ordained for the Shudra also, 0.! Bharata. A Shudra 
however is not competent to utter swaha and svadha or any other mantra. 
For this reason, the Shudra, without observing the vows laid down in the 
Vedas, should worship the gods in minor sacrifices called Pakayajnas. The 
gift called Purnapatra is declared to be the Dakshina of such sacrifices.” 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Taking the verses 38 to 40 in the context of these verses preceding 
them, it becomes clear that the whole passage deals with the Shudra. 
The story of Paijavana is a mere illustration. Against this background, 
it is unnecessary to repeat the word ‘Shudra’ before Paijavana. This 
explains why the word Shudra does not occur before Paijavana in 
the two manuscripts. As to the reason for the use of the word pura 
in place of Shudra it must be remembered that the case of Paijavana 
had occurred in very ancient times. It was therefore quite natural 
for the scribe to feel that it was desirable to put this fact in express 
terms. The writer being aware that there was no necessity for 
describing Paijavana as Shudra since that was made clear from the 
context, it was not necessary to emphasize it. On the other hand, 
knowing that Paijavana had lived in very ancient times and that 
that fact was not made very clear from the context, the writer 
thought it more appropriate to add the word Pura which was 
necessary and omit the word Shudrah which having regard to the 
context was unnecessary. 

If this explanation is well-founded, we may take it as well 
established that the person referred to in the passage in the Shanti 
Parvan of the Mahabharata is Paijavana and that this Paijavana 
was a Shudra. 


II 

The next question that falls due for consideration is the 
identification of Paijavana. Who is this Paijavana? 

Yaska’s Nirukta seems to give us a clue. In Nirukta ii. 24 1 Yaska 
Says: 

“The seer Vishvamitra was the purohita of Sudas, the son of Pijavana, 

Vishvamitra, friend of all. All, moving together. Sudas a bountiful giver. 

Paijavana, son of Pijavana. Again Pi-javana one whose speed is enviable 

or whose gait is inimitable.” 

From Yaska’s Nirukta we get two very important facts : 

(1) Paijavana means son of Pijavana, and (2) the person who is 
the son of Paijavana is Sudas. With the help of Yaska, we are able 
to answer the question: who is Paijavana referred to in the passage 
in the Shanti Parvan of the Mahabharata? The answer is that 
Paijavana is simply another name for Sudas. 

The next question is who is this Sudas and what do we know about 
him? A search in the Brahmanic literature discloses three persons 

1 Lakshman Sarup, The Nighantu and Nirukta, pp. 35-36. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


119 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 119 

with the name Sudas. One Sudas is mentioned in the Rig Veda. His 
family particulars are given in the following stanzas of the Rig Veda P 

1. Rig Veda, vii.18.21. — “Parashara, the destroyer of hundreds (of 
Rakshasas), and Vasishtha, they who, devoted to thee, have glorified thee 
in every dwelling, neglect not the friendship of thee (their) benefactor; 
therefore prosperous days dawn upon the pious.” 

2. Rig Veda, vii. 18.22. — “Praising the liberality of Sudas, the grandson 
of Devavata, the son of Paijavana, the donor of two hundred cows, and 
of two chariots with two wives, I, worthy (of the gift), circumambulate thee, 
Agni, like the ministrant priest in the chamber (of sacrifice)” 

3. Rig Veda, vii. 18. 23. — “Four (horses), having golden trappings, going 
steadily on a difficult road, celebrated on the earth, the excellent and 
acceptable gifts (made) to me by Sudas, the son of Pijavana; bear me as 
a son (to obtain) food and progeny.” 

4. Rig Veda, vii. 18. 24. — “The seven worlds praise (Sudas) as if he were 
Indra; him whose fame (spreads) through the spacious heaven and earth; 
who, munificent, has distributed (wealth) on every eminent person, and 
(for whom) the flowing (rivers) have destroyed Yudhyamadhi in war.” 

5. Rig Veda, vii. 18.25. — “Maruts, leaders (of rites), attend upon this 
(prince) as you did upon Divodasa, the father of Sudas: favour the prayers 
of the devout son of Pijavana, and may his strength be unimpaired, 
undecaying.” 

The two others are mentioned by the Vishnu Purana. One Sudas 
is mentioned in Chapter IV as the descendant of Sagara. The 
genealogical tree connecting this Sudas with Sagara is as follows : 1 2 

“Sumati, the daughter of Kasyapa and Kesini, the daughter of Raja 
Vidarbha, were the two wives of Sagara. Being without progeny, the king 
solicited the aid of the sage Aurva with great earnestness, and the Muni 
pronounced this boon, that one wife should bear one son, the upholder 
of his race, and the other should give birth to sixty thousand sons; and 
he left it to them to make their election. Kesini chose to have the single 
son; Sumati the multitude; and it came to pass in a short time that the 
former bore Asamanjas, a prince through whom the dynasty continued; 
and the daughter of Vinata (Sumati) had sixty thousand sons. The son 
of Asamanjas was Ansumat. 

The son of Ansumat was Dilipa; his son was Bhagiratha, who brought 
Ganga down to earth, whence she is called Bhagirathi. The son of 
Bhagiratha was Sruta; his son was Nabhaga; his son was Ambarisha; his 
son was Sindhudvipa; his son was Ayutashva; his son was Rituparna, the 
friend of Nala, skilled profoundly in dice. The son of Rituparna was 
Sarvakama; his son was Sudasa; his son was Saudasa, named also 
Mitrasaha.” 

1 Wilson’s Rig Veda, Vol. IV (Poona Reprint), p. 146. 

2 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana, pp. 377-380. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


120 


120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Another Sudas is mentioned in Chapter XIX as a descendant of 
Puru. The genealogical tree connecting this Sudas with Puru is as 
follows P 

“The son of Puru was Janamejaya; his son was Prachinvat; his son was 
Pravira, his son was Manasyu; his son was Bhayada; his son was Sudhumna; 
his son was Bahugava; his son was Samyati; his son was Bhamyati; his son 
was Raudrashva, who had ten sons, Riteyu, Kaksheyu, Sthandileyu, Ghriteyu, 
Jaleyu, Sthaleyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu, and Vrateyu. The son of Riteyu was 
Rantinara whose sons were Tansu, Aprtiratha, and Dhruva. The son of the 
second of these was Kanva, and his son was Medhatithi, from whom the 
Kanvayana Brahmans are descended. Anila was the son of Tansu, and he 
had four sons, of whom Dushyanta was the elder. The son of Dushyanta was 
the emperor Bharata;... 

Bharata had by different wives nine sons, but they were put to death by 
their own mothers, because Bharata remarked that they bore no resemblance 
to him, and the women were afraid that he would therefore desert them. 
The birth of his sons being thus unavailing, Bharata sacrificed to the Maruts, 
and they gave him Bharadvaja, the son of Brihaspati by Mamata the wife 
of Utathya,... 

if if if 

He was also termed Vitatha, in allusion to the unprofitable (vitatha) birth 
of the sons of Bharata. The son of Vitatha was Bhavanmanyu; his sons were 
many, and amongst them the chief were Brihatkshatra, Mahavirya, Nara and 
Garga. The son of Nara was Sankriti; his sons were Ruchiradhi and Rantideva. 
The son of Garga was Sini; and their descendants called Gargyas and Sainyas, 
although Kshatriyas by birth, became Brahmins. The son of Mahavirya was 
Urukshaya, who had three sons, Trayyaruna, Pushkarin and Kapi, the last 
of whom became a Brahmin. The son of Brihatkshatra was Suhotra, whose 
son was Hastin, who founded the city of Hastinapur. The sons of Hastin were 
Ajamidha, Dvimidha and Purumidha. One son of Ajamidha was Kanva, whose 
son was Medhatithi, his other son was Brihadishu, whose son was Brihadvasu; 
his son was Brihatkarman; his son was Jayadratha, his son was Vishvajit, 
his son was Senajit, whose sons were Ruchirashva, Kasya, Dridhadhanush, 
and Vasahanu. The son of Ruchiraswa was Prithusena; his son was Para; 
his son was Nipa; he had a hundred sons, of whom Samara, the principal, 
was the ruler of Kampilya. Samara had three sons, Para, Sampara, Sadashva. 
The son of Para was Prithu; his son was Sukriti; his son was Vibhratra; 
his son was Anuha, who married Kritvi, the daughter of Shuka (the son of 
Vyasa), and had by her Brahmadatta; his son was Vishvaksena; his son was 
Udaksena; and his son was Bhallata. 

The son of Dvimidha was Yavinara; his son was Dhritimat; his son was 
Satyadhriti; his son was Dridhanemi; his son was Suparshva; his son was 
Sumati; his son was Sannatimat; his son was Krita, to whom Hiranyanabha 
taught the philosophy of the Yoga, and he compiled twenty-four Sanhitas (or 
compendia) for the use of the eastern Brahmins, who study the Sama-Veda. 
The son of Krita was Ugrayudha, by whose prowess the Nipa race of 
Kshatriyas was destroyed; his son was Kshemya; his son was Suvira; his son 
was Nripanjaya; his son was Bahuratha. These were all called Pauravas. 

1 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana, pp. 447-456. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


121 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 121 

Ajamidha had a wife called Nilini, and by her he had a son named Nila; 
his son was Santi; his son was Susanti; his son was Purujanu; his son was 
Chakshu; his son was Haryashva, who had five sons Mudgala, Srinjaya, 
Brihadishu, Pravira, and Kampilya. Their father said, ‘These my five (pancha) 
sons are able (alam) to protect the countries’; and hence they were termed 
the Panchalas. From Mudgala descended the Maudgalya Brahmins; he had 
also a son named Bahvashva, who had two children, twins, a son and 
daughter, Divodasa and Ahalya. 

if if if 

The son of Divodasa was Mitrayu; his son was Chyavana; his son was 
Sudasa; his son was Saudasa, also called Sahadeva; his son was Somaka; 
he had a hundred sons, of whom Jantu was the eldest, and Prishata the 
youngest. The son of Prishata was Drupada; his son was Dhrishtadyumna; 
his son was Drishtaketu. 

Another son of Ajamidha was named Riksha; his son was Samvarana; his 
son was Kuru, who gave his name to the holy district Kurukshetra; his sons 
were Sudhanush, Parikshit, and many others. The son of Sudhanush was 
Suhotra; his son was Chyavana; his son was Kritaka; his son was Uparichara 
the Vasu, who had seven children Brihadratha, Pratyagra, Kushamba, 
Mavella, Matsya, and others. The son of Brihadratha was Kusagra; his son 
was Rishabha; his son was Pushpavat; his son was Satyadhrita; his son was 
Sudhanvan; and his son was Jantu. Brihadratha had another son, who being 
born in two parts, which were put together (sandhita) by a female friend 
named Jara, he was denominated Jarasandha; his son was Sahadeva; his 
son was Somapi; his son was Srutasravas, These were kings of Magadha.” 

The immediate ancestry of the three Sudasas is put below in 
parallel columns to facilitate the settlement of the question whether 
they are one or three different persons: 


Status 

in Rig Veda 



Sudas in Vishnu Purana 

VII, 18:22 

VII, 18:23 

VII, 18:25 

In the Sagar 

In the Puru 





Family 

Family 

Devavata 

Pijavana 

Divodasa= 

Ritupama 

Bahvashva 



Pijavana 



Pijavana 

Sudas 



Sarvakama 

Divodasa 

Sudas 


Si 

idas 

Sudas 

Milrayu 





Saudasa = 

Chyavana 





Mitrasaha 







Sudas 






Saudasa 






Somaka 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

From the table two things are as clear as day-light. First is that 
neither Sudas mentioned in the Vishnu Purana has anything to do with 
the Sudas mentioned in the Rig Veda. The second point which is clear 
is that if the Paijavana mentioned in the Mahabharata can be identified 
with anybody who lived in ancient times it can only be with Sudas 
mentioned in Rig Veda who was called Paijavana because he was the 
son of Pijavana which was another name of Divodasa . 1 

Fortunately for me my conclusion is the same as that of Prof. Weber. 
In commenting upon the passage in the Shanti Parvan of the Mahabharata 
on which my thesis is based Prof. Weber 2 says : 

“Here the remarkable tradition is recorded that Paijavana, i.e., Sudas who 
was so famous for his sacrifices and who is celebrated in the Rig Veda as 
the patron of Vishvamitra and enemy of Vasishtha, was a Shudra.” 

Prof.Weber unfortunately did not realize the full significance of this 
passage. This is another matter. It is enough for my purpose to find 
that he too thinks that the Paijavana of the Mahabharata is no other 
than Sudas of the Rig Veda. 


Ill 

What do we know about Sudas, the Paijavana? 

The following particulars are available about him: 

I. Sudas was neither Dasa nor Arya. Both the Dasas as well as 
the Aryas were his enemies . 3 This means that he was a Vedic Aryan. 

II. The father of Sudas was Divodasa. He seems to be the adopted 
son of Vadhryashva . 4 Divodasa was a king. He fought many battles 
against Turvasas and Yadus , 5 Shambara , 6 Parava, and Karanja 7 and 


1 Some difficulty is felt about the genealogy of this Sudas in the Rig Veda, which 
is sought to be got over by identifying Devavata with Divodasa. This difficulty has 
mainly arisen because of the diffirent texts of Stanzas 22, 23 and 25 which nobody 
seems to have cared to collect properly. Chitrava Shastri’s edition of Rig Veda has 
Pijavana throughout. Satavalekar’s edition has Paijavana throughout. Wilson has 
Paijavana in 22 and 23 and Pijavana in 25. Wilson’s text seems to be accurate. For 
even Yaska has noticed the existence of the name Paijavana in his Nirukta which 
he endeavours to explain. If Wilson’s text in 25 is taken as correct no difficulty can 
arise. Pijavana would then appear to be another name of Divodasa and Paijavana would 
be another name of Sudas. 

2 Muir, Vol. 1, p. 366 

3 Rig Veda, VII, 83. 1. 

4 Rig Veda, IX, 61.2. 

5 Rig Veda, VI. 61. 1; VII 19.8 

6 Rig Veda, I. 130. 7 

7 Rig Veda, I. 53. 10 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


123 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 123 

Gungu . 1 There was a war between Turyavana and Divodasa and his 
allies Ayu and Kutsa. The victory went to Turyavana . 2 

It seems that at one time Indra was against him particularly in 
the battle of Turyavana. His purohita was Bharadvaja , 3 to whom 
Divodasa gave many gifts . 4 Bharadvaja seems to have played the part 
of a traitor by joining Turyavana against Divodasa . 5 

There is no reference to the mother of Sudas. But there is a reference 
to the wife of Sudas. His wife’s name is given as Sudevi . 6 It is said 
that the Ashvins procured her for Sudas. 

III. Sudas was a king and his coronation ceremony was performed 
by the Brahma-rishi, Vasistha. 

The Aitareya Brahmana gives the following list of the kings who had 
the Mahabhisheka ceremony performed and the name of the Purohita 
who officiated at it . 7 

“With this ceremony Sharyata, the son of Manu, was inaugurated by 
Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu. Thence Sharyata went conquering all over the 
earth, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse, and was even at the sacrificial 
session held by the gods, the house-father.” 

“With this ceremony Samasushama, the son of Vajaratna, inaugurated 
Shatanika, the son of Satrajit. Thence Shatanika went conquering everywhere 
over the whole earth up to its ends, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 
“With this ceremony Parvata and Narada inaugurated Ambashthya. Thence 
Ambashthya went conquering everywhere over the whole earth up to its ends, 
and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 

“With this ceremony Parvata and Narada inaugurated Yudhamasraushti, 
the son of Ugrasena. Thence Yudhamasraushti went conquering everywhere 
over the whole earth up to its ends, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 

“With this inauguration ceremony Kashyapa inaugurated Vishva-karma, 
the son of Bhuvana. Thence Vishvakarma went conquering everywhere over 
the whole earth up to its ends, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 

“They say that the earth sang to Vishvakarma the following stanza: 

‘No mortal is allowed to give me away (as donation). 8 0, Vishva-karma, 
thou hast given me, (therefore) I shall plunge into the midst of the sea. In 
vain was thy promise made to Kashyapa.’” 

“With this ceremony Vasishtha inaugurated Sudas, the son of Pijavana. 
Thence Sudas went conquering everywhere over the whole earth up to its 
ends, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 

1 Rig Veda, X. 48 

2 Rig Veda, I. 53, 8; VI. 18. 13 

3 Rig Veda, I. 116. 18. 

4 Rig Veda, VI. 16. 5. 

5 Rig Veda, VI. 18. 13. 

6 Rig Veda, 1. 112. 19. 

7 Martin Haug, Vol. II, pp. 523-524. 

8 The king had promised the whole earth as gift to his officiating priest. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“With this inauguration ceremony Samvarta, the son of Angiras, inaugu- 
rated Maruta, the son of Avikshit. Thence Maruta went conquering every- 
where over the whole earth up to its ends, and sacrificed the sacrificial horse.” 

In this list there is a specific mention of Sudas and of his coronation 
having been performed by Vasishtha. 

Sudas was the hero in the famous Dasharajna Yuddha or the battle 
of the ten kings described in the Rig Veda. References to this famous 
battle occur in the various Suktas of the Seventh Mandala of the Rig 
Veda. 

Sukta 83 says: 

4. “Indra and Varuna, you protected Sudas, overwhelming the yet unassailed 
Bheda with your fatal weapons; hear the prayers of these Tritsus in time 
of battle, so that my ministration may have borne them fruit.” 

6. “Both (Sudas and the Tritsus) call upon you two, (Indra and Varuna), 
in combats for the acquirement of wealth, when you defend Sudas, together 
with the Tritsus, when attacked by the ten Rajas.” 

7. “The ten confederated irreligious Rajas did not prevail, Indra and 
Varuna, against Sudas; the praise of the leaders (of rites), the offerers of 
sacrificial food, was fruitful; the gods were present at their sacrifices.” 

9. “One of you destroys enemies in battle, the other ever protects religious 
observances; we invoke you, showerers (of benefits), with praises; bestow upon 
us, Indra and Varuna, felicity.” 

Sukta 33 says : 

2. “Disgracing (Pasha dyumna), they brought from afar the fierce Indra, 
when drinking the ladle of Soma at his sacrifice, to (receive) the libation 
(of Sudas); Indra hastened from the effused Soma of Pashadyumna, the son 
of Vayata, to the Vasishthas.” 

3. “In the same manner was he, (Sudas), enabled by them easily to cross 
the Sindhu river; in the same manner, through them he easily slew his foes; 
so in like manner, Vasishthas, through your prayers, did Indra defend Sudas 
in the war with the ten kings.” 

“Suffering from thirst, soliciting (rain), supported (by the Tritsus) in the 
war with the ten Rajas, (the Vasishthas) made Indra radiant as the sun; 
Indra heard (the praises) of Vasishtha glorifying him, and bestowed a spacious 
region on the Tritsus.” 

Sukta 19 says : 

3. “Undaunted (Indra), thou hast protected with all thy protections Sudas, 
the offerer of oblations; thou hast protected, in battles with enemies for the 
possession of the earth, TRASADASYU, the son of PURUKUTSA, and PURU.” 

6. “Thy favours, Indra, to Sudas, the donor (of offerings), the presenter 
of oblations, arc infinite; shower er (of benefits)I yoke for thee (thy vigorous) 
steeds; may our prayers, reach thee who art mighty, to whom many rites 
are addressed.” 

Sukta 18 of the Seventh Mandala says : 

5. “The adorable Indra made the well-known deep waters (of the Parushni) 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


125 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 125 

fordable for Sudas, and converted the vehement awakening imprecation of 
the sacrificer into the calumniation of the rivers.” 

6. “TURVASHA, who was preceding (at solen rites), diligent in sacrifice, 
(went to Sudas) for wealth; but like fishes restricted (to the element of water), 
the Bhrigus and Druhyus quickly assailed them; of these two everywhere 
going, the friend (of Sudas, Indra) rescued his friend.” 

7. “Those who dress the oblation, those who pronounce auspicious words, 
those who abstain from penance, those who bear horns (in their hands), those 
who bestow happiness (on the world by sacrifice), glorify that Indra, who 
recovered the cattle of the Arya from the plunderers, who slew the enemies 
in battle.” 

8. “The evil-disposed and stupid (enemies of Sudas), crossing the humble 
Parushni river, have broken down its banks;but he by his greatness pervades 
the earth, and KAVI, the son of CHAYAMANA, like a falling victim, sleeps 
(in death).” 

9. “The waters followed their regular course to the Parushni, nor (wan- 
dered) beyond it; the quick course (of the king) came to the accessible places, 
and INDRA made the idly-talking enemies, with their numerous progeny, 
subject among them (to Sudas).” 

10. “They who ride on parti-coloured cattle, (the Maruts), despatched by 
PRISHNI, and recalling the engagement made by them with their friend 
(Indra), came like cattle from the pasturage, when left without a herdsman; 
the exulting Niyut steeds brought them quickly (against the foe).” 

11. “The hero INDRA created the Maruts (for the assistance of the Raja), 
who, ambitious of fame, slew one and twenty of the men on the two banks 
(of the Parushni), as a well looking priest lops the sacred grass in the chamber 
of sacrifice.” 

12. “Thou, the bearer of the thunderbolt, didst drown SHRUTA, KAVASHA, 
VRIDDHA, and afterwards DRUHYU in the waters; for they, Indra, who are 
devoted to thee, and glorify thee, preferring thy friendship, enjoy it.” 

13. “Indra, in his might, quickly demolished all their strongholds, and their 
seven (kinds of) cities; he has given the dwelling of the son of ANU to TRITSU; 
may we, (by propitiating), (Indra) conquer in battle the ill-speaking man.” 

14. “The warriors of the ANUS and DRUHYUS, intending (to carry off 
the) cattle, (hostile) to the pious (SUDAS), perished to the number of sixty- 
six thousand six hundred and sixty; such are all the glorious acts of INDRA.” 

15. “These hostile Tritsus, ignorantly contending with INDRA, fled, routed 
as rapidly as rivers on a downward course, and being discomfited abandoned 
all their possessions to SUDAS.” 

16. “INDRA has scattered over the earth the hostile rival of the hero 
(SUDAS), the senior of INDRA, the appropriator of the oblation; INDRA has 
baffled the wrath of the wrathful enemy, and the (foe) advancing on the way 
(against SUDAS) has taken the path of flight.” 

17. “INDRA has effected a valuable (donation) by a pauper; he has slain 
an old lion by a goat; he has cut the angles of the sacrificial post with a 
needle; he has given all the spoils (of the enemy) to SUDAS.” 

18. “Thy numerous enemies, INDRA, have been reduced to subjugation; effect 
at some time or other the subjugation of the turbulent BHEDA, who holds men 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

praising thee as guilty of wickedness; hurl, INDRA, thy sharp thunderbolt 
against him.” 

19. “The dwellers on the Yamuna and Tritsus glorified INDRA when 
he killed BHEDA in battle; the Ajas, the Shigrus, the Yakshas. offered 
to him as a sacrifice the heads of the horses killed in the combat.” 

20. “Thy favours, INDRA, and thy bounties, whether old or new, cannot 
be counted like the (recurring) dawns; thou hast slain DEVAKA, the son 
of MANYAMANA and of thine own will hast cast down SHAMBARA from 
the vast (mountain).” 

In this batte the kings who fought against Sudas were: 1 (1) Shinyu, 
(2) Turvasha, (3) Druhyu, (4) Kavasha, (5) Puru, (6) Anu, (7) Bheda, 
(8) Shambara, (9) Vaikarna, (10) another Vaikarna, (11) Yadu, 
(12) Matsya, (13) Paktha, (14) Bhalanas, (15) Aleena, (16) Vishanin, 
(17) Aja, (18) Shiva, (19) Shigru, (20) Yakshu, (21) Yudhyamadhi, 
(22) Yadva, (23) Devaka Manyamana, (24) Chayamana Kavi, 
(25) Sutuka, (26) Uchatha, (27) Shmta, (28) Vriddha, (29) Manyu, 
and (30) Prithu. 

Obviously, the war was a much bigger war than its name indicates. 
The war must have been a very great event in the history of the 
Indo-Aryans. No wonder the victorious Sudas became a great hero 
of his time. 2 We do not know what exactly led to this war. Some 
indication is given by Rig Veda, vii.83.7, where the kings arrayed 
against Sudas are described as irreligious which suggests that it was 
probably a religious war. 

IV. Sayanacharya, as well as tradition, declare the following 
hymns of the Rig Veda to have had the under-mentioned kings for 
their rishis : 

“Vitahavya (or Bharadvaja) x.9, Sindhudvipa, son of Ambarisha (or 
Trisiras, son of Tvashtri) x.75,Sindhukshit, son of Priyamedha; x.133, 
Sudas, son of Pijavana; x.134, Mandhatri, son of Yuvanasa; x.179, Sibi, 
son of Usinara, Pratardana, son of Divodasa and king of Kasi, and 
Vasumanas, son of Rohidasva; and x.148 is declared to have had Prithi 
Vainya.” 

It will be noticed that in this list there occurs the name of Sudas 
as a composer of Vedic hymns. 

V. Sudas performed Ashvamedha Yajna. There is reference to this 
in Rig Veda, iii.53. 

9. “The great RISHI, the generator of the gods, attracted by the deities, the 

1 The list is taken from Chitrava Shastri’s Prachin Charitra Kosh, p. 624. There 
is no unanimity whether all the names are of kings. Sayanacharya says that 13- 
16 are names of the Purohitas. There is also doubt about 27-29. 

2 The name of Sudas occurs in the Rig Veda in 27 places. It shows what a great 
hero he must have been regarded by the Vedic people. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


127 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 127 

overlooker of the leaders (at holy rites), VISHVA-MITRA arrested the watery 
stream when he sacrificed for SUDAS; INDRA with the Kushikas, was 
pleased.” 

11. “Approach, Kushikas, the steed of SUDAS; animate (him), and let him 
loose to (win) riches (for the raja); for the king (of the gods), has slain VRITRA 
in the East, in the West, in the North, therefore let (SUDAS) worship him 
in the best (regions) of the earth.” 

VI. Sudas was known for charity to the Brahmins who called him 
Atithigva (the doyen) of Philanthrophists. How the Brahmins have 
praised him for his philanthrophy appears from the following refer- 
ences in the Rig Veda: 

1.47.6. “0, impetuous Ashvins, possessing wealth in your car, bring 
sustenance to Sudas. Send to us from the (aerial) ocean, or the sky, the riches 
which are much coveted.” 

1.63.7. “Thou didst then, 0, thundering Indra, war against, and shatter, the 
seven cities for Purukutsa, when thou, 0 king, didst without effort hurl away 
distress from Sudas like a bunch of grass, and bestow wealth on Puru.” 

i. 112.19. “Come, 0 Ashvins, with those succours whereby ye brought 
glorious power to Sudas.” 

vii.19.3. “Though, 0 fierce Indra, hast impetuously protected Sudas, who 
offered oblations, with every kind of succour. Thou hast preserved Trasadasyu 
the son of Purukutsa, and Puru in his conquest of land and in his slaughter 
of enemies.” 

vii.20.2 “Indra growing in force slays Vritra; the hero protects him who 
praises him; he makes room for Sudas (or the liberal sacrificer- Sayana); he 
gives riches repeatedly to his worshippers.” 

vii.25.3. “Let a hundred succours come to Sudas, a thousand desirable (gifts) 
and prosperity. Destroy the weapon of the murderous. Confer renown and 
wealth on us.” 

vii.32.10. “No one can oppose or stop the chariot of Sudas. He whom Indra, 
whom the Marutas, protect, walks in a pasture filled with cattle.” 

vii.53.3. “And ye, 0, Heaven and Earth, have many gifts of wealth for Sudas.” 

vii.60.8. “Since Aditi, Mitra, and Varuna, afford secure protection to Sudas 
(or the liberal man), bestowing on him offspring — may we not, 0 mighty 
deities, commit any offence against the gods ... May Aryaman rid us of our 
enemies. (Grant) ye vigorous gods, a wide space to Sudas.” 

These are the biographical bits regarding Paijavana referred to in 
the Shanti Parvan of the Mahabharata gleaned from the most authentic 
source, namely, the Rig Veda. From the Rig Veda, we know that his 
real name was Sudas, that he was a Kshatriya. He was more than a 
Kshatriya. He was a king and a mighty king. To this, the Mahabharata 
adds a fresh and a new detail, namely that he was a Shudra. A Shudra 
to be an Aryan, a Shudra to be a Kshatriya and a Shudra to be a king!! 
Can there be a greater revelation? Can there be anything more 
revolutionary? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


128 


128 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This search for biographical details may be closed with a discus- 
sion of three important questions: Was Sudas an Aryan? If Sudas 
is an Aryan what is the tribe to which he belonged? If Sudas is 
a Shudra, what does Shudra signify? 

It might be well to begin with the second. For the determination 
of this question it is possible to derive some assistance from certain 
reference in the Rig Veda. The Rig Veda mentions many tribes, most 
important of which are Tritsus, Bharatas, Turvasas, Durhyus, Yadus, 
Purus and Anus. But according to the references in the Rig Veda 
there are only three with whom Sudas was connected. They are 
Purus, Tritsus and the Bharatas. It is enough to confine ourselves 
to these three and to find out if possible to which of these tribes 
he belonged. The most important stanzas bearing on the relation 
between Tritsus and Sudas are the Rig Veda, i.63.7; i. 130.7; 
vii.18.15; vii.33.5; vii.33.6; vii.83:4, 6. 

In i.63,7,Divodasa is spoken of as the king of the Purus and in 
i. 130.7, Divodasa is spoken of as Paurve, i.e., belonging to the Purus. 

Rig Veda, vii.18.15 and vii.83.6, suggest that Sudas was not a 
Tritsu. The first suggests that Sudas raided the camp of Tritsus who 
ran away and Sudas took possession of their wealth. The second 
suggests that Tritsus and Sudas were on one side in the war against 
the ten kings, but they are shown as separate. But in vii.35.5 and 
in vii.83.4, Sudas becomes fully identified with Tritsus; indeed, in 
the former Sudas becomes a king of the Tritsus. 

On this question of the relation between the Tritsus and the 
Bharatas and between them and Sudas, we have as our evidence 
Rig Veda, vii.33.6 and v. 16.4, 6, 19. According to the first, Tritsus 
are the same as the Bharatas. According to the second, Divodasa 
the father of Sudas is spoken of as belonging to the Bharatas. 

From these references one thing is certain that the Purus, Tritsus 
and Bharatas were either different branches of one and the same 
folk or that they were different tribes, who in the course of time 
became one people, folk. This is not impossible. The only question 
is: assuming they were different, to whom did Sudas originally 
belong? To the Purus, the Tritsus or to the Bharatas? Having regard 
to the connection of the Purus and the Bharatas with Divodasa, his 
father, it seems natural to suppose that Sudas originally belonged 
either to the Purus or to the Bharatas — which, it is difficult to say. 

Whether he belonged to the Purus or not, there is no doubt that 
Sudas belonged to the Bharatas if regard is had to the fact that his 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


129 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 129 

father Divodasa is spoken of as belonging to the Bharatas. The next 
question, is: who were these Bharatas and whether they are the people 
after whom India got the name Bharata Bhumi or the land of the 
Bharatas. This question is important because most people are not aware 
of the true facts. When Hindus talk of the Bharatas they have in mind 
the Daushyanti Bharatas, Bharatas descended from Dushyanta and 
Shakuntala and who fought the war which is described in the 
Mahabharata. Not only are they not aware of any other Bharatas but 
they believe that the name Bharata Bhumi which was given to India 
was given after the Daushyanti Bharatas. 

There are two Bharatas quite distinct from each other. One tribe 
of the Bharatas are the Bharatas of the Rig Veda, who were descended 
from Manu and to whom Sudas belonged. The other tribe of Bharatas 
are the Daushyanti Bharatas. What is more important is that if India 
has been named Bharata Bhumi it is after the Bharatas of the Rig 
Veda and not after the Daushyanti Bharatas. This is made clear by 
the following stanzas from the Bhagavata Purana: 1 

fTTVTf TFT TfTl RTf: ^ I 

dOJIHly Wdl ^dWd: II 

tprem RrokFTwm i 

ffaT ^ Wl dKTWBFTH: I 

idtedld' d^MdilHIHI VKTJtTTR 1 1 

“Manu, the son of Syavambhu, had a son named Priyamvada; his son 
was Agnidhra; his son was Nabhi; he had a son Rishabha. He had a 
hundred sons born to him, all learned in the Veda; of them, Bharata was 
the eldest, devoted to Narayana, by whose name this excellent land is 
known as Bharata.” 

This shows to what illustratious line of kings this Shudra Sudas 
belonged. 

The next thing to find out is whether Sudas was an Aryan. The 
Bharatas were of course Aryans and therefore Sudas must have been 
an Aryan. If reference is had to Rig Veda, vii. 18.7, this connection 
with the Tritsus to the Aryans seems to throw some doubt on his 
Aryan origin. This stanza says that Indra rescued the cows of the 
Aryas from the Tritsus and killed the Tritsus, thereby suggesting that 
the Tritsus were the enemies of the Aryas. Griffiths is very much 
perturbed by the Tritsus being shown as non-Aryans which is the 
result of a literal translation of the stanza, and to avoid it he 


1 Quoted by Vaidya in Mahabharatacha Upasamhara, p. 200. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


130 


130 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

understands cows to mean comrade . 1 This of course is unnecessary 
if one bears in mind that the Rig Veda Contains the story of two 
sorts of Aryas, whether differing in race or religion, it is difficult 
to say. Interpreted in the light of this fact, all that the stanza means 
is that at the time when it was written the Tritsus had not become 
Aryans by religion. It does not mean that they were not Aryans by 
race. It is therefore indisputable that Sudas, whether taken as a 
Bharata or as a Tritsu was an Aryan. 

And now to the last question, though it is by no means the least. 
What does Shudra signify? In the light of this new discovery that 
Sudas was a Shudra, the word now stands in a totally different light. 
To old scholars to whom the word was just the name of a servile 
and aboriginal class this new discovery must come as a surprise for 
which their past researches cannot possibly furnish an answer. As 
for myself, I am in no better position. The reason is that the social 
organization of the Vedic Aryans has yet to be studied. We know from 
the study of primitive societies that they are organized in groups and 
they act as groups. The groups are of various sorts. There are clans, 
phratries, moieties and tribes. In some cases, the tribe is the primary 
unit, in others it is the clan, in others the phratry. In some cases 
tribes are sub-divided into clans. In other cases there are no clans. 
It is a single clanless tribe. 

The clan embraces the descendants of a single ancestor held 
together by a sense of common descent. Clans often become associated 
through common social and ceremonial interests into major units, 
called phratries or brotherhoods of clans. The bond within the phratry 
may be relatively loose, that is, the association may not imply more 
than an informal feeling of preferential friendship. The phratry may 
become a moiety in which each clan is recognized as part of one of 
two major units. But moieties may occur without any sub-division, 
that is, the entire clan may consist of two clans. All these organi- 
zations whether it is a clan, a phratry, a moiety or a tribe, are all 
based on the tie of kinship. 

The Vedic Aryans had no doubt some such forms of social 
organization. That is clear from the nomenclature. As pointed out 
by Prof. Senart : 2 


1 His rendering is “yet to the Tritsus come the Aryu’s comrade, through love 
of spoil and heros’ war, to lead them.” 

2 ‘Castes in India” by Emile Senart, p. 192. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-07 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


131 


THE SHUDRAS : WHO WERE THE SHUDRAS ? 131 

“The Vedic hymns arc all too indefinite concerning the details of external 
and social life. We at least sec from them that the Aryan population was 
divided into a number of tribes or small peoples (janas), subdivided into 
clans united by the ties of kinship (visas), which in their turn were split 
up into families. The terminology of the Rig Veda, is in this respect 
somewhat indecisive, but the general fact is clear. Sajata, that is to say, 
‘kinsman’ or ‘fellow in Jati,’ of race, seems in the Atharva-Veda to denote 
fellow in clan (vis), Jana, which assumes a wider significance, recalls the 
Avestic equivalent of the clan, the zantu, and the jati or caste. A series 
of terms, vra, vrijana, vraja, vrata, appear to be synonyms or subdivisions 
either of the clan or of the tribes. The Aryan population then lived, at 
the epoch to which the hymns refer, under the rule of an organization 
dominated by the traditions of the tribe and the lower or similar groupings. 
The very variety of names indicates that this organization was somewhat 
unsettled.” 

We have, however, no information to determine which of these 
corresponds to the clan, which to the phratry and which to the tribe. 1 
That being so, it is difficult to say whether Shudra was the name 
of a clan, a phratry or a tribe. It is, however, interesting to refer 
to the view of Prof. Weber when he comments on the passage from 
the Satapatha Brahmana (i. 1.4.12) where it says that different modes 
of address should be adopted inviting the sacrificer to proceed with 
the sacrifice, addressing him as ‘come’ if he is a Brahmin, ‘hasten 
hither’ if he is a Kshatriya, ‘hasten hither’ if he is a Vaishya and 
‘run hither’ if he is a Shudra. Prof. Weber says : 2 

“The entire passage is of great importance, as it shows (in opposition 
to what Roth says in the first Volume of this Journal, p.83) that the 
Shudras were then admitted to the holy sacrifices of the Aryans, and 
understood their speech, even if they did not speak it. The latter point 
cannot certainly be assumed as a necessary consequence, but it is highly 
probable and I consequently incline to the view of those who regard the 
Shudras as an Aryan tribe which immigrated into India before the others.” 

His conclusion that the Shudras were Aryans hits the nail squarely 
on the head. The only point of doubt is whether the Shudras were 
a tribe. That they were Aryans and Kshatriyas is beyond doubt. 

• • 


1 What we called Aryan tribes appear to be a phratry in view of their changing 
alliances. 


2 Muir. Vol. I, p. 366. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


132 


CHAPTER VIII 

THE NUMBER OF VARNAS, 

THREE OR FOUR ? 

I 

THAT there were from the very beginning four Varnas in the Indo- 
Aryan society is a view which is universally accepted by all classes 
of Hindus, and also by European scholars. If the thesis advanced 
in the last chapter, namely, that the Shudras were Kshatriyas is 
accepted, then it follows that this theory is wrong and that there 
was a time when there were only three Varnas in the Indo-Aryan 
society, viz., Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Thus, the thesis, 
while it solves one problem, at the same time creates another. 
Whether anybody else sees the importance of this problem or not, 
I do. Indeed, I am aware of the fact that unless I succeed in proving 
that there were originally only three Varnas, my thesis that the 
Shudras were Kshatriyas may not be said to be proved beyond the 
shadow of a doubt. 

While it is unfortunate that I should have landed on a thesis, 
which, while holding out a promise of solving the problem, creates 
another, I feel fortunate in having strong and cogent evidence to 
show that there were originally only three Varnas among the Indo- 
Aryans. 

The first piece of evidence I rely upon is that of the Rig Veda 
itself. There are some scholars who maintain that the Varna system 
did not exist in the age of the Rig Veda. This statement is based 
on the view that the Purusha Sukta is an interpolation which has 
taken place long after the Rig Veda was closed. Even accepting that 
the Purusha Sukta is a later interpolation, it is not possible to accept 
the statement that the Varna system did not exist in the time of 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


133 


THE SHUDRAS : THE NUMBER OF VARNAS, THREE OR FOUR ? 133 

the Rig Veda. Such a system is in open conflict with the text of 
the Rig Veda. For, the Rig Veda, apart from the Purusha Sukta, 
does mention Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas not once but many 
times. The Brahmins are mentioned as a separate Varna fifteen 
times, Kshatriyas nine times. What is important is that the Rig Veda 
does not mention Shudra as a separate Varna. If Shudras were a 
separate Varna there is no reason why the Rig Veda should not have 
mentioned them. The true conclusion to be drawn from the Rig Veda 
is not that the Varna system did not exist, but that there were only 
three Varnas and that Shudras were not regarded as a fourth and 
a separate Varna. 

The second piece of evidence I rely on is the testimony of the two 
Brahmanas, the Satapatha and the Taittiriya. Both speak of the 
creation of three Varnas only. They do not speak of the creation 
of the Shudras as a separate. 

The Satapatha Brahmana says 

II. 1.4.11. — “(Uttering), ‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated this earth. (Uttering) 
‘bhuvah’ he generated the air, and (Uttering) ‘svah’ he generated the sky. 
This universe is co-extensive with these worlds. (The fire) is placed with 
the whole. Saying ‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated the Brahman; saying 
‘bhuvah” he generated the Kshattra; (and saying) ‘svah’, he generated the 
Vis. The fire is placed with the whole. (Saying) ‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated 
himself; (saying) ‘bhuvah’, he generated offspring : saying ‘svah’, he 
generated animals. This world is so much as self, offspring, and animals. 
(The fire) is placed with the whole.” 

The Taittirya Brahmana says 1 2 

III. 12.9.2. — “This entire (universe) has been created by Brahma. Men 
say that the Vaishya class was produced from ric verses. They say that 
the Yajur Veda is the womb from which the Kshattriya was born. The 
Sama Veda is the source from which the Brahmins sprang. This word the 
ancients declared to the ancients.” 

Here is my evidence. It consists of an inference from the Rig Veda 
and two statements from two Brahmanas which in point of authority 
are co-equal with the Vedas. For both are Shruti both say in definite 
and precise terms that there were only three Varnas. Both agree that 
the Shudras did not form a separate and a distinct Varna, much less 
the fourth Varna. There cannot, therefore, be better evidence in support 
of my contention that there were originally only three Varnas 

1 Muir, Vol. 1, p. 17. 

2 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 17. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and that the Shudras were only a part of the second Varna. 

II 

Such is my evidence. On the other side, there is, of course, the 
evidence contained in the Purusha Sukta of the Rig Veda, which 
maintains that there were four Varnas from the very beginning. The 
question now is : which of the two should be accepted as the correct? 
How is this question to be decided? It cannot be decided by applying 
the rules of Mimamsa. If we did apply it, we will have to admit that 
both the statements, one in the Purusha Sukta that there were four 
Varnas and the statement in the two Brahmanas that there were 
three Varnas, are true. This is an absurd position. We must decide 
this matter in the light of the canons of historical criticism, such 
as sequence of time and intrinsic criticism, etc. The main question 
is whether the Purusha Sukta is a later composition added to the 
original Rig Veda. The question has been dealt with on the basis 
of the language of the Sukta as compared with the language of the 
rest of the Rig Veda. That it is a late production is the opinion of 
all scholars. This is what Colebrooke says 

“That remarkable hymn (the Purusha Sukta) is in language, metre, and 
style, very different from the rest of the prayers with which it is associated. 

It has a decidedly more modern tone; and must have been composed after 
the Sanskrit language had been refined, and its grammar and rhythm 
perfected. The internal evidence which it furnishes serves to demonstrate 
the important fact that the compilation of the Vedas, in their present 
arrangement, took place after the Sanskrit tongue had advanced from the 
rustic and irregular dialect in which the multitude of hymns and prayers 
of the Veda was composed, to the polished and sonorous language in which 
the mythological poems, sacred and profane (puranas and kavyas), have 
been written.” 

In the opinion of Prof.Max Muller : 1 2 

“There can belittle doubt, for instance, that the 90th hymn of the 10th book... 
is modern both in its character and in its diction. It is full of allusions to the 
sacrificial ceremonials, it uses technically philosophical terms, it mentions the 
three seasons in the order of Vasanta, spring, Grishma, summer and Sharad, 
autumn; it contains the only passsage in the Rig Veda where the four castes 
arc enumerated. The evidence of language for the modern date of this composition 
is equally strong. Grishma, for instance, the name for the hot season, docs not 
occur in any other hymn of the Rig Veda; and Vasanta also, the name 

1 Quoted in Muir, Vol, I, p. 13, 

2 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 13. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


135 


THE SHUDRAS : THE NUMBER OF VARNAS, THREE OR FOUR ? 135 

of spring docs not belong to the earliest vocabulary of the Vedic poets. 

It occurs but once more in the Rig Veda (x. 161.4), in a passage where 
the three seasons are mentioned in the order of Sharad, autumn; Hemanta, 
winter; and Vasanta, spring.” 

Prof.Weber observes P 

“That the Purusha Sukta, considered as a hymn of the Rig Veda, is 
among the latest portions of that collection, is clearly perceptible from its 
contents. The fact that the Sama Samhita has not adopted any verse from 
it, is not without importance (compare what I have remarked in my 
Academical Prelections). The Naigeya school, indeed, appears (although it 
is not quite certain) to have extracted the first five verses in the seventh 
prapathaka of the first Archika, which is peculiar to it.” 

Ill 

This is one line of argument. There is also another line of argument 
which also helps us to determine whether the Purusha Sukta is an 
earlier or later production. For this it is necessary to find out how 
many Samhitas of the Vedas have adopted the Purusha Sukta. 
Examining the different Vedas and the Samhitas, the position is as 
follows : 

The Sama Veda produces only 5 verses from the Purusha Sukta. 
As to the White Yajur Veda, the Vajasaneyi Samhita includes it but 
the difference between the two is great. The Purusha Sukta, as it 
stands, in the Rig Veda, has only 16 verses. But the Purusha Sukta 
in the Vajasaneyi Samhita has 22 verses. Of the Black Yajur Veda 
there are three Samhitas available at present. But none of the three 
Samhitas, the Taittiriya, the Katha and the Maitrayani, gives any 
place to the Purusha Sukta. The Atharva Veda is the only Veda which 
contains a more or less exact reproduction of the Purusha Sukta of 
the Rig Veda. 

The text of the Purusha Sukta, as it occurs in the different Vedas, 
is not uniform. The six additional verses of the Vajasaneyi Samhita 
are special to it and are not to be found in the text as it occurs in 
the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda or the Atharva Veda. There is another 
difference which relates to verse 16. The 16th verse of the Rig Veda 
is to be found neither in the Atharva Veda nor in the Sama Veda nor 
in the Yajur Veda. Similary, the 16th verse of the Atharva Veda is to 
be found neither in the Rig Veda nor in the Yajur Veda. Of the fifteen 


1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 14. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 136 

136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

verses, which are common to the three Vedas, their texts are not, 
identical. Nor is the order in which the verses stand in the three 
Vedas the same as may be seen from the following table : 

Yajur Veda Rig Veda Sama Veda Atharva Veda 


1 

1 

3 

i 

2 

2 

5 

4 

3 

3 

6 

3 

4 

4 

4 

2 

5 

5 

7 

9 

6 

8 

* 

10 

7 

9 

* 

11 

8 

10 

* 

14 

9 

7 

* 

13 

10 

11 

* 

12 

11 

12 

* 

5 

12 

13 

* 

6 

13 

14 

* 

7 

14 

6 

* 

8 

15 

15 

* 

15 

16+ 

16 

* 

16+ 

17 

* 

* 

* 

18 

* 

* 

* 

19 

* 

* 

* 

20 

* 

* 

* 

21 

* 

* 

* 

22 

* 

* 

* 


The point is that if the Purusha Sukta had been an old, hoary 
text, sanctified by ancient tradition, could the other Vedas have taken 
such a liberty with it? Could they have changed it and chopped it 
as they have done? 

The place of the Purusha Sukta in the hymns of the different Vedas 
is also very significant. In the Rig Veda it occurs in the miscellaneous 
part and in the Atharva Veda it occurs in what is known as the 
supplementary part. If it was the earliest composition of the Rig 
Veda, why should it have been placed in such inconsequential 


*Means that these Verses are not to be found. 
fMeans that they are not identical. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


137 


THE SHUDRAS : THE NUMBER OF VARNAS, THREE OR FOUR ? 137 

collection? What do these points suggest? They suggest that : 

(1) If the Purusha Sukta was not incorporated in the Taittiriya, 
Kathaka and Maitrayani Samhitas of the Black Yajur Veda, 
it follows, that the Purusha Sukta was added to the Rig Veda 
after the Taittiriya Samhita, the Kathaka Samhita, the 
Maitrayani Samhita of the Black Yajur Veda. 

(2) That it had to be put in the miscellaneous and supplemen- 
tary portions of the Vedas shows that it was composed at 
a later stage. 

(3) That the freedom which the authors of the different Samhitas 
took in adding, omitting and recording the verses shows that 
they did not regard it as an ancient hymn, which they were 
bound to reproduce in its exact original form. 

These points go a long way in furnishing corroborative evidence 
in support of the views held by Prof. Max Muller and others that 
the Purusha Sukta is a later interpolation. 

IV 

The difference in the form of the stanzas in the Purusha Sukta 
is also very noteworthy. Anyone who reads the Purusha Sukta will 
find that except for these two verses, viz., 11 and 12, the whole of 
it is in the narrative form. But the two verses, which explain the 
origin of the four Varnas, are in the form of question and answer. 
The point is : Why should these verses be introduced in a question 
form breaking the narrative form? The only explanation is that the 
writer wanted to introduce a new matter and in a pointed manner. 
This means that not only the Purusha Sukta is a later addition to 
the Rig Veda, but these particular verses are much later than even 
the Purusha Sukta. 

Some critics have gone to the length of saying that the Purusha 
Sukta is a forgery by the Brahmins to bolster up their claim to 
superiority. Priests are known to have committed many forgeries. The 
Donations of Constantine and Pseudo-Isidore Decretals are well 
known forgeries in the history of the Papacy. The Brahmins of 
India were not free from such machinations. How they changed the 
original word ‘Agre’ into ‘Agne’ to make Rig Veda give support to 
the burning of widows has been pointed out by no less an authority 
than Prof.Max Muller. It is well-known how in the time of the East 
India Company a whole Smriti was fabricated to support the case 
of a plaintiff. There is, therefore, nothing surprising if the Brahmins did 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


138 


138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

forge the Purusha Sukta, if not the whole, at least the two verses 
11 and 12, at some later stage, long after the fourth Varna had come 
into being, with a view to give the system of Chaturvarnya the 
sanction of the Veda. 


V 

Is the Purusha Sukta earlier than the Brahmanas? This question 
is distinct and separate from the first. It may be that the Purusha 
Sukta belongs to the later part of the Rig Veda. Yet, if the Rig Veda 
as a whole is earlier than the Brahmanas, the Purusha Sukta would 
still be earlier than the Brahmanas. The question, therefore, needs 
to be separately considered. 

It is Prof. Max Muller’s view that in the growth of the Vedic 
literature the order was Vedas, then Brahmanas and thereafter the 
Sutras. If this proposition was adopted, it would mean that the 
Purusha Sukta must be earlier than the Brahmanas. Question is : 
Can Prof. Max Muller’s proposition be accepted as absolute? If it was 
accepted as absolute, the proposition would lead to two conclusions: 

(1) That in the time of the Rig Veda there were four Varnas 
and at the time of the Satapatha Brahmana they became 
three; or 

(2) that the tradition is not completely recorded in the Satapatha 
Brahmana. 

It is obvious that both these conclusions are absurd and must be 
rejected. The first is absurd on the face of it. The second is untenable 
because the theory of the evolution of Varnas by the two Brahmanas 
is different from that set out in the Purusha Sukta and is complete 
in itself. The absurdity of the result is inevitable if one were to take 
Max Muller’s proposition as absolute. The proposition cannot be taken 
as absolute to mean that no Brahmana was composed until all the 
Samhitas had come into being. On the other hand, it is quite possible 
as pointed out by Professors Belvalkar and Ranade that most of these 
compositions are composite and synchronous and, therefore, one part 
of the Vedas can be earlier than another part and that a part of 
the Brahmanas can be earlier than parts of the Vedas. If this is a 
correct view then there is nothing inherently improbable in holding 
that the parts of the Satapatha Brahmana and of the Taittiriya 
Brahmana, which record the legend that there were at one time only 
three Varnas, are earlier than the Purusha Sukta of the Rig Veda. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-08 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


139 


THE SHUDRAS : THE NUMBER OF VARNAS, THREE OR FOUR ? 139 

What is the conclusion which follows from this examination of the 
Purusha Sukta? There is only one conclusion, that the Sukta is an 
addition to the Rig Veda made at a later stage and is, therefore, 
no argument that there were four Varnas from the very beginning 
of the Aryan Society. 

For the reasons given above, it will be seen that my thesis about 
the origin of the Shudras creates no problem such as the one 
mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter. If it did appear to create 
a problem, it was because of the assumption that the Purusha Sukta 
was an authentic and genuine record of what it purports to say. That 
assumption has now been shown to be quite baseless. I, therefore, 
see no difficulty in concluding that there was a time when the Aryan 
Society had only three Varnas and the Shudras belonged to the second 
or the Kshatriya Varna. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


140 


CHAPTER IX 

BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 


THE thesis that the Shudras were Kshatriyas and that if they became 
the fourth Varna it was because they were degraded to that position 
does not wholly solve the problem. It only raises another problem. 
This problem is why were the Shudras degraded? 

The problem is new. It has never been raised before. The existing 
literature on the subject cannot, therefore, be expected to contain an 
answer. The question is raised by me for the first time. As it is a 
question on which my theory of the Shudras rests, the burden of 
giving a satisfactory answer must rest on me. I believe, I can give 
a satisfactory answer to this question. My answer is that the 
degradation of the Shudras is the result of a violent conflict between 
the Shudras and the Brahmins. Fortunately for me, there is abundant 
evidence of it. 


I 

There is direct evidence of a violent conflict between the Shudra 
king, Sudas and Vasishtha, the Brahmin rishi. The facts relating to 
this conflict however are stated in a very confused manner. In the 
narration which follows, I have made an attempt to state them in 
a neat and an orderly fashion. 

To understand the nature of the conflict, it is necessary first to 
understand the relations between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra. 

Vasishtha and Vishvamitra were enemies and were enemies first 
and enemies last. There was no incident to which one of them was 
a party in which the other did not know himself as an opponent. 
As evidence of their enmity, I will refer to some of the episodes. The 
first one is that of Satyavrata otherwise called Trishanku. The story 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


141 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 141 

as told in the Harivamsha 1 is as follows: 

“Meanwhile Vasishtha, from the relation subsisting between the king 
(Satyavrata’s father) and himself, as disciple and spiritual preceptor, governed 
the city of Ayodhya, the country, and the interior apartments of the royal 
palace. But Satyavrata, whether thorough folly or the force of destiny, 
cherished constantly an increased indignation against Vasishtha, who for a 
(proper) reason had not interposed to prevent his exclusion from the royal 
power by his father. ‘The formulae of the marriage ceremonial are only 
binding,’ said Satyavrata, ‘when the seventh step has been taken, and this 
had not been done when I seized the damsel; still Vasishtha, who knows 
the precepts of the law, does not come to my aid.’ Thus Satyavrata was 
incensed in his mind against Vasishtha, who, however had acted from a sense 
of what was right. Nor did Satyavrata understand (the propriety of) that silent 
penance imposed upon him by his father... When he had supported this 
arduous rite, (he supposed that) he had redeemed his family position. The 
venerable muni Vasishtha did not, however, (as has been said), prevent his 
father from setting him aside, but resolved to install his son as king. When 
the powerful prince Satyavrata had endured the penance for twelve years, 
he beheld, when he was without flesh to eat, the milch cow of Vasishtha 
which yielded all objects of desire, and under the influence of anger, delusion, 
and exhaustion, distressed by hunger, and failing in the ten duties he slew... 
and both partook of her flesh himself, and gave it to Vishvamitra’s sons to 
eat. Vasishtha hearing of this, became incensed against him and imposed 
on him the name of Trishanku as he had committed three sins. On his return 
home, Vishvamitra was gratified 2 by the support which his wife had received, 
and offered Trishanku the choice of a boon. When this proposal was made, 
Trishanku chose his boon of ascending bodily to heaven. All apprehension 
from the twelve years’ drought being now at an end, the muni (Vishvamitra) 
installed Trishanku in his father’s kingdom and offered sacrifice on his behalf. 
The mighty Kaushika then, in spite of the resistance of the gods and of 
Vasishtha exalted the king alive to heaven.” 

The next episode in which they appear on opposite sides is that 
of Harishchandra, the son of Trishanku. The story is told in the Vishnu 
Purana and in the Markandeya Purana. The following account is 

1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, pp. 377-378.. 

2 It is stated in the Harivamsha : 

“In consequence of the wickedness which had been committed, Indra did not rain 
for a period of twelve yean, At that time Vishvamitra had left his wife and children 
and gone to practise austerities on the seashore. His wife, driven to extremity by want, 
was on the point of selling her second son for a hundred cows, in order to support 
the others; but this arrangement was stopped by the intervention of Satyavrata who 
liberated the son when bound, and maintained the family by providing them with the 
flesh of wild animals and according to his father’s injunction, consterated himself for 
the performance of a silent penance for twelve years.” 

As stated in another place in the Harivamsha, Trishanku had been expelled from 
his home by his father for the offence of carrying off the young wife of one of the 
citizens under the influnece of a criminal passion and Vasishtha did not interfere to 
prevent his banishment. It is to this that the text refers. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
given 1 The story runs : 

“On one occasion, when hunting, the king heard a sound of female 
lamentation which proceeded, it appears, from the sciences who were becoming 
mastered by the austerely fervid sage Vishvamitra, in a way they had never 
been before by anyone else; and were consequently crying out in alarm at 
his superiority. For the fulfilment of his duty as a Kshatriya to defend the 
weak, and inspired by the god Ganesha, who had entered into him, 
Harishchandra exclaimed ‘What sinner is this who is binding fire in the hem 
of his garment, while I, his lord, am present, resplendent with force and fiery 
vigour? He shall to-day enter on his long sleep, pierced in all his limbs by 
arrows, which, by their discharge from my bow, illuminate all the quarters 
of the firmament.’ Vishvamitra was provoked by this address. In consequence 
of his wrath the Sciences instantly perished, and Harishchandra, trembling 
like the leaf of an ashvatlha tree, submissively represented that he had merely 
done his duty as a king, which he defined as consisting in the bestowal of 
gifts on eminent Brahmins and other persons of slender means, the protection 
of the timid, and war against enemies. Vishvamitra hereupon demands a gift 
as a Brahmin intent upon receiving one. The king offers him whatsoever he 
may ask: Gold, his own son, wife, body, life, kingdom, good fortune. The saint 
first requires the present for the Rajasuya sacrifice, On this being promised, 
and still more offered, he asks for the empire of the whole earth, including 
everything but Harishchandra himself, his wife, and son, and his virtue which 
follows its possessor wherever he goes. Harishchandra joyfully agrees. 
Vishvamitra then requires him to strip off all his ornaments, to clothe himself 
in the bark of trees, and to quit the kingdom with his wife Shaivya and his 
son. When he is departing, the sage stops him and demands payment of his 
yet unpaid sacrificial fee. The king replies that he has only the persons of 
his wife, his son and himself left. Vishvamitra insists that he must 
nevertheless pay, and that unfulfilled promises of gifts to Brahmins bring 
destruction. The unfortunate prince, after being threatened with a curse, 
engages to make the payment in a month; and commences his journey with 
a wife unused to such fatigues, amid the universal lamentations of his 
subjects. While he lingers, listening to their affectionate remonstrances 
against his desertion of his kingdom, Vishvamitra comes up, and being 
incensed at the delay and the king’s apparent hesitation, strikes the 
queen with his staff, as she is dragged on by her husband. Harishchandra 
then proceeded with his wife and little son to Benares, imagining that the 
divine city, as the special property of Siva, could not be possessed by any 
mortal. Here he found the relentless Vishvamitra waiting for him, and ready 
to press his demand for the payment of his sacrificial gift, even before the 
expiration of the full period of grace, In this extremity, Shaivya the 
queen suggests with a sobbing voice that her husband should sell her. On 
hearing this proposal Harishchandra swoons, then recovers, utters lamenta- 
tions and swoons again, and his wife seeing his sad condition, swoons 
also. While they are in a state of unconsciousness their famished child 
exclaims in distress, ‘0, father, give me bread; 0, mother, mother, give me 
food; hunger overpowers mo and my tongue is parched.’ At this moment 


1 Muir, Vol, 1, pp. 379-387. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


143 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 143 

Vishvamitra returns, and after recalling Harishchandra to consciousness by 
sprinkling water over him, again urges payment of the present. The king, 
again swoons, and is again restored. The sage threatens to curse him if his 
engagement is not fulfilled by sunset. Being now pressed by his wife, the 
king agrees to sell her, adding, however, ‘If my voice can utter such a wicked 
word, I do what the most inhuman wretches cannot perpetrate.' He then goes 
into the city, and in self-accusing language offers his queen for sale as a 
slave. A rich old Brahmin offers to buy her at a price corresponding to her 
value, to do his household work. Seeing his mother dragged away the child 
ran after her, his eyes dimmed with tears, and crying ‘mother.’ The Brahmin 
purchaser kicked him when he came up; but he would not let his mother 
go, and continued crying ‘mother, mother.’ The queen then said to the 
Brahmin, ‘Be so kind, my master, as to buy also this child, as without him 
I shall prove to thee but a useless purchase. Be thus merciful to me in my 
wretchedness, unite me with my son, like a cow to her calf.’ The Brahmin 
agrees: ‘Take this money and give me the boy.’ After the Brahmin had gone 
out of sight with his purchases. Vishvamitra again appeared and renewed 
his demands: and when the afflicted Harishchandra offered him the small 
sum he had obtained by the sale of his wife and son, he angrily replied, 

‘If, miserable Kshatriya, thou thinkest this a sacrificial gift befitting my 
deserts, thou shalt soon behold the transcendent power of my ardent austrere- 
fervour of my terrible majesty, and of my holy study,’ Harishchandra promises 
an additional gift, and Vishvamitra allows him the remaining quarter of the 
day for its liquidation. On the terrified and afflicted prince offering himself 
for sale, in order to gain the means of meeting this cruel demand, Dharma 
(Righteousness) appears in the form of a hideous and offensive chandala, and 
agrees to buy him at his own price, large or small. Harishchandra declines 
such a degrading survitude, and declares that he would rather be consumed 
by the fire of his persecutor’s curse than submit to such a fate. Vishvamitra, 
however, again comes on the scene, asks why he docs not accept the large 
sum offered by the Chandala, and when he pleads in excuse his descent from 
the solar race, threatens to fulminate a curse against him if he docs not accept 
that method of meeting his liability. Harishchandra implores that he may 
be spared this extreme of degradation, and offers to become Vishvamitra’s 
slave in payment of the residue of his debt; whereupon the sage rejoins, ‘if 
thou art my slave, then I sell thee as such to the Chandala for a hundred 
millions of money.’ The Chandala, delighted pays down the money, and 
carries off Harishchandra bound, beaten, confused, and afflicted, to his own 
place of abode. Harishchandra is sent by the Chandala to steal grave 
clothes in a cemetery and is told that he will receive two-sixths of the 
value for his hire; three-sixths going to his master, and one-sixth to the 
king. In this horrid spot, and in this degrading occupation he spent in great 
misery twelve months, which seemed to him like a hundred years. He then 
falls asleep and has a series of dreams suggested by the life he had been 
leading. After he awoke, his wife came to the cemetery to perform the 
obsequies of their son, who had died from the bite of a serpent. At first, 
the husband and wife did not recognize each other, from the change in 
appearance which had been wrought upon them both by their miseries. 
Harishchandra, however, soon discovered from the tenor of her lamentations 
that it is his wife, and falls into a swoon; as the queen docs also when she 
recognizes her husband. When consciousness returns they both break 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

out into lamentations, the father bewailing in a touching strain the loss of 
his son, and the wife, the degradation of the king. She then falls on his neck, 
embraces him and asks ‘whether all this is a dream, or a reality, as she 
is utterly bewildered’; and adds, that “if it be a reality, then righteousness 
is unavailing to those who practise it.” After hesitating to devote himself to 
death on his son’s funeral pyre without receiving his master’ leave. 
Harishchandra resolves to do so, braving all the consequences and consoling 
himself with the hopeful anticipation. ‘If I have given gifts and offered 
sacrifices and gratified my religious teachers, then may I be reunited with 
my son and with thee (my wife) in another world.’ The queen determines 
to die in the same manner. When Harishchandra, after placing his son’s body 
on the funeral pyre, is meditating on the Lord Hari Narayana Krishna, the 
supreme spirit, all the gods arrive, headed by Dharma (Righteousness); and 
accomapanied by Vishvamitra. Dharma entreats the king to desist from his 
rash intention; and Indra announces to him that, he, his wife, and son have 
conquerred heaven by their good works. Ambrosia, the antidote of death, and 
flowers are rained by the gods from the sky; and the king’s son is restored 
to life and the bloom of youth. The king adorned with celestial clothing and 
garlands, and the queen, embrace their son. Harishchandra, however, declares 
that he cannot go to heaven till he has received his master the Chandala’s 
permission, and has paid him a ransom. Dharma then reveals to the king 
that it was he himself who had miraculously assumed the form of a Chandala. 
The king next objects that he cannot depart unless his faithful subjects, who 
are sharers in his merits, are allowed to accompany him to heaven, at least 
for one day. This request is granted by Indra; and after Vishvamitra has 
inaugurated Rohitashva the king’s son to be his successor. Harishchandra, 
his friends and followers, all ascend in company to heaven. Even after this 
great consummation, however, Vasishtha, the family priest of Harishchandra, 
hearing, at the end of a twelve years’ abode in the waters of the Ganges, 
an account of all that has occurred, becomes vehemently incensed at the 
humilation inflicted on the excellent monarch, whose virtues and devotion 
to the gods and Brahmins he celebrates, declares that his indignation had 
not been so greatly roused even when his own hundred sons had been slain 
by Vishvamitra, and in the following words dooms the latter to be transformed 
into a crane : ‘Wherefore that wicked man, enemy of the Brahmins, smitten 
by my curse, shall be expelled from the society of intelligent beings, and 
losing his understanding shall be transformed into a Baka.’ Vishvamitra 
reciprocates the curse, and changes Vasishtha into a bird of the species 
called Ari. In their new shapes the two have a furious fight, the Ari being 
of the Portentous height of two thousand yojanas= 18,000 miles, and the 
Baka of 3090 yojanas. They first assail each other with their wings; then 
the Baka smites his antagonist in the same manner, while the Ari 
strikes with his talons. Falling mountains, overturned by the blasts of wind 
raised by the flapping of their wings, shake the whole earth, the waters of 
the ocean overflow, the earth itself, thrown off its perpendicular slopes 
downwards to Patala, the lower regions. Many creatures perished by these 
various convulsions. Attracted by the dire disorder, Brahma arrives, attended 
by all the gods, on the spot, and commands the combatants to desist 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


145 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 145 

from their fray. They were too fiercely infuriated to regard this injunction; 
but Brahma put an end to the conflict by restoring them to their natural 
forms and counselling them to be reconciled.” 

The next episode in which they came in as opponents is connected 
with Ambarisha, king of Ayodhya : 

“The story 1 relates that Ambarisha was engaged in performing a 
sacrifice, when Indra carried away the victim. The priest said that this 
ill-omened event had occurred owing to the king’s bad administration; and 
would call for a great expiation, unless a human victim could be produced. 
After a long search the royal-rishi (Ambarisha) came upon the Brahmin 
rishi, Richika, a descendant of Bhrigu, and asked him to sell one of his 
sons for a victim, at the price of a hundred thousand cows. Richika 
answered that he would not sell his eldest son and his wife added that 
she would not sell the youngest; ‘youngest sons’ she observed, ‘being 
generally the favourites of their mothers.’ The second son, Shunasshepa, 
then said that in that case he regarded himself as the one who was to 
be sold, and desired the king to remove him. The hundred thousand cows, 
with ten millions of gold pieces and heaps of jewels, were paid down and 
Shunasshepa carried away. As they were passing through Pushkara, 
Shunasshepa beheld his maternal uncle Vishvamitra who was engaged in 
austerities there with other rishis, threw himself into his arms, and 
implored his assistance, urging his orphan, friendless and helpless state, 
as claims on the sage’s benevolence. Vishvamitra soothed him; and pressed 
his own sons to offer themselves as victims in the room of Shunasshepa. 
This proposition met with no favour from Madhushyanda and the other 
sons of the royal hermit, who answered with haughtiness and derision: 
‘How is it that thou sacrificest thine own sons and seekest to rescue those 
of others? We look upon this as wrong, and like the eating of one’s own 
flesh. ‘The sage was exeedingly wroth at this disregard of his injunction, 
and doomed his sons to be born in the most degraded classes, like 
Vasishtha’s sons, and to eat dog’s flesh, for a thousand years. He then 
said to Shunasshepa: ‘When thou art bound with hallowed cords, decked 
with a red garland, and anointed with unguents and fastened to the 
sacrificial post of Vishnu, then address thyself to Agni, and sing these 
two divine verses (gathas), at the sacrifice of Ambarisha: then shalt thou 
attain the fulfilment (of thy desire)’. Being furnished with the two gathas, 
Shunasshepa proposed at once to king Ambarisha that they should set out 
for their destination. When bound at the stake to be immolated, dressed 
in a red garment, he celebrated the two gods, Indra and his younger brother 
(Vishnu), with the excellent verses. The thousand-eyed (Indra) was pleased 
with the secret hymn; and bestowed long life on Shunasshepa.” 

The last episode recorded in which the two had ranged themselves 
on opposite sides is connected with king Kalmashapada. The episode 
is recorded in the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata : 2 

1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I. pp. 405-407. 

2 Ibid, pp. 415-417. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“Kalmashapada was a king of the race of Ikshvaku. Vishvamitra wished 
to be employed by him as his officiating priest; but the king preferred 
Vasishtha. It happened however that the king went out to hunt, and after 
having killed a large quantity of games, he became very much fatigued, as 
well as hungry and thirsty. Meeting Shakti, the eldest of Vasishtha’s hundred 
sons, on the road, he ordered him to get out of his way. The priest civilly 
replied:’ The path is mine, 0 king; this is the immemorial law; in all 
observations the king must cede the way to the Brahmin.’ Neither party would 
yield, and the dispute waxing warmer, the king struck the muni with his 
whip, The muni, resorting to the usual expedient of offended sages, by a curse 
doomed the king to become a man-eater. It happened that at that time enmity 
existed between Vishvamitra and Vasishtha on account of their respective 
claims to be priest to Kalmashapada. Vishvamitra had followed the king; and 
approached while he was disputing with Shakti. Perceiving, however, the son 
of his rival Vasishtha, Vishvamitra made himself invisible, and passed them, 
catching this opportunity. The king began to implore Shakti’s clemency; but 
Vishvamitra wishing to prevent their reconciliation, commanded a Rakshasa 
(a man-devouring demon) to enter into the king. Owing to the conjoint 
influence of the Brahman-rishi’s curse, and Vishvamitra’s command, the 
demon obeyed the injunction. Perceiving that his object was gained, Vishvamitra 
left things to take their course, and absented himself from the country.The 
king having happened to meet a hungry Brahmin, and sent him, by the hand 
of his cook (who could procure nothing else), some human flesh to cat, was 
cursed by him also to the same effect as by Shakti. The curse, being now 
augmented in force, took effect, and Shakti himself was the first victim, being 
eaten up by the king. The same fate befell all the other sons of Vasishtha 
at the instigation of Vishvamitra. Perceiving Shakti to be dead, Vishvamitra 
again and again incited the Rakshasa against the sons of Vasishtha and 
accordingly the furious demon devoured those of his sons who were younger 
than Shakti as a lion eats up the small beasts of the forest. On hearing the 
destruction of his sons by Vishvamitra, Vasishtha supported his affliction as 
the great mountain sustains the earth. He meditated his own destruction, 
but never thought of exterminating the Kaushikas. This divine sage hurled 
himself from the summit of Mcru, but fell upon the rocks as if on a heap 
of cotton. Escaping alive from his fall, he entered a glowing fire in the forest; 
but the fire, though fiercely blazing, not only failed to burn him, but seemed 
perfectly cool. He next threw himself into the sea with a heavy stone attached 
to his neck; but was cast up by the waves on the dry land. He then went 
home to his hermitage; but seeing it empty and desolate, he was again 
overcome by grief and sent out; and seeing the river Vipasa which was swollen 
by the recent rains, and sweeping along many trees torn from its banks, he 
conceived the design of drowning himself into its waters; he accordingly lied 
himself firmly with cords, and threw himself in; but the river severing his 
bonds, deposited him unbound (Vipasa) on dry land ; whence the name of 
the stream, as imposed by the sage. He afterwards saw and threw himself 
into the dreadful Satadru (Sutlej), which was full of alligators, etc., and 
derived its name rushing away in a hundred directions on seeing the Brahmin 
brilliant as fire. In consequence of this, he was once more stranded; and seeing 
that he could not kill himself, he went back to his hermitage.” 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


147 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 147 


There are particular instances in which Vasishtha and Vishvamitra 
had come into conflict with each other. But there was more than these 
occasional conflicts between the two. There was general enmity 
between them. This general enmity was of a mortal kind so much 
so that Vishvamitra wanted even to murder Vasishtha as will be seen 
from the Shalyaparvan of the Mahabharata. Says the author of the 
Mahabharata 

“There existed a great enmity, arising from rivalry in their austerities, 
between Vishvamitra and the Brahmin rishi Vasishtha. Vasishtha had an 
extensive hermitage in Sthanutinha, to the east of which was Vishvamitra’s. 
These two great ascetics were every day exhibiting intense emulation in 
regard to their respective austerities. But Vishvamitra beholding the might 
of Vasishtha was the most chagrined; and fell into deep thought. The idea 
of this sage, constant in duty, was the following : ‘This river Sarasvati will 
speedily bring to me on her current the austere Vasishtha, the most eminent 
of all utterers of prayers. When that most excellent Brahmin has come, I 
shall most assuredly kill him.’ Having thus determined, the divine sage 
Vishvamitra, his eyes reddened by anger, called to mind the chief of rivers. 
She being thus the subject of his thoughts became very anxious, as she knew 
him to be very powerful and very irascible. Then trembling, pallid and with 
joined hands, the Saraswati stood before the chief of munis like a woman 
whose husband has been slain; she was greatly distressed, and said to him 
‘what shall I do?’ The incensed muni replied, ‘Bring Vasishtha hither speedily, 
that I may slay him.’ The lotus-eyed goddess, joining her hands trembled 
in great fear, like a creeping plant agitated by the wind. Vishvamitra, however, 
although he saw her condition, repeated his command. The Sarasvati, who knew 
how sinful was his design, and that the might of Vasishtha was unequalled, 
went trembling and in great dreed of being cursed by both the sages, to 
Vasishtha and told him what his rival had said. Vasishtha seeing her 
emaciated, pale and anxious, spoke thus, ‘Deliver thyself, 0 chief of rivers; 
carry me unhesitatingly to Vishvamitra, lest he curse thee.’ Hearing these 
words of the merciful sage, the Sarasvati considered how she could act most 
wisely. She reflected, ‘Vasishtha has always shown me great kindness, I must 
seek his welfare.’ Then observing the Kaushika sage praying and sacrificing 
on her brink, she regarded that as a good opportunity, and swept away the 
bank by the force of her current. In this way the son of Mitra and Varuna 
(Vasishtha) was carried down; and while he was being borne along, he thus 
celebrated the river; ‘Thou, o Sarasvati, issuest from the lake of Brahma, and 
pervadest the whole world with thy excellent streams. Residing in the sky, thou 
discharges! water into the clouds. Thou alone art all waters. By thee we study.’ 
Thou art nourishment, radiance, fame, perfection, intellect, light. Thou art 
speech, thou art svaha; this world is subject to thee. Thou, in fourfold form, 
dwellest in all creatures.’ Beholding Vasishtha brought near by the Sarasvati, 
Vishvamitra searched for a weapon with which to make an end of him, 
Perceiving his anger, and dreading lest Brahmanicidc should ensue, the river 


1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, pp. 420-422. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


148 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


promptly carried away, Vasishtha in an easterly direction thus fulfilling 
the commands of both sages, but eluding Vishvamitra. Seeing Vasishtha 
so carried away, Vishvamitra, impatient and enraged by vexation, said to 
her, ‘Since thou, o chief of rivers, has eluded me, and hast receded, roll 
in waves of blood acceptable to the chief of demons’ (which are fabled to 
gloat on blood). The Sarasvati being thus cursed, flowed for a year in a 
stream mingled with blood. Rakshasas came to the place of pilgrimage 
where Vasishtha had been swept away, and revelled in drinking to satiety 
the bloody stream in security, dancing and laughing, as if they had 
conquered heaven. Some rishis who arrived at the spot some time after 
were horrified to see the blood-stained water, and the Rakshasas quaffing 
it, and made the most strenuous efforts to rescue the Sarasvati.” 

The enmity between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra was not an enmity 
between two priests. It was an enmity between a Brahmin priest and 
a Kshatriya priest. Vasishtha was a Brahmin. Vishvamitra was a 
Kshatriya. He was a Kshatriya of royal lingeage. In the Rig Veda 
(iii.33.11) Vishvamitra is spoken of as the son of Kushika. The Vishnu 
Purana 1 gives further details about Vishvamitra. It says that 
Vishvamitra was the son of Gadhi who was descended from king 
Pururavas. This is confirmed by the Harivamsha. 2 From the Rig Veda 
(iii: 1:21) we know that the family of Vishvamitra has been keeping 
‘fire’ kindled in every generation. 3 We also know from the Rig Veda 
that Vishvamitra was the author of many hymns of that Veda and 
was admitted to be a Rajarishi. He was the author of the hymn which 
is held to be the holiest in the whole of the Vedas namely the Gayatri 
hymn in the Rig Veda (iii. 62. 10). Another important fact we know 
about him is that he was a Kshatriya and his family belonged to 
the clan of the Bharatas. 4 

It seems that about this time a dispute was going on between 
Brahmins and Kshatriyas on the following points : 

(1) The right to receive gifts. Gift means payment made without 
work. The contention of the Brahmins was that nobody could 
receive gifts. To receive gifts was the right of the Brahmins 
only. 5 

(2) The right to teach the Vedas. The Brahmins’ contention was 
that the Khastriya had only the right to study the Vedas. He 
had no right to teach the Vedas. It was the privilege of the 
Brahmins only. 

1 Quoted in Muir, Vol. I, P. 349. 

2 Quoted in Muir, Vol. I, p. 353. 

3 Quoted in Muir, Vol. I, p. 316. 

4 Quoted in Muir, Vol. I, p. 354. 

5 That is why Manu says “if the king wants to make a gift to a Shudra he must 
make him work.” 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


149 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 149 

(3) The right to officiate at a sacrifice. On this point the Brahmins’ 
contention was that Kshatriya had the right to perform 
sacrifices, but he had no right to officiate as a purohit (priest) 
at a sacrifice. That was the privilege of the Brahmins. 

What is important to note is that even in disputes on these points 
and particularly on the third point they did not fail to play their 
part as the opponents of each other. This is confirmed by the story 
of Trishanku narrated in the Ramayana 1 and which runs as follows : 

“King Trishanku, one of Ikshvaku’s descendants, had conceived the design 
of celebrating a sacrifice by virtue of which he should ascend bodily to heaven. 

As Vasishtha on being summoned, declared that the thing was impossible 
(asakyam), Trishanku travelled to the south, where the sage’s hundred sons 
were engaged in austerities, and applied to them to do what their father 
had declined. Though he addressed them with the greatest reverence and 
humility, and added that the Ikshvakus regarded their family-priests as their 
highest resource in difficulties, and that, after their father, he himself looked 
to them as his tutelary deities,’ he received from the haughty priests the 
following rubuke for his presumption : “Fool, thou hast been refused by the 
truth-speaking preceptor. How is it that, disregarding his authority thou hast 
resorted to another school (shakha)? The family-priest is the highest oracle 
of all the Ikshvakus; and the command of that veracious personage cannot 
be transgressed. Vasishtha, the divine rishi, has declared that ‘the thing 
cannot be how can we undertake the sacrifice? Thou art foolish, king; return 
to thy capital. The divine (Vasishtha) is competent to act as priest of the 
three works; how can we shew him disrespect?” 

Trishanku then gave them to understand, that as his preceptor and “his 
preceptor’s sons had declined compliance with his requests, he should think 
of some other expedient. “In consequence of his venturing to express this 
presumptuous intention, they condemned him by their imprecation to become 
a Chandala. As this curse soon took effect, and the unhappy king’s form was 
changed into that of a degraded outcast, he resorted to Vishvamitra (who, 
as we have seen, was also dwelling at this period in the south), enlarging 
on his own virtues and piety, and bewailing his fate. Vishvamitra commis- 
erated his condition and promised to sacrifice on his behalf, and exalt him 
to heaven in the same Chandala form to which he had been condemned by 
his preceptor’s curse. “Heaven is now as good as in the possession, since thou 
hast resorted to the son of Kushika.’” He then directed that preparations 
should be made for the sacrifice, and that all the rishis, including the family 
of Vasishtha, should be invited to the ceremony. 

The disciples of Vishvamitra who had conveyed his message, reported the 
result on their return in these words: “Having heard your message, all the 
Brahmins are assembling in all the countries, and have arrived, excepting 
Mahodaya (Vasishtha). Hear what dreadful words those hundred Vasishthas, 
their voices quivering with rage, have uttered: ‘How can the gods and rishis 
consume the oblation at the sacrifice of that man, especially if he be a Chandala, 


1 Muir, Vol. I, pp. 401-404. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


150 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for whom a Kshatriya is officiating priest? How can illustrious Brahmins 
ascend to heaven, after eating the food of a Chandala, and being entertained 
by Vishvamitra?” These ruthless words all the Vasishthas, together with 
Mahodaya, uttered, their eyes inflamed with anger.” Vishvamitra who was 
greatly incensed on receiving this message, by a curse doomed the sons of 
Vasishtha to be reduced to ashes, and reborn as degraded outcasts (mritapah) 
for seven hundred births, and Mahodaya to become a Nishada. 

Knowing that this curse had taken effect Vishvamitra then, after eulogizing 
Trishanku, proposed to the assembled rishis that the sacrifice should be 
celebrated. To this they assented, being actuated by fear of the terrible sage’s 
wrath, Vishvamitra himself officiated at the sacrifice as Yajaka; and the other 
rishis as priests (ritvijah) (with other functions) performed all the ceremonies.” 

In this dispute between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra, Sudas seems 
to have played an important part. Vasishtha was the family priest 
of Sudas. It was Vasishtha who performed his coronation ceremony. 
It was Vasishtha who helped him to win the battle against the ten 
kings. Notwithstanding this, Sudas removed Vasishtha from office. 
In his place he appointed Vishvamitra as his purohita 1 who performed 
yajna for Sudas. This is the first deed of Sudas which created enmity 
between Sudas and Vasishtha. There was another deed which Sudas 
committed which widened and intensified the enmity. He threw into 
fire Shakti the son of Vasishtha and burned him alive. The story 
is reported in the Satyayana Brahmana . 2 The Satyayana Brahmana 
does not give the reason for such an atrocious act. Some light is 
thrown on it by Shadgurushishya 3 in his Commentary on Katyayana’s 
Anukramanika to the Rig Veda. According to Shadgurushishya, a 
sacrifice was performed by Sudas at which there was a sort of public 
debate between Vishvamitra and Shakti, the son of Vasishtha and 
in this debate, to use the words of Shadgurushishya: 

“The power and speech of Vishvamitra were completely vanquished by 
Shakti, son of Vasishtha; and the son of Gadhi (Vishvamitra) being so 
overcome, became dejected.” 

Here is the reason why Sudas threw Shakti into fire. Obviously, 
Sudas did it to avenge the dishonour and disgrace caused to 
Vishvamitra. Nothing could avert a deadly enmity growing up 
between Sudas and Vasishtha. 


1 There is no direct evidence for this, Tradition accepts this as correct which seems 
to have been based upon Rig Veda, III. 53.9. This is confirmed by Yaska in his Niruktu 
(II, 24) where he says, “They then relate a story. The rishi Vishvamitra was the purohita 
of Sudas, the son of Pijavana.” 

2. This is referred to by Sayana in his introduction to Rig Veda, vii.32 on the 
authority of the Anukramanika which is quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p, 328. 

3 This is referred to by Sayana in his introduction to verses 15 and 16 of Sukta 
53 of the Third Mandala of the Rig Veda, which is quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 343. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


151 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 151 

This enmity does not seem to have ended with Sudas and 
Vasishtha. It appears to have spread to their sons. This is supported 
by the Taittiriya Samhita which says 

“Vasishtha, when his son had been slain, desired, ‘May I obtain 
offspring; may I overcome the Saudasas.’ He beheld this ekasmannapanchasa, 
he took it and sacrificed with it. In consequence he obtained offspring, 
and overcame the Saudasas.” 

This is confirmed by the Kaushitaki Brahmana 1 2 which says : 

“Vasishtha, when his son had been slain, desired, ‘May I be fruitful 
in offspring and cattle and overcome the Saudasas. He beheld this form 
of offering, the Vasishtha-sacrifice; and having performed it, he overcame 
the Saudasas. 3 " 


II 

The conflict between Sudas and Vasishtha is not the only conflict 
between kings and the Brahmins. The Puranas record other conflicts 
also between kings and Brahmins. It is desirable to assemble them 
here. The first relates to king Vena. The story of his conflict with 
Brahmins has been told by various authorities. The following account 4 
is taken from the Harivamsa : 

“There was formerely a Prajapati (Lord of creatures), a protector of 
righteousness called Anga, of the race of Atri, and resembling him in power. 
His son was the Prajapati Vena who was but indifferently skilled in duty, 
and was born of Sunita, the daughter of Mrityu. This son of the daughter 
of Kala (Death), owing to the taint derived from his maternal grandfather, 
threw his duties behind his back, and lived in covetousness under the 
influence of desire. This king established an irreligious system of conduct; 
transgressing the ordinances of the Veda, he was devoted to lawlessness. In 
his reign men lived without study of the sacred books and without the 
Vashatkara, and the gods had no Soma libations to drink at sacrifices. ‘No 
sacrifice or oblation shall be offered’ — such was the ruthless determination 
of that Prajapati, as the time of his destruction approached. ‘I,’ he declared,’ 
am the object, and the performer of sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself; it is 
to me that sacrifice should be presented, and oblations offered.’ This 
transgressor of the rules of duty, who arrogated to himself what was not 
his due, was then addressed by all the great rishis headed by Marichi: ‘We 
are about to consecrate ourselves for a ceremony which shall last for many 

1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 328. 

2 Ibid. 

3 There seems to be some doubt whether this enmity of Vasishtha had developed 
against Sudas or against the sons of Sudas. This doubt has arisen because the 
Satyayana and Kaushitaki Brahmanas speak of Saudasa, thereby suggesting that the 
quarrel of Vasishtha was with the sons of Sudas and not with Sudas. On the other 
hand, Manu is definite that it was Sudas who was the offender. Shadgurushishya speaks 
of Sudas and not Saudasas while the Brihaddevta in a similar passage gives Sudas. 
The difficulty could be solved if Saudasas was interpreted to be the family of Sudas, 
which includes both Sudas and his sons. 

4 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 302. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

years; practise not unrighteousness, 0 Vena; this is not the eternal rule of 
duty. Thou art in very deed a Prajapati of Atri’s race, and thou hast engaged 
to protect thy subjects.’ The foolish Vena, ignorant of what was right, 
laughingly answered those great rishis, who had so addressed him; ‘who but 
myself is the ordainer of duty? or whom ought I to obey? Who on earth equals 
me in sacred knowledge, in prowess, in austere fervour, in truth? Ye, who 
are deluded and senseless, know not that I am the source of all beings and 
duties. Hesitate not to believe that I, if I willed, could bum up the earth, 
or deluge it with water, or close up heaven and earth.’ When owing to his 
delusion and arrogance Vena could not be governed, then the mighty rishis 
becoming incensed, seized the vigorous and struggling king, and rubbed his 
left thigh. From this thigh, so rubbed, was produced a black man, very short 
in stature, who, being alarmed, stood with joined hands. Seeing that he was 
agitated, Atri said to him ‘Sit down’ (nishida). He became the founder of the 
race of the Nishadas, and also progenitor of the Dhivaras (fisherman), who 
sprang from the corruption of Vena.” 

The next king who came in conflict with the Brahmins was 
Pururavas. This Pururavas is the son of Ila and grandson of Manu 
Vaivasvat. The details of his conflict with the Brahmins are given 
in the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata : 1 

“Subsequently, the wise Pururavas was born of Ila, who, as we have heard, 
was both his father and his mother. Ruling over the thirteen islands of the 
ocean, and surrounded by beings who were all superhuman, himself a man 
of great renown, Pururavas, intoxicated by his prowess, engaged in a conflict 
with the Brahmins, and robbed them of their jewels, although they loudly 
remonstrated. Sanatkumara came from Brahma’s heaven, and addressed to 
him an admonition, which, however, he did not regard. Being then straight- 
away cursed by the incensed rishis, he perished, this covetous monarch, who, 
through pride of power, had lost his understanding.” 

The third king in this series is Nahusha. This Nahusha is the 
grandson of Pururavas, the account of whose conflict with the 
Brahmins has been recounted above. The story of Nahusha and his 
conflict with the Brahmins has been told in two places in the 
Mahabharata, once in the Vanaparvan and again in the Udyogaparvan. 
The account which follows is taken from the Udyogaparvan . 2 It says: 

After his slaughter of the demon Vritra, Indra became alarmed at the idea 
of having taken the life of a Brahmin (for Vritra was regarded as such), and 
hid himself in the waters. In consequence of the disappearance of the king of 
the gods, all affairs, celestial as well as terrestrial, fell into confusion. The rishis 
and gods then applied to Nahusha to be their king. After first excusing himself 
on the plea of want of power, Nahusha at length, in compliance with their 

1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 307. 

2 Quoted in Muir, Vol. I, pp. 310-313. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


153 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 153 

solicitations, accepted the high function. Up to the period of his elevation 
he had led a virtuous life, but he now became addicted to amusement and 
sensual pleasure; and even aspired to the possession of Indrani, Indra’s wife, 
whom he had happened to see. The queen resorted to the Angiras Brihaspati, 
the preceptor of the gods who engaged to protect her. Nahusha was greatly 
incensed on hearing of this interference; but the gods endeavoured to pacify 
him, and pointed out the immorality of appropriating another person’s wife. 
Nahusha, however, would listen to no remonstrance, and insisted that in his 
adulterous designs he was no worse than Indra himself. The renowned Ahalya, 
a rish’s wife, was formerely corrupted by Indra in her husband’s lifetime. 
Why was he not prevented by you? And many barbarous acts, and unrighteous 
deeds, and frauds were perpetrated of old by Indra; why was he not prevented 
by you?’ The gods, urged by Nahusha, went to bring Indrani; but Brihaspati 
would not give her up. At his recommendation, however, she solicited Nahusha 
for some delay, till she should ascertain what had become of her husband. 
This request was granted. Indrani now went in search of her husband; and 
by the help of Upashruti (the goddess of night and revealer of secrets) 
discovered him existing in a very subtle form in the stem of a lotus growing 
in a lake situated in a continent within an ocean north of the Himalayas. 
She made known to him the wicked intentions of Nahusha, and entreated 
him to exert his power, rescue her from danger and resume his dominion. 
Indra declined any immediate interposition on the plea of Nahusha’s superior 
strength; but suggested to his wife a device by which the usurper might be 
hurled from his position. She was recommended to say to Nahusha that ‘if 
he would visit her on a celestial vehicle borne by rishis, she would with 
pleasure submit herself to him.’ 

The queen of the gods accordingly made this proposal:’ I desire for thee, 
king of the gods, a vehicle hitherto unknown, such as neither Vishnu nor 
Rudra, nor the Asuras, nor the Rakshasas employ. Let the eminent rishis, 
all united, bear thee, lord, in a car; this idea pleases me’. Nahusha receives 
favourably this appeal to his vanity, and in the course of his reply thus gives 
utterance to his self-congratulation; ‘He is a personage of no mean prowess 
who makes the munis his bearers. I am a fervid devotee of great might, Lord 
of the past, the future, and the present. If I were angry, the world would 
no longer stand; on me everything depends. Wherefore, 0 goddess, I shall, 
without doubt, carry out what you propose. The seven rishis and all the 
Brahmin rishis, shall carry me. Behold, beautiful goddess, my majesty and 
my prosperity.’ 

The narrative goes on : 

Accordingly this wicked being, irreligious, violent, intoxicated by the 
force of conceit, and arbitrary in his conduct, attached to his car the rishis, 
who submitted to his commands, and compelled them to bear him. 
Indrani then again resorts to Brihaspati who assures her that vengeance 
will soon overtake Nahusha for his presumption; and promises that he 
will himself perform a sacrifice with a view to the destruction of the 
oppressor, and the discovery of Indra’s lurking place. Agni is then sent 
to discover and bring Indra to Brihaspati and the latter, on Indra’s arrival, 
informs him of all that had occurred during his absence. While 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Indra, with Kubera, Yama, Soma and Varuna was devising means for the 
destruction of Nahusha, the sage Agastya came up, congratulated Indra on 
the fall of his rival, and proceeded to relate how it had occurred. 

Wearied with carrying the sinner, Nahusha, the eminent divine-rishis, and 
the spotless Brahmin-rishis, asked that divine personage, Nahusha (to solve) 
a difficulty; ‘Dost thou, O Vasava, most excellent of conquerors, regard as 
authoritative or not those Brahmana texts which arc recited at the immolation 
of king?’ ‘No’, replied Nahusha, whose understanding was enveloped in 
darkness. The rishis rejoined; ‘Engaged in unrighteousness, thou attainest 
not unto righteousness; these tests, which were formerely uttered by great 
rishis, arc regarded by us as authoritative.’ Then (proceeds Agastya) disputing 
with the munis, Nahusha impelled by unrighteousness touched me on the 
head with his foot. In consequence of this, the king’s glory was smitten and 
his prosperity departed. When he had instantly become agitated and oppressed 
with fear, I said to him, ‘Since thou, a fool, condemnest that sacred text, 
always held in honour, which has been composed by former sages, and 
employed by Brahmin-rishis and hast touched my head with thy foot, and 
employest the Brahma-like and irresistible rishis as bearers to carry thee, 
therefore, shorn of thy lustre and all thy merit exhuasted, sink down, sinner, 
degraded from heaven to earth. For ten thousand years thou shalt crawl in 
the form of a huge serpent. When that period is completed, thou shalt again 
ascend to heaven.’ So fell that wicked wretch from the sovereignty of the 
gods, Happily, 0 Indra, we shall now prosper, for the enemy of the Brahmins 
has been smitten. Take possession of the three worlds, and protect their 
inhabitants, 0 husband of Shachi (Indrani), subduing the senses, overcoming 
thine enemies, and celebrated by the great rishis.” 

The fourth king to come into conflict with the Brahmins was Nimi. 
The details of the story are related in the Vishnu Purana 1 which says: 

“Nimi had requested the Brahmin-rishi, Vasishtha to officiate at a sacrifice, 
which was to last a thousand years. Vasishtha in reply pleaded a pro- 
engagement to Indra for five hundred years, but promised to return at the 
end of that period. The king made no remark, and Vasishtha went away, 
supposing that he had assented to his arrangement. On his return, however, 
the priest discovered that Nimi had retained Gautama (who was, euqally with 
Vasishtha a Brahmin-rishi) and others to perform the sacrifice; and being 
incensed, he cursed the King, who was then asleep, to lose his corporeal form. 
When Nimi awoke and learnt that he had been cursed without any previous 
warning, he retorted by uttering a similar curse on Vasishtha, and then died. 
Nimi’s body was embalmed. At the close of the sacrifice which he had begun, 
the gods were willing, on the intercession of the priests, to restore him to 
life; but he declined the offer; and was placed by the deities, according to 
his desire, in the eyes of all living creatures. It is in consequence of this 
that they are always opening and shutting (Nimisha means ‘the twinkling 
of the eye’). 

These foregoing cases of conflict have been referred to by Manu 
in his Smriti ; 2 

1 Quoted by Muir, Vol. I, p. 316. 

2 Max Muller’s, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXV, p. 222. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-09 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013 10-11-2013 


155 


THE SHUDRAS : BRAHMINS VERSUS SHUDRAS 155 

“Through a want of modesty many kings have perished, together with 
their belongings; through modesty even hermits in the forest have gained 
kingdoms. Through a want of humility Vena perished, likewise king 
Nahusha, Sudas, the son of Pijavana, Sumukha, and Nimi.” 

Unfortunately, the bearing of these cases on the position of the 
Shudra has not been realized as fully as it should have been. The 
reason is that nobody has realized that this conflict was a conflict 
between Brahmins and Shudras. Sudas definitely was a Shudra. The 
others although they have not been described as Shudras are 
described as having been descended from Ikshvaku. Sudas is also 
described as a descendant of Ikshvaku. There is nothing far-fetched 
in saying that they were all Shudras. Even Manu had no idea of this. 
He represents these cases as cases of conflict between Brahmins and 
Kshatriyas. Dr. Muir has failed to realize that Sudas was a Shudra 
and has in recounting these stories represented that the parties to 
these conflicts were Brahmins on the one hand and the Kshatriyas 
on the other. In a sense, it is true that the conflict was between 
Brahmins and Kshatriyas because the Shudras were also a branch 
of the Kshatriyas. It would, however, have been far more illuminating 
if they had been described in more precise terms as conflicts between 
Brahmins and Shudras. The misunderstanding having been caused, 
it has remained and has continued to conceal the real nature of so 
important a part of the history of the Indo-Aryan society. It is to 
clear this misunderstanding that the hearing given to this Chapter 
is ‘Brahmins versus Shudras’ and not ‘Brahmins versus Kshatriyas’. 
Understood as a history of conflict between Brahmins and Shudras, 
it helps one to understand how the Shudras came to be degraded 
from the second to the fourth Varna. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


156 


CHAPTER X 

THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 


WHAT is the technique which the Brahmins employed to bring about 
the degradation of the Shudras from the rank of the second to the 
rank of the fourth Varna? 

The discussion has so far centred round two questions as to whether 
or not the Shudras were originally a part of the second or Kshatriya 
Varna and whether or not the Brahmins had not received sufficient 
provocation to degrade the Shudras. It is now necessary to deal with 
the question, which is logically, next in order of sequence. What is 
the technique of degradation employed by the Brahmins? 

My answer to the question is that the technique employed by the 
Brahmins for this purpose was to refuse to perform the Upanayana 
of the Shudras. I have no doubt that it is by this technique that 
the Brahmins accomplished their end and thereby wreaked their 
vengeance upon the Shudras. 

It is perhaps necessary to explain what Upanayana means and 
what importance it had in the Indo-Aryan Society. The best way to 
give an idea of Upanayana is to give a description of the ceremony. 

As a rite Upanayana was originally a very simple ceremony, The 
boy came to the teacher with a samidh (a grass blade) in his hand 
and told the teacher that he desired to become a Brahmachari (i.e 
a student) and begged the teacher to allow him to stay with him 
for purposes of study. At a later date it became a very elaborate 
ceremony. How elaborate it had become may be realised from the 
following description of Upanayana in the Ashvalayana Grihya 
Sutra 

Let him initiate the boy who is decked, whose hair (on the head) is shaved 
(and arranged), who wears a new garment or an antelope skin if a Brahmana, 
rum skin if a Kshatriya, a goat’s skin if a Vaishya; if they put on garments they 


1 Kane, History of Dharmashastra, Vol. II (i), pp. 281-283. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


157 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 157 

should put on dyed ones, reddish-yellow, red and yellow (for a Brahmana, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya respectively); they should have girdles and staffs (as 
described above). While the boy takes hold of (the hand of) his teacher, the 
latter offers (a homa of clarified butter oblations) in the fire ( as described 
above), and seats himself to the north of the fire with his face turned to 
the east, while the other one (the boy) stations himself in front (of the teacher) 
with his face turned to the west. The teacher then fills the folded hands of 
both himself and of the boy with water and with the verse ‘we choose that 
of Savitri’ (Rg.V. 82.1) the teacher drops down the water in his own folded 
hands on to the water in the folded hands of the boy; having thus poured 
the water, he should seize with his own hand the boy’s hand together with 
the thumb (of the boy) with the formula’ by the urge (or order) of the god 
Savitri, with the arms of the two Ashvins, with the hands of Pushan, I seize 
thy hand, oh so, and so,’ with the words ‘Savitri has seized thy hand, oh 
so and so’ a second time (the teacher seizes the boy’s hand) with the words 
‘Agni is thy teacher oh so and so’ a third time. The teacher should cause 
(the boy, to look at the sun, while the teacher repeats ‘God Savitri, this is 
thy brahmachari protect him, may he not die’ and (the teacher should further) 
say Whose brahmachari art thou? thou art the brahmachari of Prana. Who 
does initiate thee and whom (docs he initiate)? I give thee to Ka (to Prajapati).’ 
With the half verse (Rg. III. 8. 4) ‘the young man well attired and dressed, 
come hither’ he (the teacher) should cause him to turn round to the right 
and with his two hands placed over (the boy’s) shoulders he should touch 
the place of the boy’s heart repeating the latter half (of Rg. III. 8.4). Having 
wiped the ground round the fire, the brahmachari should put (on the fire) 
a fuel stick silently, since it is known (from sruti) ‘what belongs to Prajapati 
is silently done,’ and the brahmachari belongs to Prajapati. Some do this 
(offering of a fuel stick) with a mantra to Agni: ‘I Have brought a fuel stick, 
to the great Jatavedas; by the fuel stick mayest thou increase, Oh agni and 
may we (increase) through brahman’ (prayer or spiritual lore), svaha.’ Having 
put the fuel stick (on the fire) and having touched the fire, he (the student) 
thrice wipes off his face with the words ‘I anoint myself with lustre,’ it is 
known (from sruti) for he does anoint himself with lustre. ‘May Agni bestow 
on me, insight, offspring and lustre: on me may Indra bestow insight, offspring 
and vigour (Indriya) ;on me may the sun bestow insight, offspring and 
radiance; what thy lustre is, Oh Agni, may I thereby become lustrous; what 
the strength is, Agni, may I thereby become strong; what thy consuming power 
is, Agni, may I thereby acquire consuming power.’ Having waited upon 
(worshipped) Agni with these formulae, (the student) should bend his knees, 
embrace (the teachers feet) and say to him ‘recite, Sir, recite, Sir, the Savitri.’ 
Seizing the student’s hands with the upper garment (of the student) and his 
own hands, the teacher recites the Savitri first pada by pada, then hemistich 
by hemistich (and lastly) the whole verse. He (the teacher) should make him 
(the student) recite (the Savitri) as much as he is able. On the place of the 
student’s heart the teacher lays his hand with the fingers upturned with the 
formula ‘I place thy heart unto duty to me, may thy mind follow my mind; 
may you attend on my words single-minded; may Brihaspati appoint thee 
unto me.’ Having tied the girdle round him (the boy) and having given him 
the staff, the teacher should instruct him in the observances of a brahmachari 
with the words ‘a brahmachari art thou, sip water, do service, do not 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sleep by day, depending (completely) on the teacher learn the Veda.’ He (the 
student) should beg (food) in the evening and the morning; he should put 
a fuel stick (on fire) in the evening and morning. That (which he has received 
by begging) he should announce to the teacher; he should not sit down (but 
should be standing) the rest of the day. 

The Upanayana ends with the teaching by the Acharya to the boy 
of the Vedic Mantra known as the Gayatri Mantra. Why the Gayatri 
Mantra is regarded as so essential as to require the ceremony of 
Upanayana before it is taught it is difficult to say. 

From this description of the Upanayana ceremony two things are 
clear. First is that the purpose of Upanayana was to initiate a person 
in the study of the Vedas which commenced with the teaching of 
Gayatri Mantra by the Acharya to the Brahmachari. The second thing 
that is clear is that certain articles were regarded as very essential 
for the Upanayana ceremony. They are (1) two garments one for the 
lower part of the body technically called Vasa and the other for the 
upper part of the body called Uttariya, (2) Danda or wooden staff, 
(3) Mekhala or a girdle of grass tied across the waist. 

Any one who compares this description of Upanayana as it was 
performed in ancient times with the details of the ceremony as 
performed in later days is bound to be surprised at the absence of 
any mention of thread called Yajnopavita to be worn by the 
Brahmachari as a part of his Upanayana. The centre of the modern 
ceremony of Upanayana is the wearing of this thread and the whole 
purpose of the Upanayana has come to be the wearing of this 
Yajnopavita 1 So important a part this Yajnopavita has come to play 
that most elaborate rules have come to be framed about its manu- 
facture and its use. 

The Yajnopavita should have three threads, each thread to be of 
nine strands well twisted. One tantu (strand) stands for one devata 
(deity). 

The Yajnopavita should reach as far as the navel, 2 should not reach 
beyond the navel, nor should it be above the chest. 

1. Yajnavalkya (T, 16 and 133) calls It Bramhu Sutra, 

2. Kane, D.S. H (i), p. 292. 

The nine devatas of the nine tantus (strands) according to the Devala Smriti are, 
Omkara, Agni, Naga, Sema, Pitris, Prajapati, Vayu, Surya, Vishvcdeva. Some change 
seems to have come about in this view. For Medhatithi (see Kane) says that in ishtis, 
animal sacrifices and soma sacrifices, the Yajnopavita was to have only one thread 
of three tantus, but it was three-fold in three classes of ahina, ekahu and sattra 
sacrifices as they required three fires, and in the seven somasamstha seven-fold, and 
five-fold when viewed with reference to the three savanas and two samdhyas. 

A brahmachari was to wear only one yajnopavita, and samnyasins, when they kept 
yajnopavita at all, also wore only one. A snataka (i.e., one who has returned from 
the teacher’s house after brahmacharya) and householder were to wear two, while one 
who desired long life may wear more than two. A snataka should always wear two 
yajnopavitas, A householder may wear any number up to ten. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


159 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 159 

A person could wear more than one Yajnopavita, 

A man must always wear Yajnopavita. If he took his meals without 
wearing the Yajnopavita, or answers the call of nature without having 
the Yajnopavita placed on the right ear, he had to undergo prayascitta, 
viz., to bathe, to mutter prayers and fast. 

Wearing of another’s Yajnopavita along with several other things 
(such as shoes, ornament, garland and kamandalu) is forbidden. 1 

Three ways of wearing the Yajnopavita are recognized: (1) nivita, 
(2) pracinavita and (3) upavita. When the cord is carried over the 
neck, both shoulders and the chest and is held with both the thumbs 
(of the two hands) lower than the region of the heart and above the 
navel, it is called nivita. Suspending the cord over the left shoulder 
in such a way that it hangs down on his right side, it becomes upavita. 
Suspending it on his right shoulder in such a way that it hangs down 
on his left side, it becomes pracinavita. 

How did this Yajnopavita come in? Mr. Tilak offers an explanation 2 
which is worth quoting. Mr. Tilak says : 

“Orion or Mrigashiras is called Prajapati in the Vedic works, otherwise called 
Yajna. A belt or girdle of cloth round the waist of Orion or Yajna will therefore 
be naturally named after him as Yajnopavita, the upavita or the cloth of 
yajna. 

The term, however, now denotes the sacred thread of the Brahmins, and it 
may naturally be asked whether it owes its character, if not the origin, to 
the belt of Orion. I think it docs on the following grounds: 

The word yajnopavita is derived by all native scholars from Yajna + Upavita; 
but there is a difference of opinion as to whether we should understand the 
compound to mean an upavita for yajna i.e for sacrificial purposes, or, whether 
it is the ‘upavita of Yajnas.’ The former is not incorrect, but authority is 
in favour of the latter. Thus the Prayoga-writers quote a smriti to the effect 
that ‘the High Soul is termed Yajna by the hotris, this is his upavita; therefore 
it is yajna-upavita.’ A mantra, which is recited on the occasion of wearing 
the sacred thread means, ‘I bind you with the upavita of yajna”, while the 
first half of the general formula with which a Brahmin always puts on his 
sacred thread is as follows: 

TWTfsTJf 

The Mantra is not to be found in any of the existing Samhitas, but is given 
in the Brahmopanishad and by Baudhayana. This verse is strikingly similar to 
the verse quoted above from the Haoma Ycsht. It says, ‘yajnopavita is high and 
sacred; it was born with Prajapati, of old.’ The word purastat corresponds with 
paurvanim in the Avesta verse and thus decides the question raised by Dr. Haug, 

1. Kane. History of Dharmashastra Vol. II, (1), p. 293. 

2. Orion, pp, 144-146. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

while sahaja, born with the limbs of Prajapati, conveys the same meaning 
as mainyutastem. The coincidence between these verses cannot be acci- 
dental, and it appears to me that the sacred thread must be derived from 
the belt of Orion. Upavita, from ve to weave, literally means a piece of 
cloth and not a thread. It appears, therefore, that a cloth worn round the 
waist was the primitive form of yajnopavita, and that the idea of sacredness 
was introduced by the theory that it was to be a symbolic representation 
of Prajapati’s waistcloth or belt.” 

This explanation by Mr. Tilak is no doubt very interesting. But 
it does not help to explain some of the difficulties. It does not explain 
the relation of the Yajnopavita to the two garments the Uttariya, and 
the vasa, which are necessary for a person to wear while undergoing 
Upanayana. Was the Yajnopavita in addition to the two garments? 
If so, how is it that there is no mention of it in the early description 
of the ceremony of the Upanayana ? It does not explain another 
difficulty. If that thread is a substitute for the cloth, how is it that 
the wearing of the cloth is retained in the Upanayana ? 

There seems to be another explanation. I offer it for what it is 
worth. According to it, the wearing of the thread had to do with the 
adoption of the gotra. Its object was to tie oneself to a particular 
gotra. It had nothing to do with the Upanayana as such, the object 
of which was to initiate a person in the study of the Vedas. It is 
not sufficiently realized that under the Ancient Aryan Law, a son 
did not naturally inherit the gotra of his father. The father had to 
perform a special ceremony to give his gotra to his son. It is only 
when this ceremony was performed that the son became the same 
gotra as the father. In this connection, reference may be made to 
two rules observed by the Indo-Aryan Society. One is the rule of 
impurities. The other is the rule of adoption. With regard to the rule 
of impurity, brought about by death, the days of impurity vary with 
the kinship with the dead. If the kinship is very close, the days of 
impurity are greater than those in the case where the kinship is less 
close. The impurities attached to the death of a boy who has not been 
invested with the thread are very meagre , 1 not extending for more than 
a few days. With regard to the rule of adoption , 2 it lays down that a 
boy who was invested with the thread was not eligible for adoption. 
What is the idea behind these rules? The idea seems to be quite clear. 
The impurities are nominal because there being no thread, the boy had 
not formally entered into the gotra of his father. Adoption means 

1. See Manu Smriti, Chapter V, Verses 66-70, 

2. Kalikapurana quoted by Vyavahara Mayukha, edited by Kane, p. 114. This 
plea hat been taken in various cases in Courts by litigants to which Mr. Kane makes 
references. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


161 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 161 

entering into the gotra of the adoptive father. Once the thread 
ceremony had taken place the boy had already and irrevocably 
entered another gotra. 

There was no room for adoption left. Both these rules show that 
the thread ceremony was connected with gotra and not with Upanayana. 

The view that the thread has connection with gotra seems to receive 
support from Jain literature. Shloka 87 of the fourth Parvan of the 
Padmapurana by Acharya Ravishena reads as follows 

“Bhagwan ! you have told us the origin of Kshatriya, Vaishya and 

Shudra. I am anxious to know the origin of those who wear the thread 

in their neck.” 

The words ‘those who wear the thread in the neck’ are very 
important. There is no doubt that it is a description of the Brahmins. 
From this it is clear that there was a time when the Brahmins alone 
wore the thread and no other class did. Read with the fact that the 
gotra relationship was confined only to the Brahmins, it is clear that 
the thread ceremony was connected with bringing the boy into — 
actually tying him up to the gotra — of his father, and had nothing 
to do with Upanayana which was connected with the initiation in 
the teaching of the Vedas. 

If this is true, then the thread ceremony and the Upanayana 
ceremony had different purposes to serve. At some later date the two 
merged into one. The reason for this merger appears to be very 
natural. The Upanayana without the thread ceremony involved the 
danger of the Acharya taking the boy in his gotra. It was to avoid 
the danger that the father of the boy performed the thread ceremony 
before handing him over to the Acharya. This is the probable reason 
why the two ceremonies came to be performed simultaneously. 

Be that as it may, Upanayana means the teaching of the Veda by 
the Vedic Brahmin. 


Ill 

While I am convinced that my thesis is sound, it would be over 
confident to think that there will not be found persons who will not 
raise objections to it. I anticipate the following : 

(1) Is absence of Upanayana the test of Shudradom; 

(2) Did the Shudra ever have the right to Upanayana ? 


1 Quoted by Nathuram Premi in his Jain Sahitya our Itihas (Hindi), p. 55a, 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(3) How can the loss of Upanayana result in the general degra- 

dation of Shudras? 

(4) What power did the Brahmins have to deny Upanayana to the 

Shudras? 

Having stated the possible objections to my thesis, I like to give 
my reply to them. 


IV 

To begin with the first. The best way to deal with this objection 
is to refer to the judicial decisions in order to find out what the Courts 
in India have regarded as the surest criterion for determining who 
is a Shudra. 

The first case to which reference may be made is to be found in 
7, M.I.A.18. 1 It was decided by the Privy Council in 1837. The question 
at issue was whether at the relevant time there were in India any 
Kshatriyas. The contention of one side was that there were. The 
contention on the other side was that there were none. The latter 
contention was based upon the theory propagated by the Brahmins 
that the Brahmin Parashurama had killed all the Kshatriyas and that 
if any were left they were all exterminated by the Shudra king 
Mahapadma Nanda, so that thereafter there were no Kshatriyas left 
and that there were only Brahmins and Shudras. The Privy Council 
did not accept this theory which they regarded as false and concocted 
by the Brahmins and held that the Kshatriyas still existed in India. 
The Privy Council did not however lay down any test by which a 
Kshatriya could be distinguished from a Shudra. In their view, the 
question must be determined in each case on its own facts. 

The second case on the subject is to be found in I.L.R.10 Cal. 688. 2 
The question raised in the case was whether the Kayasthas of Bihar 
were Kshatriyas or Shudras. The High Court decided that they were 
Shudras. The partisans of the Kayasthas took the position that the 
Kayasthas of Bihar were different from the Kayasthas of Bengal, the 
Upper Provinces and Benares and that while those in the Upper 
Provinces and Benares were Shudras, the Kayasthas of Bihar were 
Kshatriyas. The court refused to make this distinction and held that 
the Kayasthas of Bihar were also Shudras. 


1. Chuohirya Run Murdan Syn Versus Sahub Purhulad Syn. 

2. Raj Coomar Lall versus Bissessur Dyal. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


163 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 163 

The validity of this judgement was not accepted by the Allahabad 
High Court. In I.L.R.12 All. 328, 1 Justice Mahamood at page 334 
observed as follows : 

“I entertain considerable doubts as to the soundness of the view which seems 
to have been adopted by both the Courts below, that the literary caste of 
Kayasthas in this part of the country, to which the parties belong, falls under 
the category of Shudras, as understood in the division of mankind in the 
Institute of Manu or elsewhere in authoritative texts of the Hindu Law. The 
question is one of considerable difficulty not only ethnologically, but also from 
a legal point of view, so far as the administration of the Hindu Law to this 
important section of the population is concerned. I do not take the question 
to be settled by any adjudication of the Lords of the Privy Council either 
in Sri Narayan Miner vs. Sree Mutty Kishen Soondoory Dassee, 2 3 or in 
Makashova Shosinath Ghose vs. Srimati Krishna Soondari Dasi 3 in both of 
which the cases referred to adoption by Kayasthas of Lower Bengal, who may 
be distinguishable from the twelve castes of Kayasthas in Upper India, such 
as the North-western Provinces and Oudh. Nor do I think that the unreported 
decision of the learned Chief Justice and my brother Tyrell in Chaudhari 
Hazari Lai versus Bishnu Dial (First Appeal No. 113 of 1886, decided on 
the 15th June 1887), which was also an adoption case, settles the question. 
But I need not pursue the subject any further....” 

The third case is reported in (1916) 20 Cal. W.N.901 4 . Here the 
question raised was whether Kayasthas of Bengal were Kshatriyas 
or Shudras. The High Court of Calcutta held that they were Shudras. 
The case was taken to the Privy Council by way of appeal against 
the decision of the Calcutta High Court. The decision of the Privy 
Council is reported in (1926) 47 I. A. 140. The question whether the 
Bengali Kayasthas are Shudras or Kshatriyas was not decided upon 
by the Privy Council but was left open. In between 1916 and 1926 
the Calcutta High Court gave two decisions which held that inter- 
marriages between Kayasthas of Bengal and Tantis 5 and Domes 6 two 
of the low castes, were legal on the ground that both of them were 
sub-castes of Shudras. 

These decisions which caused further deterioration in the position 
of the Kayasthas were followed by another which is reported in 
I.L.R. 6 Patna 506. 7 In a most elaborate judgement extending over 
47 pages Mr. Justice Jwala Prasad went into every Purana and every 

1. Tulsi Ram versus Behari Lai. 

2. L. R. I. A. Sup., Vol. 149. 

3. L. R. 7,1.A., 250. 

4. Asita Mohan Ghosh versus Nirod Mohan Ghosh Maulik. 

5. (1921) 48 Cal. 626. Bishwanath Ghosh versus Srimati Balai Desai. 

6. (1924) 51 Cal. 788. Bholanalh Mitter versus King Emperor. 

7. (1926) Ishwari Prasad versus Rai Hari Prasad Lai. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Smriti in which there was a reference to the Kayasthas. He differed 
from the Calcutta High Court and held that the Kayasthas of Bihar 
were Kshatriyas. 

Next come cases in which the question at issue was whether the 
Maharattas are Kshatriyas or Shudras. The first case in which this 
issue was raised is reported in 48 Mad. I. 1 This was an interpleader 
suit filed by the Receiver of the estate of Raja of Tanjore in which 
all the descendants as well as the distant agnates and cognates of 
the Raja were made defendants in the suit. The kingdom of Tanjore 
was founded by Venkoji, otherwise called Ekoji, who was a Mahratta 
and the brother of Shivaji the founder of the Mahratta Empire. The 
judgement in the case covers 229 pages and the question whether 
the Mahrattas were Kshatriyas was dealt with in a most exhausitve 
manner. The decision of the Madras High Court was that the 
Mahrattas were Shudras and not Kshatriyas as was contended by 
the defendants. 

The next case which also relates to the Mahrattas is reported in 
I.L.R. (1928) 52 Bom. 497. 2 The Court decided that : 

“There are three classes among the Mahratthas in the Bombay Presi- 
dency: (1) the five families; (2) the ninety-six families; (3) the rest Of these, 

the first two classes are legally Kshatriyas.” 

The last case to which reference may be made is reported in I.L.R. 
(1927) 52 Mad. I. 3 The issue was whether the Yadavas of Madura 
were Kshatriyas. The Yadavas claimed themselves to be Kshatriyas. 
But the Madras High Court negatived the claim and held that they 
were Shudras. 

Such is the course of judicial pronouncements on the issue as to 
how to determine who is a Kshatriya and who is a Shudra. It is a 
most confusing medley of opinion which settles little and unsettles 
much. The Kayasthas of Bihar, of the Upper Provinces (now U.P) and 
Benares are Kshatriyas, while the Kayasthas of Bengal are Shudras!! 
According to the Madras High Court all Mahrattas are Shudras. But 
according to the Bombay High Court, Mahrattas belonging to five 
families and 96 families are Kshatriyas and the rest are Shudras!! 
The Yadava community to which Krishna belonged is popularly 
believed to be Kshatriyas. But according to the Madras High Court, 
the Yadavas are Shudras!! 

1. (1924) Maharaja of Kolhapur versus Sundaram Ayyar. 

2. Subbarao Hambirao Palil vera? Radha Hambirao Patil. 

3. Mokka Kone versus Ammakutti. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


165 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 165 

More important for our purpose are the criteria which the courts 
have adopted in coming to their decisions than the particular 
decisions in the cases referred to. Among the criteria which the courts 
have laid down, the following may be noted : 

(1) In I.L.R. 10 Cal. 688, the criteria adopted were (i) use of Das 

as surname, (ii) wearing the sacred thread, (iii) ability to 
perform the homa, (iv) the period of impurity; (v) competence 
or incompetence of illegitimate sons to succeed. 

(2) In I.L.R. 6 Patna 606, the criterion seems to be general repute. 

If a community is Kshatriya by general repute it is to be 
treated as a Kshatriya community. 

(3) In 48 Madras 1, a variety of criteria were adopted. One was 

the consciousness of the community. The second was under- 
going the ceremony of Upanayana as distinguished from 
wearing the sacred thread. The third criterion was that all 
non-Brahmins are Shudras unless they prove that they are 
Kshatriyas or Vaishyas. 

(4) In I.L.R. Bom. 497, the tests adopted were (i) the consciousness 

of the caste (ii) its custom, and (iii) the acceptance of that 
consciousness by other castes. 

No one who knows anything about the subject can say that the 
criteria adopted by the various courts are the right ones. A criterion 
such as the period of impurity is irrelevant and of no value for 
determining the question. A criterion such as the capacity for 
performing homa is relevant but not valid. It mistakes effect for a 
cause. The criterion of consciousness is hardly a fair criterion. A 
community may have lost its consciousness by long disuse of nec- 
essary religious observances due to causes over which it has no 
control. The criterion of Upanayana stands on a different footing. The 
courts have not put it properly. But there is no doubt that rightly 
understood and properly put the criterion of Upanayana is sound. 
The Courts have not made any distinction between the de facto 
position of the community and its position de jure in regard to 
Upanayana, and have proceeded on the assumption that what is true 
de facto must also be true de jure. It is this fault in the application 
of the criterion of Upanayana which has produced anomalies and 
absurdities, such as one community having one status in one area 
and quite a different status in a different area — or allowing any 
pretender community to wear the thread and by continuing its 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

pretence for a period to acquire a vested right or contrariwise 
punishing a community by declaring that it had no de jure right to 
wear the thread merely because it has not been wearing it de facto. 
The real criterion is not the wearing of the sacred thread but the 
right to wear the sacred thread. Understood in its proper sense, it 
may be said without fear of contradiction that the right to Upanayana 
is the real and the only test of judging the status of a person whether 
he is a Shudra or a Kshatriya. 


V 

The second objection is quite untenable. To assume, as the objection 
does, that from the very beginning the Aryan Society treated its 
different classes differently in the matter of Upanayana is to my mind 
a very unnatural supposition. Primitive society does not begin with 
differentiation. It begins with uniformity and ends in diversity. The 
natural thing would be to suppose that in the matter of the 
Upanayana the ancient Aryan society treated all its classes on the 
same footing. It may however be argued, on the other side, that such 
an original tendency in favour of uniformity need not be accepted 
as being universal, that it may well be that in the ancient Aryan 
society the Shudras and the women were excluded from Upanayana. 
Fortunately for me, it is not necessary for me to rely on logic alone 
though I contend that logic is on my side. For there is ample evidence 
both circumstantial as well as direct to show that both Shudras as 
well as women had at one time the right to wear the sacred thread. 

That the ancient Aryan society regarded Upanayana as essential 
for all will be evident if the following facts are borne in mind. 

Upanayana was allowed for the deaf, the dumb, the idiot and even 
the impotent. A special procedure was prescribed for the Upanayana 
of the deaf and dumb and idiots. The principal points in which their 
Upanayana differs from that of others are that the offering of Samidh, 
treading on a stone, putting on a garment, the tying of mekhala, the 
giving of deer skin and staff are done silently, that the boy does not 
mention his name, it is the acharya himself who makes offering of 
cooked food or of clarified butter, all the mantras are muttered softly 
by the acharya himself. The same procedure is followed as to other 
persons who are impotent, blind, lunatic, suffering from such diseases 
as epilepsy, white leprosy or black leprosy, etc. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


167 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 167 

The six anuloma castes were also eligible for Upanayana; this is 
clear from the rules 1 for the Upanayana of Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and 
of mixed castes like Rathakara, Ambashtha, etc. 

Upanayana was permitted to Patitasavitrikas. The proper age for 
the Upanayana of a Brahman boy was 8th year from birth, of a 
Kshatriya 11th year and of a Vaishya 12th year. But a certain 
latitude was allowed so that the time for Upanayana was not deemed 
to have passed upon the 16th, the 22nd and the 24th year in the 
case of Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas respectively. After these 
years are passed without Upanayana taking place, a person was held 
to have become incompetent thereafter for learning the Savitri (the 
sacred Gayatri verse). Such persons were then called Patitasavitrika 
or savitripatita. According to the strict interpretation of rules, no 
Upanayana is to be thereafter performed for them, they are not to 
be taught the Veda, nor is anyone to officiate at their sacrifices and 
there is to be no social intercourse with them (i.e., no marriage takes 
place with them). But even in their case, there was readiness to relax 
the rules 2 subject to certain penances. 

Upanayana was permitted in the case of Brahmaghnas. A 
Brahmaghna is a person whose father or grandfather had failed to 
perform Upanayana. The original rule 3 was that if a person’s father 
and grandfather also had not the Upanayana performed for them then 
they (i.e., the three generations) are called slayers of brahma (holy 
prayers or lore); people should have no intercourse with them, should 
not take their food nor should enter into marriage alliance with them. 
But even in their case the rule was relaxed and they were allowed 
Upanayana if they desired, provided they performed the prescribed 
penance. 

1. Baud. Gr. Sutra (II. 8). Kane, History of Dharmashastra, II (1), p. 299. 

2. Ap. Dh. S., I. 1. 1 28-31, prescribes that after the 16th or 24th year, the person 
should undergo the rules of studenthood two months just as those who meant to study 
the three vedas and whose Upanayana has been performed, observe (viz., begging for 
food, etc.) then his Upanayana should be performed, then for one year he should bathe 
(thrice if possible) every day and then he should be taught the Veda. This is a somewhat 
easy penance. But others prescribe heavier penalties. Vas. Dh. S. XI. 76-79 and the 
Vaik. Smarta, 11.3 prescribes that one who is patitasavitrika should either perform 
the Uddalaka vrata or should take a bath along with the performer of an Ashvamedha 
sacrifice or should perform the Vratyastoma sacrifice. See Kane, ibid., p. 377. 

3. Ap. Dh. S., I. 1.1. 32-2. 4. The penance prescribed was that of observing the 
rules of studenthood one year for each generation (that had not the Upanayana 
performed) then there is Upanayana and then they have to bathe (thrice or once) every 
day for a year with certain mantras, viz., the seven Pavamani verses beginning with 
‘yad ami yacca durake’ (Rg. IX. 67. 21-27), with the Yajus Pavitra (Tai. S., I. 2.1. 
l=Rg. X. 17. 10) with the samapavitra and with the mantras called Angirasa (Rg. IV. 
40.5) or one may pour water only with the Vyahritis. After all this is done, one must 
be taught the Veda. See Kane, ibid., p. 378. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


168 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

A further relaxation was made in the case of a person whose 
generation beginning with the great grandfather had not the 
Upanayana performed on them . 1 Even they were allowed to have their 
Upanayana performed if they desired, provided they performed 
penance which included studenthood for twelve years and bath with 
the Pavamani, and other verses. On his Upanayana, instruction in 
the duties of the householder was imparted to him, and though he 
himself could not be taught the Veda, his son may have the samskara 
performed as in the case of one who is himself a patitasavitrika so 
that his son will be ‘one like other Arya’. 

Upanayana was permitted to the Vratyas. It is difficult to state 
exactly who the Vratyas were, whether they were Aryans who had 
for more than three generations failed to perform the Upanayana or 
whether they were non-Aryans who were never within the Aryan fold 
and whom the Brahmins wanted to convert to the Aryan faith. It 
is possible that it included both. Be that as it may, there is no doubt 
that Upanayana was open to the Vratyas provided they performed 
Vratyastomas. Vratyas were those who lead the Vratya life, were base 
and were reduced to a baser state since they did not observe 
studenthood (brahmacharya) nor did they till the soil nor engage in 
trade. There were four Vratyastomas, the first of which is meant for 
all Vratyas, the second is meant for those who are Abhishasta who 
are wicked or guilty of heavy sins and are censured and lead a Vratya 
life, the third for those who are the youngest and lead a Vratya life 
and the fourth for those who are very old and yet lead a Vratya life. 
In each of the four Vratyastomas, Sodasastoma 2 is always performed. 
It is by the Sodasastoma that they can attain this (superior status). 
The Sodasastoma was supposed to have the power to remove the guilt 
of these. By performing the Vratyastoma sacrifice, they should cease 
to be Vratyas and become eligible for social intercourse with the 
Orthodox Aryas, to have the sacrament ( samskara of Upanayana) 
performed of them and then be eligible to study the Veda. 

In the Vratyata-shuddisamgraha 3 provision is made for the puri- 
fication of Vratyas even after twelve generations subject to appro- 
priate penances. 

1. Ap. Dh S., 1.1. 2.5-10. 

2. Kane (ibid, p. 385) refers to the Tandya Brahmana 17.1.1 which tells the story 
that when the gods went to the heavenly world some dependents of theirs who lived 
the vratya life were left behind on the earth. Then through the favour of the gods 
the dependents got at the hands of Maruts the Sodasastoma (containing 16 stotras) 
and the metre (viz., anustubh ) and then the dependents secured heaven. 

3. Kane, ibid, p. 387 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


169 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 169 

Upanayana was so highly thought of that Baudhayana (ii.10) 
allowed Upanayana for the Asvattha tree. 

Given these facts, it is difficult to believe that the women and 
Shudras were excluded from the Upanayana by the Aryan society 
from the very beginning. In this connection, attention may be drawn 
to custom prevalent among the Indo-Iranians who were very closely 
related to the Indo-Aryans in their culture and religion. Among the 
Indo-Iranians, not only both men and women but men and women 
of all classes are invested with the sacred thread. It is for the 
opponents to prove why the system was different among the Indo- 
Aryans. 

It is, however, not quite necessary to depend upon circumstantial 
evidence. There is enough direct evidence to show that there was a 
time when both women and Shudras had the right to Upanayana and 
did have it performed. 

As to the Upanayana of women the statements 1 contained in the 
Hindu religious books are quite explicit. Anyone who examines them 
will find that Upanayana was open to women. Women not only 
learned the Vedas but they used to run schools for teaching the Vedas, 
are even known to have written commentaries on the Women Purva 
Mimamsa. 

As to the Shudras, the evidence is equally positive. If Sudas was 
a king, if Sudas was a Shudra, if his coronation ceremony was 
performed by Vasishtha and he performed the Rajasuya Yaga, then 
there can be no doubt that the Shudras did at one time wear the 
sacred thread. In addition to circumstantial evidence and the evidence 
of the authors mentioned before, the Sanskara Ganapati cited by Max 
Muller 2 contains an express provision declaring the Shudra to be 
eligible for Upanayana. 

The only difference between the women and the Shudras is that 
in the case of women there is some plausible explanation given as 
to why the Upanayana of women was stopped, while there is no such 
explanation for stopping the Upanayana of the Shudras. It is argued 
that the Upanayana of women continued as long as the age of 
Upanayana and the age of marriage continued to be different. It is said 
that in ancient times the age of Upanayana was 8 and the age for 
marriage was considerably later. But at a later stage, the age of 
marriage was brought down to 8, with the result that the Upanayana 


1. See Purushartha Number for September 1940 where all authorities are 
collected in one place. 

2. History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature (1860), p. 207. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


170 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as an independent ceremony ceased to exist and became merged in 
marriage. Whether this explanation is right or wrong is another 
matter. The point is that in the case of the Shudra, the Upanayana 
was at one time open to him, that it was closed to him at a later 
stage and that there is no explanation for this change. 

Those who, in spite of the evidence to which I have referred, think 
that they must insist upon their objection should remember the 
weakness of their side. Assuming that the Shudras had never had 
the benefit of Upanayana, the question they have to face is why were 
the Shudras not allowed the benefit of the Upanayana. The orthodox 
theory merely states the fact that there is no Upanayana for a 
Shudra. But it does not say why the Shudra is not to have his 
Upanayana performed. The explanation that there was no Upanayana 
of the Shudra because he was a non-Aryan is a modern invention 
which has been shown to be completely baseless. Either there was 
once an Upanayana and it was stopped or the Upanayana was from 
the very beginning withheld. Either may be true. But before one or 
the other is accepted to be true, it must be accompanied by reasons. 
There being no reason why the benefit of the Upanayana was withheld 
from the Shudra, the presumption must be in favour of my thesis 
which states that they had the right to Upanayana, that they were 
deprived of it and gives reasons why they were deprived of its validity. 


VI 

The third objection is no objection at all. Only a person who does 
not know fully all the incidents of Upanayana can persist in upholding 
its validity. 

The Aryan society regarded certain ceremonies as Samskaras. The 
Gautama Dharma Sutra (VIII. 14-24) gives the number of Samskaras 
as forty. They are : 

Garbhadhana Pumsavana, Simantonnayana, Jatakarma, namakarana, 
annaprasana, caula, Upanayana, the four vratas of the Veda, Snana (or 
Samavartana), vivaha, five daily mahayajnas (for deva, pitri, manushya, 
bhuta, and Brahma); seven pakayajnas (viz., astaka, parvanasthalipaka, 
sraddha sravani, agrahayani, caitri, asvayuji); seven haviryajnas (in which 
there is burnt offering but no Soma, viz., Agnyadheya, Agnihotra, 
Darsapurnamasa, Agrayana, Caturmasyas, Nirudhapasubandha and 
Sautramani); seven soma sacrifices (Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, Ukthya, 
Sodasin, Vajapeya, Atiratra, Aptoryama). 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


171 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 171 

At a late stage a distinction appears to have been drawn between 
Samskaras in the narrower sense and Samskaras in the wider sense. 
Samskaras in the wider sense were really sacrifices and were 
therefore not included in the Samskaras in the proper sense, which 
were reduced to sixteen. 

There is nothing strange about the Samskaras. Every society 
recognises them. For instance, the- Christians regard Baptism, 
Cofirmation, Matrimony, Extreme Unction, Eucharist, the Lord’s 
Supper and the Holy Communion as sacraments. There however 
seems to be a difference between the notions of the Indo-Aryans and 
say the Christians about the Samskaras. According to Christian 
notions, the Samskara or Sacrament is a purely spiritual matter- 
drawing in of God’s grace by particular rites. It had no social 
significance. Among the Indo-Aryans the Samskaras had originally 
a purely spiritual significance. This is clear from what Jaimini the 
author of the Purva Mimamsa has to say about the Samskaras. 
According to Jaimini the general theory is that Samskaras impart 
fitness. They act in two ways. They remove taints and they generate 
fresh qualities. Without such Samskaras, a person may not get the 
reward of his sacrifice on the ground that he is not fit to perform 
it. Upanayana was one of the Samskaras and like other Samskaras, 
its significance was just spiritual. The denial of the Upanayana to 
the Shudras necessarily brought about a change in its significance. 
In addition to its spiritual significance it acquired a social significance 
which it did not have before. 

When Upanayana was open to everyone, Aryan or non-Aryan, it 
was not a matter of social significance. It was a common right of 
all. It was not a privilege of the few. Once it was denied to the 
Shudras, its possession became a matter of honour and its denial 
a badge of servility. The denial of Upanayana to the Shudras 
introduced a new factor in the Indo Aryan society. It made the 
Shudras look up to the higher classes as their superiors and enabled 
the three higher classes to look down upon the Shudras as their 
inferiors. This is one way in which the loss of Upanayana brought 
about the degradation of the Shudras. 

There are other incidents of Upanayana. Since idea of these can be 
had if one refers to the rules laid down in the Purva Mimamsa 1 . One 


1 See Ganganath Jha, Purva Mimamsa, pp. 368-369 and 171-172. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of these rules is that all property is meant primarily for the purpose 
of providing a person with the means of performing a sacrifice. The 
right to property is dependent upon capacity to sacrifice . 1 In other 
words, anyone who suffers from an incapacity to perform a sacrifice 
has no right to property. Capacity to sacrifice depends upon Upanayana. 
This means that only those who are entitled to Upanayana have a 
right to own property. 

The second rule of the Purva Mimamsa is that a sacrifice must 
be accompanied by Veda mantras. This means that the sacrificer must 
have undergone a course in the study of the Veda. A person who 
has not studied the Vedas is not competent to perform the sacrifices. 
The study of the Veda is open only to those persons who have 
undergone the Upanayana ceremony. In other words, capacity to 
acquire knowledge and learning — which is what the study of Veda 
means-is dependent upon Upanayana. If there is no Upanayana the 
road to knowledge is closed. Upanayana is no empty ceremony. Right 
to property and right to knowledge are the two most important 
incidents of Upanayana. 

Those who cannot realise how loss of Upanayana can bring about 
the degradation of the Shudras should have no difficulty in under- 
standing the matter if they will bear in mind the rules of the Purva 
Mimamsa referred to above. Once the relation of Upanayana to 
education and property is grasped, all difficulty in accepting the 
thesis that the degradation of the Shudra was entirely due to loss 
of Upanayana must vanish. 

It will be seen, from what has been said above, how the sacrament 
of Upanayana was in the ancient Aryan society fundamental and how 
the social status and personal rights of persons depended upon it. 
Without Upanayana, a person was doomed to social degradation, to 
ignorance and to poverty. The stoppage of Upanayana was a most 
deadly weapon discovered by the Brahmins to avenge themselves 
against the Shudras. It had the effect of an atomic bomb. It did make 
the Shudra, to use the language of the Brahmins, a graveyard. 


1 Not a few are unable to understand why the Manu Smriti and other Smritis 
deny women and Shudra the right to hold property and to study the Vedas. All 
difficulty, however, vanishes if one bears in mind that the disabilities are the natural 
consequences of the rule, laid down in the Purva Mimamsa. Women and Shudras 
cannot hold property, not because they are women and Shudras, but because they 
are debarred from performing sacrifices. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


173 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 173 

VII 

That the Brahmins possessed the power to deny Upanayana is 
beyond question. The doubt probably arises from the fact that there 
is nowhere an express statement showing the conferment of such a 
power upon the Brahmins. All the same, whatever doubt there may 
be lurking in the minds of persons who are not aware of the operative 
parts of the religious system of the Indo-Aryans must vanish if 
account is taken of two things: (1) the exclusive right of the Brahmin 
to officiate at the Upanayana and (2) the penalties imposed upon the 
Brahmin for performing unauthorised Upanayana. 

It is probable that in most ancient times it was the father who 
taught his son the Gayatri, with which the study of the Veda begins 
and for which the ceremony of Upanayana was devised at a later 
stage. But it is beyond question that from a very early time the 
function of performing Upanayana had been assigned to a guru or 
a teacher called the Acharya and the boy went and stayed in the 
Acharya’s house. 

The questions as to who should be the Acharya and what should 
be his qualification have been the subject of discussions from very 
ancient times. 

The Acharya must be a man learned in the Vedas. A Brahmana 
text 1 says, “he, whom a teacher devoid of learning initiates, enters 
from darkness into darkness and he also (i.e. an acharya) who is 
himself unlearned (enters into darkness).” 

The Ap. Dh. S. (1.1.1.12 — 13), lays down that an Acharya selected 
for performing one’s Upanayana should be endowed with learning and 
should be one whose family is hereditarily learned and who is serene 
in mind, and that one should study Vedic lore under him up to the 
end (of brahmacharya) as long as the teacher does not fall off from 
the path of Dharma. 2 

But the first and foremost qualification of an Acharya is that he 
must be a Brahmana: It was only in times of difficulty (i.e., when 
a Brahmana is not available) that a person was allowed to have a 


1 Quoted in the Ap. Dh. S., I. i. i. 11, Kane, II (I), p. 324. 

2 According to Vyasa (quoted in Sam. p., p. 408) the Acharya should be one who 
is solely devoted to the Veda, who knows Dharma, is born of a good family, who 
is pure, is a shrotriya that has studied his Vedic sakha and who is not lazy. Shrotriya 
has been defined as one who has studied one sakha of a Veda. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Kshatriya or a Vaishya teacher 1 . This exception was permitted only 
during the period when the distinction between the right to learn the 
Vedas and the right to teach the Vedas had not been made. But when 
that distinction came to be made — and it was made in very early times — 
in fact the conflict between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra was just on this 
very point — the Brahmin alone came to possess the right to be an 
Acharya fit to officiate at an Upanayana. 

One thing therefore must be taken as well-established, namely that 
none but a Brahmin could perform the Upanayana ceremony. Upanayana 
performed by anybody else is not a valid Upanayana. 

The other operative part of the Indo-Aryan religious system is the 
obligation imposed upon the Brahmin not to do any unauthorized act 
of a religious character. A Brahmin guilty of any such conduct was liable 
to punishment or penance. Many such penalties are to be found in the 
ancient Law Books. I refer to Manu and Parashara. 

Manu (III.150ff.), lays down what class of Brahmins are to be deemed 
unworthy (to partake) of oblations to the gods and manes. In this list 
he includes : 

III. 156. — “He who teaches for a stipulated fee and he who is taught 
on that condition, he who instructs Shudra pupils and he whose teacher 
is a Shudra, he who speaks rudely, the son of an adultress, and the son 
of a widow.” 

Parashara says : 2 

“That Brahmana, who for the sake of dakshina (gift of money or fee) offers 

oblation into fire on behalf of a Shudra, would become a Shudra, would the 

Shudra (for whom he offers) would become a Brahman;” that, according to 

Madhava, propounds that the merit of the rite “goes to the Shudra and the 

Brahmana incurs sin.” ” 

Those who may ask what powers the Brahmins had to deprive the 
Shudra of his right to Upanayana may consider the combined effect 
of these two facts : (1) the Brahmin’s exclusive right to officiate at 
an Upanayana, and (2) the penalties to which he is made liable for 
performing an unauthorized Upanayana. If they do, they will have 
no doubt that the combined effect of these two factors was to vest 
in the Brahmin the power of performing as well as of denying 
Upanayana. It is true that such a power has not been expressly vested 
in the Brahmin. That was because it was unnecessary to do by express 

1 It is curious to note that in such cases the only service a Brahmana student 
was required to render to his Kshatriya or Vaishya guru was to follow after him; he 
had not to render bodily service (such as shampooing or washing the feet, etc.). Vide 
Ap. Dh. S., II, 2.4, 25-28 Gaut, 7, 1-3, Baud Dh. S.I.-2, 40-42, Manu, II. 241. It was 
also premised that a Kshatriya or a Vaishya should teach a Brahmana only when 
urged by him and not at his sweet will. 

2. Quoted by Vyavahara Mayukha (edited by Kane, p. 115). 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


175 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 175 

terms what was in fact done by indirect but more effectual means. 
That the Brahmins are conscious of the possession of this power to 
deny Upanayana is also beyond doubt. So far as the records go, there 
are 16 reported cases in which they have threatened various com- 
munities by putting it into operation against them. In nine cases, 
they challenged the Kayasthas, in four they challenged the Panchalas, 
in one they challenged the Palshes. What is important is that they 
challenged even two Maratha Kings. These instances have occurred 
between 556 to 1904 A.D. It is true that they do not belong to ancient 
times. It must however be remembered that these instances are mere 
evidences of the exercise by the Brahmins of their power to deny 
Upanayana. The power itself must have been acquired in much more 
ancient times. That they have acquired it earlier is not an empty 
assertion without support. Satyakama Jabali’s instance which is very 
ancient is cited generally to prove that the Varna of a man was 
determined by his guna (mental and moral qualities) and not by his 
birth. While this is true, it is equally true that Jabali’s case proves 
that even in ancient times the Brahmins had acquired the right to 
refuse to perform Upanayana. 

The enumeration of these cases has very little value for the purpose 
in hand unless we know the deductions that could be drawn from 
the decisions arrived at in them. To be able to do this, we must know 
the details of each case. Unfortunately, in most of them beyond the 
decision other details are not sufficiently full for the purpose. There 
is only one case that of the Brahmins versus Shivaji in respect of 
which the details are full and well-known. The case is sufficiently 
important and it is therefore well worth detailed examination. The 
deductions deducible from it are not only interesting and instructive 
but they throw a flood of light on the point under discussion. 


VIII 

As is well known, Shivaji after having established a Hindu 
independent kingdom in the western part of Maharashtra thought 
of proclaiming himself a king by having his coronation performed. 
It was felt by Shivaji and his friends that the coronation ceremony 
if it was at all to be of any value must be performed according to 
Vedic rites. But in carrying out his wishes Shivaji found himself faced 
with many difficulties. He found that whether his coronation could 
be performed with Vedic rites depended entirely upon the Brahmins. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Nobody was from religious point of view qualified to perform the 
ceremony except a Brahmin. Secondly, he found that no such 
ceremony could be performed unless it was proved that he was a 
Kshatriya. There was a third difficulty, namely, that even if he was 
found to be a Kshatriya, he was past the age of Upanayana and 
without Upanayana there could be no coronation. The third difficulty 
was a minor one for it could be got over by the performance of the 
Vratya Stoma ceremony. The first difficulty was the greatest stum- 
bling block. It related to Shivaji’s status. The question was, was he 
a Kshatriya? If that could be got over, the rest was easy. Shivaji’s 
claim that he was Kshatriya was opposed by many. His principal 
opponents were Brahmins who were led by his own Prime Minister 
Moro Pant Pingle. Unfortunately for Shivaji even his Maratha 
Sardars had refused to give him social precedence 1 and had ranged 
themselves against him. In their view, he was a Shudra. Shivaji’s 
claim was also in direct conflict with the well established thesis long 
insisted upon by the Brahmins that there were no Kshatriyas in the 
Kali age. Shivaji was living in the Kali age. Obviously he could not 
be a Kshatriya. This objection to his claim for the status of Kshatriya 
was further strengthened by the non-performance of the ceremony 
of Upanayana or the investiture of the sacred thread at the proper 
time, which was fixed by the Sastras to be the eleventh year in the 
case of the Kshatriyas. This was taken to be evidence of his being 
a Shudra. He was however fortunate in securing the services of one 
Gagabhat, a renowned Brahmin, resident of Benares, learned both 
in the Vedas and Sastras. Gagabhat solved all difficulties and 
performed Shivaji’s coronation 2 on 6th June 1674 at Raigad first after 
performing the Vratya Stoma and then the Upanayana. 

1 Kinkaid has some interesting observations to make as to how the idea of coronation 
originated. He says : 

“For although the high-spirited Deccan nobles gladly followed Shivaji in the field, 
they were unwilling in private life to concede to him any precedence. And at State 
dinners they resented that a Bhosle should sit on a seat raised above those assigned 
to Mohites and Nimbalkars, Savants and Ghorpades. He spoke of the matter to his 
Secretary, Balaji Avaji Chitnis and the latter urged him to take the royal crown from 
the hands, not of the Moghul Emperor, but of a Benares priest. The king consulted 
his mother, Jijabai, the saintly Ramdas and his favourite goddess Bhavani and found 
them all favourable to his Secretary’s suggestions .” — History of Maharashtra, p. 244. 

From this it appears that the ideas behind Vedic coronation was to obtain social 
precedence and not so much to obtain legal and political sovereignty. 

2 It seems that some Brahmins were prepared to perform Shivaji’s coronation but 
with non-Vedic, i.e., with Pauranic rites as is done in the case of Shudras. They 
predicted all sorts of evils to happen if Shivaji had his coronation performed with Vedic 
rites. Unfortunately these evils did take place and Shivaji who undoubtedly was 
superstitious had another coronation performed according to non-Vedic rites. The 
following account of this second coronation taken from Mr. C. V. Vaidya makes 
interesting reading : 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


177 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 177 


Shivaji’s case is important for several reasons. It is important because 
it proves that nobody except a Brahmin has the right to perform the 
Upanayana and that nobody can compel a Brahmin to perform it if he 
is not prepared to do so. Shivaji was the ruler of an independent kingdom 
and had already started styling himself Maharaja and Chhatrapati. 
There were many Brahmins who were his subjects. Yet, Shivaji could 
not compel anyone of them to perform his coronation. 

It is important because it proves that the ceremony to be valid must 
be performed by a Brahmin. A ceremony performed by a non-Brahmin 
would be infructuous. It was open to Shivaji to have his coronation 
performed by a non-Brahmin. But he did not dare 1 to do it. For he knew 
it would be without any social or spiritual efficacy. 

In the third place, it is important because it proves that the power 
of determining the status of a Hindu depends entirely upon the will 
of the Brahmins. The decision in favour of Shivaji is sought to be 
justified by the genealogy which was brought from Mewar by Shivaji’s 
friend, Balaji Avaji, and which connected Shivaji with the Sisodiyas of 
Mewar who were reckoned as Kshatriyas. It has been alleged that the 
genealogy was a fabrication got up for the occasion. 


“Obstructive and dissatisfied Brahmins there were even then as always. They did 
not deem the ceremony satisfactory, though it was acclaimed by the whole of 
Maharashtra. A poem named Rajyabhisheka Kalpataru, a copy of which is in the Library 
of the Bengal Royal Asiatic Society and which has been published from it by Itihas 
S. Mandal of Poona (Quarterly, Vol. X-I), embodies some objections raised against the 
coronation ceremony gone through. This poem is not quite contemporary, as it mentions 
the later idea that Shivaji was an incarnation of Siva (not of Vishnu as represented 
by the earlier Shivabharata) though it is of the time of Rajaram. It gives an imaginary 
conversation between Nischalpuri, a learned Brahmin ascetic of Benares who was an 
opponent of Gagabhat, and Govindbhat Barve as taking place in Konkan. It recounts 
the ill omens which preceded and followed the coronation, such as the death of 
Prataprao Gujar, the death of Kashibai, wife of Shivaji, etc., and the wound caused 
to Gagabhat himself on the nose by the falling of a rafter. The poem expressly says 
that Gagabhat engaged for the ceremony those Brahmins only who were his followers 
and refused to employ those recommended by Nischalpuri. Many defects in the ceremony 
itself, are next mentioned. Thus when Shivaji was getting into the chariot after the 
ceremony of ascending the throne Gagabhat himself first sat in the chariot and then 
Shivaji. After seeing the whole ceremony through Nischalpuri left the fort but told 
Shivaji that bad events would happen on the 13th, 22nd and 55th days. On the 13th 
day accordingly, Shivaji’s mother died. Next a horse-shed was burnt at Pratapgad with 
good many horses in it and an elephant died on Sinhgad. These incidents induced 
Shivaji to call Nischalpuri back and through him and his Brahmins Shivaji performed 
afresh the ceremony of ascending the throne, not with Vedic rites, but Tantrik or 
magical. This ceremony is also described in detail. There are mentioned some Vedic 
mantras from Sama Veda as recited; but the ceremony was not Vedic. It was performed 
on Ashvin Suddha 5 (Lalita Panchami day S, 1596), as is stated at the end of the 
peom. This ceremony is also mentioned by J and Nischapuri is also spoken of in a 
Mahomedan record .' — .Shivaji the Founder of Maratha Swaraj, pp. 252-253.” 

1 The Kayasthas had at one time resolved to perform their own ceremonies as a priest 
against the constant challenge by the Brahmins to their status. But they did not put 
their resolve into action. The reason must be the same. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Assuming it was not a fabrication , 1 how can it justify the recognition of 
Shivaji’s claim to be a Kshatriya? Far from establishing that Shivaji was 
a Kshatriya, the genealogy could do no more than raise another question, 
namely, whether the Sisodiyas were Kshatriyas. The Sisodiyas were 
Rajputs. There is considerable doubt as to whether the Rajputs are the 
descendants of the original Kshatriyas who formed the second Varna of 
the ancient Indo-Aryan community. One view is that they are foreigners, 
remnants of the Huns who invaded India and established themselves in 
Rajputana and whom the Brahmins raised to the status of Kshatriyas with 
the object of using them as means to suppress Buddhism in Central India 
by a special ceremony before the sacred fire and who were therefore known 
as the Agnikul Kshatriyas. This view has the support of many erudite 
scholars who are entitled to speak on the subject. Vincent Smith says : 2 

In this place I want to draw attention to the fact, long suspected and 
now established by good evidence that the foreign immigrants into 
Rajputana and the upper Gangetic valley were not utterly destroyed in 
the course of their wars with the native princes. Many of course perished 
but many survived and were mixed in the general population of which 
no inconsiderable part is formed by their descendants. These foreigners 
like their fore-runners the Sakas and the Yue-chi universally yielded to 
the wonderful assimilative power of Hinduism and rapidly became Hinduised. 
Clans or families which succeeded in winning chieftainships were admitted 
readily into the frame of Hindu polity as Kshatriyas or Rajputs and there 
is no doubt that the Parihars and many other famous Rajput clans of the 
north were developed out of the barbarian hordes which poured into India 
during the fifth and sixth centuries. The rank and file of the strangers 
became Gujars and the castes ranking lower than Rajputs in their 
precedence. Further to the south, various indigenous or aboriginal tribes 
and clans underwent the same process of Hinduised social promotion in 
virtue of which Gonds, Bhars, Kharwas and so forth emerged as Chandels, 
Rathors, Gaharwars and other well-known Rajput clans duly equipped with 
pedigree reaching back to the sun and the moon. 

William Crooke 3 says : 

Recent research has thrown much light on the origin of Rajputs. A wide gulf 
lies between the Vedic Kshatriyas and the Rajputs of mediaeval times which it 

1 The Sisodiya family of Mewar was important for two reasons (1) They were 
a branch of the Sisodiyas of Udaipur who were descendants of the family of Lava 
the eldest son of Rama, the hero of Ramayana. (2) The Sisodiyas of Mewar were 
pure because they had refused to give their females in marriage to the Moghul 
emperors and had refused to intermarry with other Rajput families such as Jaipur 
and Jodhpur who had done so. Was it because of these reasons that this attempt 
to establish that Shivaji was the descendant of the Sisodiyas of Mewar was made? 

2 Quoted by C. V. Vaidya in his History of Mediaeval India, Vol. II. P. 8. 

3 Quoted by Vaidya, ibid., p. 9. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


179 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 179 

is now impossible to bridge. It is now certain that the origin of many clans 
dates from the Saka or Kushan invasions of more certainly from that of 
the White Huns who destroyed the Gupta empire about 480 A.D. The Gujar 
tribe connected with the latter people adopted Hinduism and their leaders 
formed the main stock from which the higher Rajput families sprang. When 
these new claimants to princely honour accepted the faith and the 
institution of Brahmanism the attempt would naturally be made to connect 
them with the heroes of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana. Hence arose 
the body of legend recorded in these annals by which a fabulous origin 
from the sun and the moon was ascribed to these Rajput families ... The 
group denoted by the name Kshatriya or Rajput depended on status rather 
than on descent and it was therefore possible for foreigners to be introduced 
into these tribes without any violation of the prejudices of caste, which 
was then only partially developed. But it was necessary to disguise this 
admission of foreigners under a convenient fiction. Hence arose the legend 
how by a solemn act of purification or initiation under the superintendence 
of the ancient Vedic Rishis, the fire — born septs were created to help the 
Brahmins in repressing Buddhism and other heresies. This privilege was 
confined to four septs known as Agnikula or fire-born viz., the Parmar, 
Parihar, Chalukya and Chauhan. 

Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar 1 also holds the same view. According to him, 
the Rajputs are the descendants of Gujars, the Gujars were foreigners 
and that the Rajputs are therefore the descendants of foreigners. 

The Brahmins engaged for the coronation could not have been ignorant 
of the origin of the Rajputs, and their claim to be descended from the 
Kshatriyas. But assuming that they did not know this fact they knew that 
there was already a previous decision of the Brahmins, namely, that there 
were no Kshatriyas in the Kali age. This was an old, long-standing decision. 
And if the Brahmins had respect for precedent, they were bound to throw 
out the claim of Sisodiyas as well as of Shivaji. Nobody would have blamed 
them, if they had done so. But the Brahmins had never accepted the law 
of precedent as binding upon them. With them there was no such thing 
as stare decisis. 

Fourthly, it is important because it shows that the decisions of 
the Brahmins on matters of status were open to sale like the 
indulgences of the Catholic clergy. That the decision of Gagabhat was 
not an honest decision is obvious from the amount of money which 
Gagabhat and other Brahmins received as officiating priests. The 
amount of money spent on the coronation by Shivaji and how much 
of it went to Gagabhat and the Brahmins will be seen from the 

1 Quoted by Vaidya, Ibid., p. 10. Mr. Vaidya combats the view and tries to prove 
that the Rajputs are not foreigners but are the descendants of original Aryan- 
Kshatriyas. What Mr. Vaidya says does not appear to be very convincing. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


180 


180 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

following details collected by Mr. Vaidya. P 

“These ministers were presented each with one lakh of hon, one elephant, 
one horse, garments and ornaments. Gagabhat was given one lakh of rupees 
for seeing the whole ceremony through. The Dakshinas granted by Shivaji 
on the several occasions of the coronation ceremony were very large, as was 
suited to the occasion. Sabhasad reports that the whole expenditure amounted 
to one crore and forty-two lakhs of hons or 426 lakhs of rupees. 

Sabhasad relates that 50,000 Vaidika Brahmins had collected on the occasion 
of Shivaji’s coronation. 1 2 Besides these there were Jogis, Sanyasis, etc., by 
thousands. These were fed or given corn below the fort. It is related in 
contemporary papers that Shivaji, before coronation, was weighed against gold 
and almost every other metal as well as auspicious thing. Dutch record 
describing the ceremony in detail on 3rd October PS. 1684 states that Shivaji 
weighed 17,000 hons or 160 lbs. and he was also weighed against silver, 
copper, iron, etc., and against camphor, salt, sugar, butter, various kinds of 
fruit, betel-nuts, etc., and the value of the whole was distributed amongst 
Brahmins. On the 7th June, the day after the coronation, Dakshina was given 
in general and every Brahmin got three to five rupees and everyone else, 
whether woman or child two rupees and one rupee. In all, the Dakshina 
amounted to one and a half lakhs of hon 3 in value. 

Oxenden also states in his diary from 18th May to 13th June that Shivaji 
was weighed against gold and the weight 16,000 hons, together with one lakh 
of hons in addition were distributed as Dakshinas among Brahmins. 

The above noted Dutch record further states that for the Vratya ceremony 
7,000 hons were given to Gagabhat and 17,000 to other Brahmins. On the 
5th of June Shivaji bathed in holy Ganges water and every Brahmin present 
was given 100 hons.” 

Can the amount paid to Gagabhat be taken as representing nothing 
more than a fee 4 properly payable to a priest? There is one 
circumstance which may be depended upon to show that Gagabhat 
was not even paid enough. It is that what Gagabhat got was 
comparatively much less than what the Ministers of Shivaji got. Two 
facts must however be noted as telling on the other side before any 
conclusion is drawn from this fact. They completely nullify the 
argument. The first is that the ministers themselves had made 
large presents 5 to Shivaji on his coronation. Moropant Pingle the 
Peshwa or Prime Minister of Shivaji, the Mujamdar had paid 7,000 hons 
and the other two ministers 5,000 hons each. Deducting these, the 

1 Shivaji, the Founder of Maratha Swaraj, pp. 248 and 252. 

2 Vaidya says this must be a mistake for 5,000. He gives no reason in support 
of his ‘must’. 

3 A Hon was equal to 3 rupees. 

4 It must not be supposed that Gagabhat got only Rs. 1 lakh. He got in addition 
7,000 hons or 21,000 rupees for Vratya Stoma. Further he must have received some 
part of the gold and the value of other things against which Shivaji was weighed and 
which was distributed among the Brahmins. 

5 Vaidya, ibid., p. 247. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


181 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 181 

presents given to them by Shivaji must be said to be much smaller 
than they appear to be. 

The second fact is that these ministers of Shivaji were the greatest 
opponents of Shivaji in this project of coronation. They were staunch 
in their view that he was a Shudra and that he was not entitled 
to have his coronation performed as it was a right which belonged 
to the Kshatriya only. It is therefore, no surprise if Shivaji gave them 
large presents with a view to silence them and win them over 
permanently to his side. The amount of money paid to the ministers 
by Shivaji is therefore no criterion to determine whether the amount 
paid to Gagabhat was no more than a fair fee for officiation. Indeed 
there are so many twists and turns taken by Gagabhat that one is 
forced to the conclusion that it was more than fair fee and that it 
included some part as illegal gratification to keep him straight. 

In this business of coronation the man who took the most leading 
part in bringing it about was a Kayastha from Maharashtra by name 
Balaji Avaji who was the Personal Secretary to Shivaji. The first step 
Balaji took was to send three Brahmins 1 as messengers from Shivaji 
to fetch Gagabhat from Benares with full information as to the status 
and purpose of Shivaji. What did Gagabhat do? He sent back the 
three messengers with a letter refusing to accept the invitation on 
the ground that in his. view Shivaji was a Shudra and was therefore 
not fit for coronation. The next step Balaji took was to collect evidence 
in support of Shivaji’s claim to the status of a Kshatriya. He 
succeeded in obtaining a genealogy which showed that Shivaji was 
a Kshatriya descended from the Sisodiyas who were Rajputs and 
rulers of Mewad. This evidence he sent with another messenger , 2 to 
Gagabhat. Gagabhat seemed to have been impressed by the evidence 
for he agreed to come to Raigad to perform the coronation ceremony. 
What did Gagabhat do on his arrival? He said that he had reexamined 
the evidence and had come to the conclusion that Shivaji was a 
Shudra and was therefore unfit for coronation. 

This is not the only somersault which Gagabhat took in this business. 
He took another and a very queer turn and declared that he was 
prepared to perform the coronation of Balaji Avaji for he was a 

1 They were (1) Keshav Bhat, (2) Bhalachandra Bhat, and (3) Somanath Bhat. 

2 The name of the messenger was Nilo Yesaji. He was a Kayastha. The three 
Brahmins who went on the first occasion to fetch Gagabhat were suspected to have 
commuted a foul play by acting contrary to their instructions and betraying the 
interest of Shivaji to which as Brahmins they were opposed. It is possible that Balaji 
felt that the letter brought by them was a piece of manoeuvre. That is why Balaji 
this lime sent a Kayastha, a man of his own caste. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Kayastha and therefore a Kshatriya but not of Shivaji who was 
Shudra. Gagabhat did not stop there. He again turned round and 
gave his opinion that Shivaji was a Kshatriya and that he was 
prepared to perform his coronation and even went so far as to write 
a treatise known as Gagabhatti in which he sought to prove that 
the Kayasthas were bastards. 

What do these twists and turns show? Do they not show he was 
a most unwilling priest and that his willingness has had to be bought 
by cash? If this argument is sound then there is no doubt that his 
decision that Shivaji was Kshatriya was sold by him for illegal 
gratification. 1 

Lastly Shivaji’s case is important because it shows that the 
Brahmins in the matter of status did not recognize as being bound 
by the principle of res judicata. They regard themselves as free to 
reopen a case already decided by them. For how long did the 
Brahmins respect their decision that Shivaji was a Kshatriya? 

Shivaji started a new era from the day of his coronation, namely, 6th 
June 1674 which he called the Rajyabhisheka Era. How long did it remain 
in vogue? Only so long as Shivaji and his descendants remained as active 
rulers on the throne. The moment effective sovereignty passed into the 
hands of the Brahmin Peshwas, they issued an order 2 to discontinue it. 
Not only did they stop the use of the Era, they began using the style of 
the Muslim Emperors, namely, the Fasli year. The Brahmins did not stop 
there. They went further and began to question the very status of Shivaji’s 
descendants as Kshatriyas. 3 They could do nothing to the two sons of 
Shivaji, Sambhaji and Rajaram. Shivaji had their Upanayana performed 
in his life-time by Brahmins with Vedic rites. They could do nothing to 
his grandson, Shahu because the Brahmins had no ruling power in their 


1 For facts about Gagabhat’s twist's and turns stated above, I have drawn on 
K. S. Thakare’s Marathi booklet Gramanyacha Itihas. Thakare has in his turn drawn 
upon the Bakhars or Chronicles. How far they are reliable it is difficult to say. It 
must however be admitted that the twists and turns of Gagabhat appear to be true 
because without them it would be difficult to explain certain relevant and disturbing 
facts. For instance, take the following question : Did Gagabhat change after coming 
to Raigad and if so, why? The change and the reason for it is to be found in the 
discovery by Gagabhat that another Brahmin by name’ Moropant Pingle who was no 
less than the Prime Minister of Shivaji was deadly opposed to Shivaji’s claim to be 
a Kshatriya. It is likely that the two Brahmins on meeting together saw eye to eye 
which make Gagabhat change. Why did Moropant who was a strong opponent became 
later on a strong supporter of Shivaji’s coronation? If it is a fact that Gagabhat did 
propose that Balaji should be proclaimed king it gives a complete explanation of 
Moropant’s change of front. Balaji being Kayastha and the Kayasthas being the 
deadliest enemies of the Brahmins, Moropant consented to Shivaji’s coronation as a 
lesser of the two evils. 

2 Sardesai, Marathi Riyasat, II. p. 363, and Vaidya, Shivaji, p. 251 

3 What follows is taken from Siddhanta Vijaya, edited by Rao Bahadur Dongre. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


183 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 183 

hands. The moment Shahu transferred his sovereign powers to his 
Brahmin Peshwa their road to repudiation became clear. There is 
no evidence whether Ramjee Raje the successor and adopted son of 
Shahu, who was minor and whose guardians were the Peshwas, had 
his Upanayana performed and if so, whether it was performed with 
Vedic rites. But there is definite evidence that the Upanayana 
ceremony of his successors, Shahu II, who was adopted in 1777 had 
been performed with Pauranic rites and by the direction of the 
Peshwas. 1 The performance of Upanayana of Shahu II with Pauranic 
rites was tantamount to his being regarded by the Peshwas as a 
Shudra. For it is only in the case of a Shudra that the ceremonies 
are performed with Pauranic rites. What happened to Maharaja 
Pratapsing who succeeded Shahu II in 1808 whether or not his 
Upanayana was performed and if performed whether it was performed 
with Vedic rites or Pauranic rites it is not possible to be definite. 
One thing, however, is definitely known that in about 1827 the 
Shankarcharya of Karvir in his judgement about the status of the 
Kayasthas of Sangli stated 2 “that there were no Kshatriyas in the Kali 
age and that documents showing that neither Shivaji, nor Samhhaji 
nor Shahu were Kshatriyas exist in his Daftar”. It is alleged that this 
statement is not to be found in the original judgement but was 
interpolated by the Brahmin Raja of Sangli. Be that as it may, it 
was a direct challenge to the status of Pratapsinha as a descent of 
Shivaji. Pratapsinha had to put the issue to a conference of Brahmins 
which was held in Satara in 1830. The majority gave a decision in 
favour and saved Pratapsinha from being degraded to the status of 
a Shudra. 

Foiled in their attempt to level down one line of Shivaji to the 
status of a Shudra, the Brahmins began their attack on the status 
of the second line of Shivaji which had established itself at Kolhapur. 
In the reign of one of the rulers of Kolhapur by name Babasaheb 
Maharaj, the Palace Priest by name Raghunath Sastri Parvate took 
into his head to perform all ceremonies in the Palace with Pauranic 
rites. It is said that he was stopped from continuing the practice. 
Babasaheb died in 1886. From 1886 to 1894, all rulers were minors 
and the administration was in the hands of the British. There is no 
direct evidence as to the exact manner and mode of ceremonial 
performances adopted by the Palace priest. In 1902, the late Shahu 
Maharaj issued order to the Palace priest to perform all ceremonies 

1 Dongre Siddhanta Vijaya, Introduction, p. 6. 

2 Dongre, Ibid,., Introduction, p. 9. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


184 


184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the Vedic manner. The priest refused and insisted on performing 
it in the Pauranic manner suggesting thereby that the rulers of 
Kolhapur were Shudras and not Kshatriyas. The part played by 
Sankaracharya of Karvir Math in this affair is very noteworthy. At 
the time of the controversy the head of the Math called Guru, had 
adopted a disciple (Sishya) by name Brahmanalkar and had given 
him all the rights of the head of the Math. At first both the Guru 
and the Sishya were on the side of the Palace Priest and against 
the Maharaja. Later on, the disciple took the side of the Maharaja 
and accepted his status as a Kshatriya. The Guru who remained on 
the side of the Priest excommunicated the Sishya. The Maharaja later 
on tried to create his own Sankaracharya 1 but he too proved false 
to the Maharaja. 

Shivaji was recognised as a Kshatriya. Obviously, that status was 
not a personal honour conferred on him. It was a status in tail and 
belonged to his family as well as to his descendants. Nobody could 
question it. It could be lost by a particular descendant by doing some 
act which was inconsistent with it. It could not be lost generally. 
No act inconsistent with the Kshatriya status was attributed to any 
of the descendants of Shivaji. Yet the Brahmins came forward to 
repudiate the decision on their status. 

This could happen only because the Brahmins claimed the power 
to do and undo the status of any Hindu at any time. They can raise 
a Shudra to the status of a Kshatriya. They can degrade the Kshatriya 
to the status of a Shudra. Shivaji’s case proves that their sovereignty 
in this matter is without limit and without challenge. 

These instances 2 are no doubt drawn from the Bombay Presidency 
only. But the principles from them are clear and general in their 
application. They are : 

(1) That the Brahmins have the exclusive right to perform the 
Upanayana. Neither Shivaji, nor Pratap Sinha nor the 
Kayasthas, Panchals or Palashes wanted the Upanayana to be 
performed by a non-Brahmin. It is only once that the Kayasthas 
resolved to have their ceremonies performed by Kayasthas. But 
it was only a paper resolution. 

(2) The Brahmin has the right to say whose Upanayana he will 
perform and whose he will not perform. In other words, the 

1 He is known as Dr. Kurtakoti. 

2 For details of each see a Marathi publication, Gramanyacha Itihas, by K. S. 
Thakare, published in 1919. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-10 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


185 


THE SHUDRAS : THE DEGRADATION OF THE SHUDRAS 185 

Brahmin is the sole judge of deciding whether a given 
community is entitled to Upanayana. 

(3) The support of the Brahmins for the performance of Upanayana 
need not be based on honest grounds. It could be purchased 
by money. Shivaji got the support of the Brahmin Gagabhat 
on payment of money. 

(4) The denial of Upanayana by the Brahmins need not be on legal 
or religious ground. It is possible for the denial to be based 
on purely political grounds. The refusal by the Brahmins of 
Upanayana to Kayasthas was entirely due to political rivalry 
between the two. 

(5) The right of appeal against the denial of an Upanayana by 
a Brahmin is only to a Vidvat-Parishad and the Vidvat- 
Parishad is an assembly for which a Brahmin alone is eligible 
to be a member. 

From the foregoing discussion, it must be clear to all that the 
Brahmins did possess the power to deny Upanayana. Given the 
powers and the motive, there is nothing strange if they used it against 
the Shudras. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


186 


CHAPTER XI 

THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 


SO far I have attempted to establish the following propositions 

(1) That it is the Brahmins who brought about the fall of the 
Shudras from the second to the fourth Varna in the Indo- 
Aryan Society; 

(2) That the technique adopted by the Brahmins to degrade the 
Shudras was to deny them the benefit of the Upanayana; 

(3) That this act of degradation was born out of the spirit of 
revenge on the part of the Brahmins who were groaning under 
the tyrannies and oppressions and indignities to which they 
were subjected by the Shudra kings. 

While all this is crystal clear, there may be some who may yet 
have some such questions to ask, namely : 

(i) Why should a quarrel with a few kings make the Brahmins 
the enemies of the whole Shudra community? 

(ii) Was the provocation so great as to create a feeling of hatred 
and desire to seek vengeance? 

(iii) Were not the parties reconciled? If they were, then their was 
no occasion for the Brahmins to degrade the Shudras. 

(iv) How did the Shudras suffer this degradation? 

These questions I admit have in them enough force and substance 
to call for serious consideration. It is only proper that they should 
be answered. 


I 

The question why the Brahmins, because of their quarrels with a 
few kings, should proceed to degrade the whole community of Shudras 
is not only relevant but is also very pertinent. There would, however, 
be no difficulty to answer this question if two things are borne in mind. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


187 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 187 

In the first place, the conflicts described in Chapter 9 between 
the Brahmins and the Shudra kings were not individual conflicts 
though they appear to be so. On the side of the Brahmins there 
is no doubt that the whole class was involved. Barring the episode 
relating to Vasishtha, all other episodes relate to Brahmins in 
general. On the side of the kings, it is true that the episodes mention 
individual kings as being involved in this conflict with the Brahmins. 
But it must not be forgotten that they all belonged to the same line 
to which Sudas belonged. 

In so far as Sudas is concerned, the conflict was between the 
Brahmins and the Shudra clan of Kshatriyas. Of this, there can be 
no doubt. We have no direct evidence to say that the other offending 
kings also belonged to the Shudra clan of Kshatriyas. But we have 
other evidence which leads to the conclusion that they belonged to 
the same line of descent as Sudas. 

Attention is invited to the following genealogical tree appearing 
overleaf which is taken from the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata. 1 

The inter-relationship of the Kshatriya kings who came in conflict 
with the Brahmins throws some interesting light on the subject, 
Pururavas 2 is the son of Ila and the grandson of Manu Vaivasvata. 
Nahusha 3 is the grandson of Pururavas. Nimi 4 is one of the sons of 
Ikshvaku, who is the son of Manu Vivasvat. Trishanku 5 is 28th in 
descent from Ikshvaku. Sudas 6 is descended from Ikshvaku and is 
50th in descent from him. Vena 7 is the son of Manu Vaivasvata. 
All of them claimed descent from Manu, some from him and some 
from Ikshvaku. Being descendants of Manu and Ikshvaku, it is 
possible to argue that they were all kindred of Sudas. Given the fact 
that Sudas is a Shudra, it follows logically that all these kings 
belonged to the Shudra group. 

We have no direct evidence, but there would be nothing unnatural 
in supposing that in these conflicts with the Brahmins, the whole 
Shudra community, not merely a few Shudra kings, was involved. 
This conflict, it must be remembered, has taken place in the ancient 
past when life was tribal in thought and in action, and when the rule 

1 Muir, Vol. I, p. 126 

2 Muir, Vol. I, p. 126. 

3 Muir Vol. I, p. 307. 

4 Muir Vol. I, p. 316. 

5 Muir Vol. I, p. 362. 

6 Muir Vol. I, p. 362. 

7 Divodasa, the father of Sudas, is spoken of in the Rig Veda as king of Purus 
and Purus are described as Ikshvakus. 


MARICHI 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-11 Mk S.K.-26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


188 


188 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


o> 

43 


0> 

£3 

o 


Pl 



a3 

03 


>> 

43 


a3 

CO 


PP 

43 


co 

o3 


03 

Q 


P 

II 

<4H 

O 


C 

CO 


Ph 


+p 

< 

<D 

-M 

o3 

m 

43 

bo 

ft 

o3 _ 

33 

c? 


o3 

u 


T3 

Ph 


o3 
> 
co - 
o3 
> 

> 


o3 

a 

o3 


CO 

£3 

^ o 

|D co 

5 ° 

<3 r— I 

§ * 
a 
43 


a 

-4-3 

"3 

< 


33 

o3 Q 

2 
03 w 
4! 

45 

o3 

Z 


o3 

Sh 

t3 

o3 

4! 




GO 


o3 _ 


o3 

CO 


o3 

43 

CO 

33 

o3 

^3 


33 

o3 

> 

43 

CO 

43 


o3 

b/D 

o3 _ 

45 ^ 
o3 

£ 


33 

o3 

• 

4! : 
co 

2 

o3 


33 

£3 

43 

co 

’fH 

43 

Q 


o3 

£3 

o> 

> 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


189 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 189 

was that what was done by one individual belonging to the tribe was 
deemed to be done by the whole tribe. In all ancient societies the unit 
was the tribe or the community and not the individual, with the result 
that the guilt of the individual was the guilt of the community and 
the guilt of the community was the guilt of every individual belonging 
to it. If this fact is borne in mind, then it would be quite natural to 
say that the Brahmins did not confine their hatred to the offending 
kings, but extended it to the whole of the Shudra community and 
applied the ban against Upanayana to all the Shudras. 

II 

As to whether there was enough provocation, the matter is hardly open 
to question. Tempers must have risen high on both sides. There was 
enough combustible material on both sides for an explosion to take place. 

On the side of the Brahmins, it is evident that their pretensions to 
social superiority and their claim for special privileges had become 
outrageous in character and unbearable in extent. 

The following is a catalogue 1 of the pretensions put fourth by the 
Brahmins : 

(i) The Brahmin must be acknowledged to be the guru to all Varnas 
by the mere fact of his birth; 

(ii) The Brahmana has the sole right of deciding upon the duties of 
all other classes, what conduct was proper to them and what should 
be their means of livelihood; and the other classes were to abide 
by his directions and the king was to rule in accordance with such 
directions; 

(Hi) The Brahmana is not subject to the authority of the king. The 
king was the ruler of all except the Brahmana; 

(iv) The Brahmana is exempt from (1) whipping; (2) fetters being put 
on him; (3) the imposition of fines; (4) exile; (5) censure and (6) 
abandonment. 

(v) A Shrotriya (a Brahmana learned in Vedas) is free from taxes. 

(vi) A Brahmana is entitled to claim the whole of the treasure trove 
if he found it. If the king found it he must give half to the 
Brahmana. 

(vii) The property of a Brahmana dying without an heir shall not go 
to the king, but shall be distributed among Shrotriyas or Brahmanas. 

(viii) The king meeting a Shrotriya or a Brahmana on the road must 
give way to the Brahmana. 

(ix) The Brahmana must be saluted first. 

(x) The person of a Brahmana is sacred. No death sentence could be 
passed against a Brahmana even if he is guilty of murder. 

1 This summary is based on the catalogue given in Kane’s Dharma Shastra, 
Vol. II (I), pp. 138-153. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(xi) Threatening a Brahmana with assault, or striking him or drawing 
blood from his body is an offence. 

(xii) For certain offences the Brahmana must receive a lesser punish- 
ment than members of other classes. 

(xiii) The king should not summon a Brahmana as a witness where 
the litigant is not a Brahmana. 

(xiv) Even when a woman has had ten former husbands who are not 
Brahmanas, if a Brahmana marries such a woman, it is he alone 
who is her husband and not a Rajanya or a Vaishya 1 to whom 
she may have been married. 

After discussing these pretensions and privileges claimed by the 
Brahmanas, Mr. Kane says : 2 

“Further privileges assigned to Brahmanas are : free access to the houses 
of other people for the purpose of begging alms; the right to collect fuel, 
flowers, water and the like without its being regarded as a theft, and to 
converse with other men’s wives without being restrained (in such conver- 
sation) by others; and the right to cross rivers without paying any fare for 
the ferry-boat and to be conveyed (to the other bank) before other people. 
When engaged in trading and using a ferry boat, they shall have to pay no 
toll. A Brahmana who is engaged in travelling, who is tired and has nothing 
to eat, commits no wrong by taking two canes of sugar or two esculent roots.” 

These privileges have no doubt grown in course of time and it 
is difficult to say which of them had become vested rights when these 
conflicts were raging. But there is no doubt that some of the most 
annoying ones such as (i), (ii), (iii), (viii) and (xiv) had then come 
into existence. These were enough to infuriate any decent and self- 
respecting body of men. 

On the side of the Kshatriya kings they could not be supposed to 
be willing to take things lying low. How could they? It must not be 
forgotten that most of the Kshatriya kings who came into conflict with 
the Brahmins, belonged to the solar line . 3 They differed from the 
Kshatriyas of the lunar line in learning, in pride and in martial spirit. 
The Kshatriyas who belonged to the solar line were a virile people, 
while those who belonged to the lunar line were an imbecile lot without 
any self-respect. The former challenged the Brahmins. The latter 
succumbed to them and became their slaves. This was as it should 
be. For while the Kshatriyas of the lunar line were devoid of any 
learning, those belonging to the solar line were not merely the equals 
of Brahmins in the matter of learning, they were their 

1 No. (xiv) is not mentioned by Kane, but is mentioned in the Atharva Veda V. 
17. 8-9; see Muir, Vol. I, p. 280. 

2. Ibid., pp. 153-4. 

3. Only Pururavas and Nahusha belong to the Lunar line of Kshatriyas as may 
be seen from 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


191 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 191 

superiors. Several of them were the authors of the Vedic hymns and 
were known as Rajarishis. This was particularly true of those who 
came into conflict with the Brahmins. 

According to the Anukramanika to the Rig Veda as well as 
according to tradition the following hymns are said to have been 
composed by the undermentioned kings i 1 

“vi.15: Vitahavya (or Bharadvaja); x.9: Sindhuvipa, son of Ambarisha (or 
Trisiras, son of Tvashtri); x.75: Sindhukshit, son of Priyamedha; x. 133, Sudas 
son of Pijavana; x. 134, Mandhatri, son of Yuvanasva; x. 179, Sibi, son of 
Usinara, Pratardana, son of Divodasa and king of Kasi, and Vasumanas, son 
of Rohidasva; and x. 148 is declared to have had Prithi Vainya.” 

The Matsya Purana also gives the lists 2 of those who composed 
the hymns of the Rig Veda in a passage which says : 

“Bhrigu, Kashya, Prachetas, Dadhicha, Atmavat, Aurva, Jamadagni, Kripa, 
Sharadvata, Arshtishena, Yudhajit, Vitahavya, Suvarchas, Vaina, Prithu, 
Divodasa, Brahmasva, Gritsa, Saunaka — these are the nineteen Bhrigus, 
composers of hymns. Angiras, Vedhasa, Bharadvaja, Bhalandana, Ritabadha, 
Garga, Siti, Sankriti, Gurudhira, Mandhatri, Ambarisha, Yuvanasva, Purukutsa, 
Pradyumna, Shravanasya, Ajamidha, Haryashva, Takshapa, Kavi, 
Prishadashva, Virupa, Kanva, Mudgala, Utathya, Sharadvat, Vajasravas, 
Apasya, Suvitta, Vamadeva, Ajita, Brihaduktha, Dirghatamas, Kakshivat, are 
recorded as thirty-three eminent Angirases. These were all composers of 
hymns. Now learn the Kasyapas... Vishvamitra, son of Gadhi, Devaraja, Bala 
the wise Madhuchhandas, Rishabha, Aghamarshana, Ashtaka, Lohita, 
Bhritakila, Vedasravas, Devarata, Puranashva, Dhananjaya, the glorious 
Mithila, Salankayana, — these are to be known as the thirteen devout and 
eminent Kusikas. Manu Vaivasvata, Ida, king Pururavas, these are to be 
known as the eminent utterers of hymns among the Kshatriyas. Bhalanda, 
Vandya, and Sanskirti these are always to be known as the three eminent 
persons among the Vaishyas who were composers of hymns. Thus ninety-one 
persons have been declared by whom hymns have been given birth to, 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. 

the following genealogical tree : — 

Soma=Tara 

Budha=Ila 

Pururav as=Urvashi 

Ayus 

Nahusha 

If it is borne in mind that Ha the mother of Pururavas was the daughter of 
Manu Vaivasvata it will be seen that they too were the kith and kin of the 
solar Kshatriyas who came into conflict with the Brahmins. 

1. Muir, Vol. I, p. 268 

2. Muir Vol. I, p. 279. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In the list of the authors of the Vedic hymns there are not only 
names of many Kshatriyas, there are names of many of the 
Kshatriyas who had come into conflict with the Brahmins. The 
Kshatriyas were the leaders among the Vedic hymn makers. The 
most famous Vedic hymn namely the Gayatri mantra is the 
production of Vishvamitra who was a Kshatriya. It was impossible 
for the Kshatriyas of this calibre not to take up this challenge of 
the Brahmins. 

Their pride which was born out of their prowess and their learning 
must have been so greatly wounded by the pretensions of the 
Brahmins that when they did take up the challenge of the Brahmins 
they did it in a ruthless spirit. They hit the Brahmins hip and thigh. 
Vena forced them to worship him and no other god; Pururavas looted 
their wealth. Nahusha yoked them to his chariot and made them 
drag it through the city. Nimi flouted the exclusive and hereditary 
right of a family priest to perform all the ceremonies in the family 
and Sudas went to the length of burning alive the son of Vasishtha 
who was once his family priest. Surely, there cannot be greater cause 
to provoke the Brahmins to seek their vengeance upon the Shudras. 

Ill 

On the point of possible reconciliation between the Brahmins and 
the Shudras, there is no doubt some evidence on which some people 
might rely. Before stating my views upon the worth of this evidence, 
it is desirable to draw attention to it. The evidence consists of stories 
of reconciliation which are scattered throughout the Mahabharata 
and the Puranas. 

The first story of reconciliation concerns the two tribes, the 
Bharatas to whom Vishvamitra belonged and the Tritsus to whom 
Vasishtha belonged. That the Bharatas were enemies of Vasishtha 
or Tritsus is clear from the Rig Veda itself which says 

III. 53.24. — “These sons of Bharata, O Indra, desire to avoid (the 
Vasishthas), not to approach them.” 

The story of their reconciliation is told in the Adi Parvan of the 
Mahabharata 1 2 and runs as follows : 

“And the hosts of their enemies also smote the Bharatas. Shaking the earth 

with an army of four kinds of forces, the Panchalya chief assailed him having 

1. Muir, Vol. I, p. 354. 

2. Muir Vol. I, p. 361. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


193 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 193 

rapidly conquered the earth and vanquished him with ten complete hosts. 
Then the king Samvarana with his wives, ministers, sons and friends fled 
from that great cause of alarm and dwelt in the thickets of the great river 
Sindhu (Indus) in the country bordering on the stream, and near a mountain. 
There the Bharatas abode for a long time, taking refuge in a fortress. As 
they were dwelling there, for a thousand years, the venerable rishi Vasishtha 
came to them. Going out to meet him on his arrival, and making obeisance, 
the Bharatas all presented him with the arghya, offering, showing every 
honour to the glorious rishi. When he was seated, the king himself solicited 
him: ‘Be thou our priest; let us strive to regain my kingdom,’ Vasishtha 
consented to attach himself to the Bharatas, and as we have heard, invested 
the descendant of Puru with the sovereignty of the entire Kshatriya race, 
to be a horn (to have a mastery) over the whole earth. He occupied the 
splendid city formerly inhabited by Bharata, and made all kings again 
tributary to himself,” 

The second story relates to the conflict between the Bhrigus and 
the Kshatriya king Kritavirya and their subsequent reconciliation. 
It occurs in the Adi Parvan of the Mahabharata i 1 

“There was a king named Kritavirya, by whose liberality the Bhrigus, 
learned in the Vedas, who officiated as his priests, had been greatly enriched 
with cows and money. After he had gone to heaven, his descendants were 
in want of money, and came to beg for a supply from the Bhrigus, of whose 
wealth they were aware. Some of the latter hid their money underground, 
others bestowed it on Brahmins, being afraid of the Kshatriyas, while others 
again gave these last what they wanted. It happened, however, that a 
Kshatriya while digging the ground, discovered some money buried in the 
house of a Bhrigu. The Kshatriyas then assembled and saw this treasure, 
and, being incensed, slew in consequence all the Bhrigus, whom they 
regarded with contempt, down to the children in the womb. The widows, 
however, fled to the Himalaya mountains. One of them concealed her 
unborn child in her thigh. The Kshatriyas, hearing of its existence from 
a Brahmani informant sought to kill it, but it issued forth from his mother’s 
thigh with lustre, and blinded the persecutors. After wandering about 
bewildered among the mountains for a time, they humbly supplicated the 
mother of the child for the restoration of their sight; but she referred them 
to her wonderful infant Aurva, into whom the whole Veda, with its six 
Vcdangas, had entered, as the person who (in retaliation of the slaughter 
of his relatives) had robbed them of their eye-sight, and who alone could 
restore it. They accordingly had recourse to him, and their eye-sight was 
restored. Aurva, however, mediated the destruction of all living creatures, 
in revenge for the slaughter of the Bhrigus, and entered on a course of 
austerities which alarmed both gods, asuras and men; but his progenitors 
(Pitris), themselves appeared, and sought to turn him from his purpose 
by saying that they had no desire to be rovenged on the Kshatriyas. It 
was not from weakness that the devout Bhrigus overlooked the massacre 
perpetrated by the murderous Kshatriyas. ‘When we became distressed by old 
age, we ourselves desired to be slaughtered by them. The money which was 


1. Muir, Vol. I, pp. 448-449 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

buried by some one in a Bhrigu’s house was placed there for the purpose 
of exciting hatred, by those who wished to provoke the Kshatriyas. For what 
had we who were desiring heaven, to do with money?’ They added that they 
hit upon this device because they did not wish to be guilty of suicide, and 
concluded by calling upon Aurva to restrain his wrath, and abstain from the 
sin he was meditating: ‘Destroy not the Kshatriyas, o son, nor the seven 
worlds. Suppress thy kindled anger which nullifies the power of austere 
fervour.’ Aurva, however, replies that he cannot allow his threat to remain 
unexecuted. His anger, unless wreaked upon some other object, will, he says, 
consume himself, and he argues, on grounds of justice, expediency and duty, 
against the clemency which his progenitors recommended. He is, however, 
persuaded by the Pltris to throw the fire of his anger into the sea, where 
they say it will find exercise in assailing the watery element, and in this 
way his threat will be fulfilled, It accordingly became the great Hayasiras, 
known to those who are acquainted with the Veda, which vomits forth that 
fire and drinks up the waters.” 

The third story concerns the conflict between Arjuna, son of 
Kritavirya, the king of the Haihayas and Parashurama and the 
subsequent reconciliation between them. It occurs in the Vanaparvan 
of the Mahabharata and runs as follows 

“Arjuna, son of Kritavirya and king of the Haihayas, had, we are told, 
a thousand arms. He obtained from Dattaireya an aerial car of gold, the march 
of which was irresistible. He thus trod down gods, Yakshas, rishis, and 
oppressed all creatures. The gods and rishis applied to Vishnu and he along 
with Indra, who had been insulted by Arjuna, devised the means of destroying 
the latter. At this time, the story goes on, there lived a king of Kanyakubja, 
called Gadhi, who had a daughter named Satyavati. The marriage of this 
princess to the rishi Richika and the birth of Jamadagni, are then told in 
nearly the same way as above narrated. Jamadagni and Satyavati had five 
sons, the youngest of whom was the redoubtable Parashurama. By his father’s 
command he kills his mother (who, by the indulgence of impure desire, had 
fallen from her previous sanctity), after the four elder sons had refused this 
matricidal office, and had in consequence been deprived of reason by their 
father’s curse. At Parashurama’s desire, however, his mother is restored by 
his father to life, and his brothers to reason; and he himself is absolved from 
all the guilt of murder; and obtains the boon of invincibility and long life 
from his father. His history now begins to be connected with that of king 
Arjuna (or Kritavirya). The latter had come to Jamadagni’s hermitage, and 
had been respectfully received by his wife; but he had requitted this honour 
by carrying away by force the calf of the sage’s sacrificial cow, and breaking 
down his lofty trees. On being informed of this violence, Parashurama was 
filled with indignation, attacked Arjuna, cut off his thousand arms, and 
slew him. Arjuna’s son, in return slew the peaceful sage Jamadagni, in 
the absence of Parashurama. Parashurama incensed at the slaughter of 
his father, having vowed in consequence to sweep away all • Kshatriyas 
from the earth, seized his weapons and slaying all the sons and grandsons 
of Arjuna, with thousands of the Haihayas, he turned the earth into 


1. Muir, Vol. I, pp. 449-454 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


195 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 195 

a mass of ensanguined mud. Having thus cleared the earth of Kshatriyas 
he became penetrated by deep compassion and retired to the forest. After 
some thousands of years had elapsed, the hero, naturally irascible, was 
taunted by Paravasu, the son of Raibhaya and grandson of Vishvamitra, in 
a public assembly in these words : ‘Are not these virtuous men, Pratardana 
and the others, who are assembled at the sacrifice in the city of Yayati — 
are they not Kshatriyas? Thou hast failed to execute thy threat, and vainly 
boastest in the assembly. Thou hast withdrawn to the mountain from the 
fear of those valiant Kshatriyas, while the earth has again become overturn 
by hundreds of their race,’ Hearing these words, Rama seized the weapons. 
The hundreds of Kshatriyas who had before been spared had now grown 
powerful kings. Those, however, Parashurama, now slew with their children, 
and all the numerous infants then unborn as they came into the world. Some, 
however, were preserved by their mothers. Having twenty-one times cleared 
the earth of the Kshatriyas, Rama gave her as a sacrificial fee to Kasyapa 
at the conclusion of an Ashvamedha.” 

After telling the story of the conflict the author of the Mahabharata 
proceeds to narrate the story of reconciliation in the following terms : 1 2 3 4 

“Having one and twenty times swept away all the Kshatriyas from the earth, 
the son of Jamadagni engaged in austerities on Mahendra, the most excellent 
of mountains. After he had cleared the world of Kshatriyas, their widows came 
to the Brahmins, praying for offspring. The religious Brahmins, free from any 
impulse of lust, cohabited at the proper seasons with these women, who in 
consequence became pregnant, and brought forth valiant Kshatriya boys and girls, 
to continue the Kshatriya stock. Thus was the Kshatriya race virtuously begotten 
by Brahmins on Kshatriya women and became multiplied and long-lived. Thence 
there arose four castes inferior to the Brahmins.” 

The above instances of conflicts and conciliations between Brah- 
mins and Kshatriyas do not relate to those Kshatriya kings who have 
figured in history as having declared war on the Brahmins. To turn 
to instances of their 2 stories of reconciliation with the Brahmins the 
first is that of Kalmashapada. He is said to be the son of Sudas . 3 
The story is given in the Adiparvan of the Mahabharata . 4 That part 
of the story which narrates the enmity between Kalmashapada and 
Vasishtha has already been recounted . 5 The part of the story which 
deals with reconciliation runs as follows : 

“After roaming about over many mountains and countries, he (V asishtha) was 
followed home by his daughter-in-law Adrisyanti, Shaktri’ s 6 widow, from whose 

1. Muir, Vol. I, pp. 451-452 

2. I am not sure that the kings mentioned in the episodes which follow are the same 
as those mentioned in Chapter IX. I refer to them because they belong to the Ikshvaku 
family. 

3. I am not sure which Sudas he is. From the details he seems to be Paijavana Sudas. 

4. Muir, Vol. I, pp. 415-418. 

5. See Chapter 9. 

6. This is probably a mistake for Shakti. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

womb he heard a sound or the recitation of the Vedas, as she was pregnant 
with a child, which, when born, received the name of Parasara. Learning from 
her that there was thus a hope of his line being continued, he abstained 
from further attempts on his own life. King Kalmashapada, however, whom 
they encountered in the forest, was about to devour them both when Vasishtha 
stopped him by a blast from his mouth, and sprinkling him with water 
consecrated by a holy text, he delivered him from the curse by which he had 
been affected for twelve years. The king then addressed Vasishtha thus: ‘Most 
excellent sage, I am Saudasa, whose priest thou art, what can I do that would 
be pleasing to thee?’ Vasishtha answered : ‘This which has happened has 
been owing to the force of destiny; go, and rule thy kingdom; but, o monarch, 
never condemn the Brahmins.’ The king replied, ‘Never shall I despise the 
most excellent Brahmins; but submitting to thy commands I shall pay thee 
all honour. And I must obtain from thee the means of discharging my debt 
to the Ikshvakus. Thou must give me the offspring which I desire.’ Vasishtha 
promised to comply with his request. They then returned to Ayodhya. And 
Vasishtha having been solicited by the king to beget an heir to the throne, 
the queen 1 became pregnant by him, and brought forth a son at the end of 
twelve years.” 

The second instance occurs in the Anushasanaparvan of the 
Mahabharata : 2 

“At the time the eloquent king Saudasa sprung from the race of Ikshvaku 
proceeded, after salutation, to make an enquiry of his family priest Vasishtha, 
the eternal saint, the most excellent of rishis, who was able to traverse all 
the world, and was a treasure of sacred knowledge: ‘What, o, venerable and 
sinless man, is declared to be the purest thing in the three worlds, by 
constantly celebrating which one may acquire the highest merit?’ Vasishtha 
in reply expatiates at great length on the merit resulting from bestowing 
cows, and ascribes to these animals some wonderful properties so that they 
are the ‘support of all beings,’ the present and the future, and describes the 
cow as ‘pervading the universe, mother of the past and the future’. The great 
self-subduing king, considering that these words of the rishi were most 
excellent, lavished on the Brahmins very great wealth in the shape of cows 
and obtained the worlds. So here we find the son of Saudasa extolled as a 
saint.” 

The third instance relates to the reconciliation in which there is 
reference to Sudasa’s descendants. It occurs in the Shanti Parvan 
of the Mahabharata : 3 

“Having received the dominion over the earth, Kasyapa made it an abode 
of Brahmins, and himself withdrew to the forest. Shudras and Vaishyas then 
began to act lawlessly towards the wives of the Brahmins, and in consequence 
of there being no government, the weak were oppressed by the strong, and no 
one was master of any property. The earth being distressed by the wicked, in 

1. Her name was Madayanti, She is referred to in the Anushashana Parvan at 
the wife of Mitrasaha, which is another name for Kamashapada — See Muir, Vol. I, 
pp, 418, 423 and 514, 

2. Muir, Vol. I, p. 374. 

3. Ibid,., Vol. I, pp. 455-456. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


197 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 197 

consequence of that disorder, and unprotected according to rule by the 
Kshatriyas, the guardians of justice, descended to the lower regions. 
Perceiving’ her moving from place to place in terror, Kasyapa upheld her 
with his thigh ( uru ). From this circumstance she derives her name of urvi. 
The goddess Earth then propitiated Kasyapa and supplicated him for 
protection, and for a king. ‘I have,’ she said, ‘preserved among females 
many Kshatriyas who have been bom in the race of Haihayas; let them 
be my protectors. There is the heir of Pauravas, the son of Viduratha, 
who has been brought up by bears on the mountain Rikshavat; let him 
protect me. So, too, the heir of Saudasa, has been preserved by the tender- 
hearted and glorious priest, Parasara who had performed, though a 
Brahmin, all menial offices for him like a Shudra whence the prince’s name 
Sarvakarman. ‘After enumerating other kings who had been rescued, the 
Earth proceeds: ‘All these Kshatriya descendants have been preserved in 
different places, abiding continually among the classes of dyokaras and 
goldsmiths. If they protect me, I shall continue unshaken. Their fathers 
and grandfathers were slain on my account by Rama, energetic in action. 

It is incumbent on me to avenge their cause. For I do not desire to be 
always protected by an extraordinary person (such as Kasyapa); but I will 
be content with an ordinary ruler. Let this be speedily fulfilled.’ Kasyapa 
then sent for these Kshatriyas who had been pointed out by the Earth, 
and installed them in the kingly office.” 

Such is the evidence. Can anybody accept it as reliable? In my 
opinion, far from accepting it, one should beware of such evidence. 

In the first place, all these stories of reconciliation end, for the 
Kshatriyas, in peace without honour. In every case, the Kshatriyas 
are shown to have undergone an abject surrender. The Bharatas are 
the enemies of Vasishtha. Suddenly there is a famine in their 
country. They leave the country and lose their kingdom. They 
implore Vasishtha their age-old enemy and pray that he become their 
priest and save them from the calamity. In the story of the Bhrigus 
and the Kshatriyas, the credit is given to the Brahmins as being 
too proud to fight. In the story of the Haihaya Kshatriyas and the 
Saudasa such as Kalmashpada, the surrender of the Kshatriyas was 
so to say purchased by them by offering their women to the victorious 
Brahmins. The stories are all doctored with a view to glorify the 
Brahmins and humiliate the Kshatriyas. Who can take such dirty, 
filthy, abominable and vainglorious stories of reconciliation as true 
historical facts? Only a supporter of Brahminism can do so. 

Such is the general character of the evidence on the question of 
reconciliation. Coming to the particular case of reconciliation between 
the Brahmins and the Shudras, the descendants of Sudas, there is 
ample, evidence to show that no such reconciliation had taken place. 
In the first place, it cannot be gainsaid that Parasara, the son 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of Shakti or Shaktri, the son of Vasishtha, when he heard of the 
way in which his father had met his death — namely, that he was 
burnt alive by Sudas, the Shudra king, — determined to execute a 
general slaughter of all creatures. The general slaughter is, of course, 
a figurative term. What is meant is that Vasishtha took a vow of 
general vengeance against the descendants of Sudas, namely, the 
Shudras. It is no doubt said in the Mahabharata that Vasishtha 
restrained Parasara and persuaded him not to carry out his threat 
of vengeance by telling him how the Bhrigus and the Kshatriyas had 
come into conflict and how the former won against the latter by 
adopting non-violence. But this story cannot be true; for, like other 
stories it is doctored with a view to bring glory to the Brahmins. 

In the second place, the strongest proof in support of the contention 
that there was no reconciliation between the Brahmins and the 
Shudras comes from the legislation enacted by the Brahmins against 
the Shudras. The laws against the Shudras have already been 
referred to. Their growth and their extraordinary character have been 
pointed out. All that remains to do is to say that against this 
background of black laws any suggestion regarding reconciliation 
must appear to be wholly untenable. The Brahmins not only did not 
forgive the Shudras, they pursued even the progeny of the Shudras 
with the same spirit of relentless revenge. As many people do not 
seem to have any idea of this, it may be desirable to state a few 
facts regarding the Chandala and the Nishada. 

The Chandala and Nishada are the issues of mixed marriages. 
Nishada is an anuloma while the Chandala is a Pratiloma. The 
anulomas 1 are held to be eligible for Upanayana. But curiously 
enough an exception is made to this rule. Nishada who is the son 
of Brahman from a Shudra woman, though an anuloma, is held not 
to be eligible for Upanayana. It is interesting to know why this 
exception was made. The only answer seems to be that this arbitrary 
act is an act of revenge against the children of one’s enemy. 


1 There are six anulomas as shown in the following table : 


Father 

Mother 

Name of the progeny 

Brahmin 

Kshatriya 

Murdhavasikta 

Brahmin 

Vaishya 

Ambashtha 

Brahmin 

Shudra 

Nishada 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

Mahishya 

Kshatriya 

Shudra 

Urga 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

Karana 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


199 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 199 

Turning to the Pratilomas, 1 Manu no doubt calls, all of them as the 
basest of men. At the same time, the stigma on the Pratilomas is not 
evenly distributed among all of them. In the matter of rights and 
privileges, the Ayogava and the Kshattar are treated with incredible 
consideration, while the Chandala is subjected to unspeakable condem- 
nation. As an illustration of this discrimination one can cite the 
following provisions in the Manu Smriti : 

As to the Ayogava, the Manu Smriti merely says : 

Carpenting (shall be the occupation) of an Ayogava. — X.46. As to the 

Kshattar the Manu Smriti says : 

catching and killing animals that live in holes (is the occupation) 

of Kshattar. — x.49. 

They are only assigned low occupations. 

Compare with this what the Manu Smriti has to say about the 
Chandala : 

“A Chandala and a boar, a cock and also a dog, and a woman in her 

courses and an eunuch, may not see the Brahmins eating.” — 

iii. 239. 

One may not abide with outcasts, nor Chandalas, nor Pukkasas, nor 
idiots, nor proud (people), nor with the low-born (people) nor with 
Antyavasayins . — iv. 79. 

One becomes pure by bathing if one has touched a Chandala, or a 
woman in her courses, an outcaste, also a woman lying-in, a corpse or 
one who has touched it. — v.85. 

Manu declared the flesh of (a beast) killed by dogs (to be pure); also 
the flesh of an animal killed by other carnivorous (animals) (or) by 
Chandala (and) other Dasyus. — v. 131. 

Two-fold should be the fine of a criminal sentenced within a year, 
and just as much if one cohabit with a Vratya woman or a Chandala 
woman. — viii.373. 

The man, however, who foolishly allows this to be done by any 
other (wife) than the one of his own caste when the latter is at 
hand, has been, of old, looked upon as (no whit better than) a 


1 Gaut. Dh, S., IV. 21, quoted by Kane, II, Part I, p. 229. 


Father 

Mother 

Name of the caste 

Shudra 

Brahmin 

Chandala 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

Kshattar 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

Ayogava 

Vaishya 

Brahmin 

Suta 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

Vaidehaka 

Kshatriya 

Brahmin 

Magadha 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


200 


200 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Chandala. — ix.87. 

The dwelling of Chandalas and Svapacas (should be) outside the 
village; they should be deprived of dishes (apapatra); their property 
(consists of) dogs and asses. — x.51. 

Moreover, Vishvamitra, well knowing right and wrong, being 
oppressed by hunger proceeded to eat the ramp of a dog, having it 
from the hand of a Chandala. — x. 108. 

At no time should a Brahmin beg property from a Shudra for the 
sake of sacrifice, for on offering sacrifice after begging (from a 
Shudra) he is born after death as a Chandala. — vi.24. 

On having (carnal) intercourse with Chandala women (or low born 
woman), on eating their food or receiving (presents) from them, a 
Brahmin (if he has done so) unwittingly, falls; but (if he has done 
so) wittingly, he comes to an equality (with them). — xi.175. 

The slayer of a Brahmin enters the womb of dogs, boars, asses, 
camels, cows, goats, sheep, (forest) animals, birds, Chandalas and 
Pukkasas. — xi.55. 

How different is the treatment accorded to the Chandala as 
compared to the treatment accorded to the Ayogava and the Kshattar 
when all of them are Pratilomas? Why should the Chandala be singled 
out as the most infamous of the Pratilomas? Only because he is the 
progeny of the hated Shudra. It is just an act of revenge against 
the children of one’s enemy. 

All this leaves no doubt that there was no reconciliation between 
the Brahmins and the Shudras. 


IV 

Coming to the last objection, it appears that behind it there is a 
feeling that the Shudras must have been a very large part of the 
Indo-Aryan society. With such a feeling it does appear rather strange 
that the Shudras should have suffered silently the perpetration of 
such an act as the denial of the Upanayana. Because the Shudras 
in the Hindu Society form such a vast proportion of the population, 
so the Shudras of the Indo-Aryan Society must also have formed a very 
large proportion of the population, can be the only basis for such a 
feeling. Such an inference is without any foundation, for the Shudras 
of the Indo-Aryan Society are absolutely different in race from the 
Shudras of the Hindu Society. The Shudras of the Hindu Society are 
not the racial descendants of the Shudras of the Indo-Aryan Society. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


201 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 201 

This confusion has arisen because of the failure to realize that the 
meaning of the word ‘Shudras’ in the Indo-Aryan society is quite 
different from the meaning it has in the Hindu society. In the Indo- 
Aryans the word Shudra was proper name of one single people. It 
was the name of a people who belonged to a particular race. The 
word Shudra, as used in the Hindu society, is not a proper name 
at all. It is an epithet for a low uncultured class of people. It is a 
general cognomen of a miscellaneous and heterogeneous collection of 
tribes and groups, who have nothing in common except that they 
happen to be on a lower plane of culture. It is wrong to call them 
by the name Shudras. They have very little to do with their 
namesakes of the Aryan society, who had offended the Brahmins. It 
is a pity that these innocent and backward people of later days have 
been rolled up with the original Shudras and subjected to the same 
penalties for which they had given no cause. 

That the Shudras of the Indo-Aryan and the Shudras of the Hindu 
Society are different and distinct is a fact which was present at one 
time to the minds of the Dharma Sutrakaras is quite clear. This is 
evident from the distinction they made between Sacchudra and Asac- 
chudra and between Aniravasita Shudras and Niravasita Shudras. 
Sachudra means a cultured Shudra and asac-chudra means an 
uncultured Shudra. Nirvasita Shudra means a Shudra living in the 
village community. Anirvasita Shudra means a Shudra living outside 
the village community. It is quite wrong to say as some 1 do that this 
division indicates that the condition of Shudras in the eyes of the 
lawgivers was improving, in that some were admitted to social 
intercourse when formerly none was. The correct interpretation is the 
Sacchudra and Nirvasita Shudra refer to the Shudras of the Aryan 
society and the asac-chudra and the Anirvasita Shudra refer to the 
Shudras by epithet who had begun to form part of the Hindu society. 
We are concerned with the Shudra of the Aryan society. They have 
no connection with the later-day Shudras of the Hindu society. That 
being so, the fact that the Shudras of the Hindu society form such 
a large number cannot be made the basis for an argument that the 
Shudras of the Indo-Aryans must have also been a very large body 
of people. We do not know exactly whether the Shudras were a tribe, 
a clan or a moiety or a group of families. But even if they were as 


1 Sec Kane, II (I), p. 123. His view that this distinction implies that Shudras were 
being gradually raised from their low status is quite incorrect. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

big as a tribe, they could not have been larger than a few thousand. 
The Bharatas are being expressly spoken of in the Rig Veda, vii.33.6, 
as being small in number. The Satapatha Brahmana referring to 
a horse sacrifice performed by the Panchala king Son Satrasaha 1 
says : 

“When Satrasaha makes the Ashvamedha offering the Taurvasas arise, 

six thousand and six and thirty, clad in mail.” 

If it is any indication that the tribe of Taurvasas numbered six 
thousand, the Shudras could not be very many. 

Apart from the question of numbers, what could the Shudras have 
done to prevent the calamity? If some Brahmins whom they had 
offended refused to perform their Upanayana, could they have got 
the services of other Brahmins whom they had not offended? Such 
a possibility would of course depend upon various circumstances. In 
the first place, we do not know whether all the Brahmins had formed 
a common front and whether it was possible to break up that front. 
We do not know that at the time when the issue was a burning 
issue the Brahmins had become a caste. But it is clear 2 that even 
in the times of the Rig Veda, Brahmins were a class by themselves, 
had developed class consciousness and were keen on maintaining 
class interests. In that event it would have been difficult for the 
Shudras to break up the conspiracy of the Brahmins. Secondly, it 
might also be that the performance of Upanayana had become the 
exclusive right of the family priest. The story of king Nimi 3 shows 
that the performance of sacrifices had become the exclusive right 
of the family priest. If there is substance in these suggestions, then 
obviously the Shudras could not have done much to prevent the 
common front of the Brahmins operating against them. 

Another possibility was the forging of a common front among all 
the Kshatriyas which might have had the effect of weighing down the 
opposition of the Brahmins. Whether such a thing was possible can 
only be a matter of speculation. In the first place, did the Shudras 
realize what the effect of the loss of Upanayana was going to be on 
their future status? I am sure they did not. Secondly, were the 
Kshatriyas a united body of people? I doubt if they were. Thirdly, had 
the other Kshatriya kings any symapathy for the Shudras? If the story 
of the Dasharajna Yuddha told in the Rig Veda is true, it is quite 

1. Quoted by Oldcnberg, Life of Buddha , p. 404. 

2. Kane, Vol. H (1) p. 29. 

3. Supra , p. 175 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-11 Mk S.K.— 26-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


203 


THE SHUDRAS : THE STORY OF RECONCILIATION 203 

obvious that there was not much love lost between the Shudras and 
the other non-Shudra Kshatriyas. 

Taking all these circumstances into consideration, there is nothing 
strange if the Shudras suffered the denial of the Upanayana by the 
Brahmins to be a fact. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


204 


CHAPTER XII 

THE THEORY IN THE CRUCIBLE 
I 

THE object of this essay was to trace the origin of the Shudras and 
discover the causes of their degradation. After an examination of 
historical material and of theories suggested by various writers — 
orthodox as well as modern — I have put forth a new thesis. In the 
preceding chapters, it has been presented in parts for the facility of 
laying the foundation of each part separately. It is time these parts 
were assembled together for a full and complete understanding of 
what the thesis is. It may be summarized as follows : 

(1) The Shudras were one of the Aryan communities of the Solar 

race. 

(2) The Shudras ranked as the Kshatriya Varna in the Indo-Aryan 

Society. 

(3) There was a time when the Aryan Society recognized only three 

Varnas, namely, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. The 
Shudras were not a separate Varna but a part of the Kshatriya 
Varna. 

(4) There was a continuous feud between the Shudra kings and 

the Brahmins, in which the Brahmins were subjected to many 
tyrannies and indignities. 

(5) As a result of the hatred towards the Shudras due to their 

tyrannies and oppressions, the Brahmins refused to invest the 
Shudras with the sacred thread. 

(6) Owing to the loss of the sacred thread the Shudras became 

socially degraded, fell below the rank of the Vaishyas and came 
to form the fourth Varna. 

It now remains to assess the validity of this thesis. It is usual 
for the author to leave this to others to do it. I propose to make 
a departure and myself enter upon the task of putting my thesis to 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


205 


THE SHUDRAS : THE THEORY IN THE CRUCIBLE 205 

test. I do so because it gives me an opportunity of vindicating my 
thesis. 


II 

I can well imagine my critics to allege that my thesis rests upon 
a single statement from the Mahabharata in which Paijavana is 
described as a Shudra; that identification of Paijavana with Sudas 
is not proved beyond the shadow of doubt; that the description of 
Paijavana as a Shudra does not occur in any other place except in 
a single place in the Mahabharata. How can a theory built on such 
weak foundations be acceptable? They are bound to invoke the usual 
agreement that a chain is not stronger than its weakest link. I am 
sure that my thesis cannot be discredited and demolished in such 
an easy manner. 

In the first place, I do not admit that a thesis cannot be built up 
on a single piece of evidence. It is a well-known principle of the law 
of evidence that witness must be weighed and not numbered. The 
number of witnesses is a less important consideration than the weight 
to be attached to the individual testimony of each or to the sum of 
the testimonies of all taken together. There is no reason to doubt 
the truth of the statement that Paijavana was a Shudra. The author 
of the Mahabharata has no reason to give a false description. Writing 
after such a long time, no motive, no partiality could be attributed 
to him. The only conclusion one can draw is that the author was 
recording a true tradition. 

The fact that Paijavana is not described as a Shudra in the Rig 
Veda does not militate against the truth of the statement which 
occurs in the Mahabharata. Many explanations can be given for the 
absence of the word Shudra from the description of Paijavana in the 
Rig Veda. The first explanation is that it is wrong to expect such 
a description in the Rig Veda. The Rig Veda is a book of religion. 
A description such as Shudra could not be expected in a book of 
religion. It would be irrelevant. But such a description may well be 
expected to occur in a book of history such as the Mahabharata 
wherein as a matter of fact it does. 

The other explanation for the infrequent mention of the word 
Shudra in connection with Sudas which I can think of is that it was 
unnecessary. Descriptions in terms of kula, gotra, tribe, etc., are 
really speaking marks of identification. Marks of identification are 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

necessary in the case of lesser people. They are unnecessary in the 
case of famous men. There is no doubt that Sudas was the most 
famous man of his time. It was unnecessary to describe him as Shudra 
for the purpose of identifying him to the people. This is not altogether 
a mere matter of speculation. One can cite historical instances. Take 
the case of Bimbisara and Pasenadi, two kings who lived in the time 
of Buddha. All other kings who were their contemporaries are 
described in the literature of the time by their gotra name. But these 
two are just spoken of by their personal names. Prof. Oldenberg 1 who 
noticed this fact explains this on the ground that they were well- 
known and did not stand in need for being described by their gotra 
names. 


Ill 

But it is really wrong to suppose that my theory is based on the 
solitary passage in the Mahabharata or on the identification of 
Paijavana with Sudas. Nothing of the kind. The thesis is not 
supported by a single chain and therefore the argument that a chain 
is not stronger than its weakest link does not apply to it. The case 
is supported by several parallel chains. The weakness of a link in 
one of them cannot be said to weaken the support. The weakness 
of one link in one chain throws the whole weight on other chains. 
Consequently, before concluding that the theory has broken down, 
it is necessary to prove that the other chains are not able to sustain 
the weight. 

The description of Paijavana as Shudra and the identification of 
Paijavana with Sudas of the Rig Veda is not the only chain which 
supports the thesis. There are other chains. One of these is the 
admission in the Satapatha and Taittiriya Brahmanas that there were 
only three Varnas and the Shudras did not form a separate Varna. 
The second consists of evidence that Shudras were kings and 
ministers of State. The third consists of evidence that the Shudras 
were at one time entitled to Upanayana. All these are strong chains 
quite capable of taking all extra weight arising out of a possible 
breakdown of the first chain. 

As far as evidence is concerned, absolute certainty amounting to 
demonstration is seldom to be had and I do not claim absolute 


1 Lift of Buddha, p. 414. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


207 


THE SHUDRAS : THE THEORY IN THE CRUCIBLE 207 

certainty for my thesis. But I do claim that the evidence in support 
of the theory is both direct as well as circumstantial, and where it 
is conflicting it is supported by strong probabilities in favour of it. 


IV 

I have shown what strength there is in the thesis I have presented. 
I will now proceed to show that the thesis is a valid one. There is 
one test which I think is generally accepted as the right one by which 
to appraise the validity of a thesis. It is that a thesis which demands 
acceptance must not only suggest a solution, but must also show that 
the solution it proposes answers the riddles which surround the 
problem which it claims to have solved. It is this test that I propose 
to apply to my thesis. 

Let me begin by listing in one place the riddles of the Shudra. 
The following include the most important of them : 

(1) The Shudras are alleged to be non-Aryans, hostile to the 
Aryans, whom the Aryans are said to have conquered and 
made slaves. How is it then that the rishis of the Yajur Veda 
and the Atharva Veda should wish glory to the Shudras and 
express a desire to be in favour of the Shudras? 

(2) The Shudras are said not to have the right to study the Vedas. 

How is it then that Sudas, a Shudra, was the composer of the 
hymns of the Rig Veda? 

(3) The Shudras are said to have no right to perform sacrifices. 

How is it that Sudas performed the Ashva-Medha sacrifice? 
Why does the Satapatha Brahmana treat the Shudra as a 
sacrificer and give the formula of addressing him? 

(4) The Shudras are said not to have the right to Upanayana. If 

this was so from the very beginning, why should there be a 
controversy about it? Why should Badari and the Samskara 
Ganapati say that he has a right to Upanayana? 

(3) The Shudra is not permitted to accumulate property. How is 
it that the Maitrayani and Kathaka Samhitas speak of the 
Shudras being rich and wealthy? 

(6) The Shudra is said to be unfit to become an officer of the State. 
How is it then that the Mahabharata speaks of Shudras being 
ministers to kings? 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


208 


208 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(7) It is said that the duty of the Shudra is to serve, in the capacity 

of a menial, the three Varnas. How is it then that there were 
kings among the Shudras as testified by the case of Sudas 
and other cases mentioned by Sayana? 

(8) If the Shudra had no right to study the Vedas, if he had no 

right to Upanayana, if he had no right to sacrifice, why was 
he not given the right to have his Upanayana, to read the 
Vedas and to perform sacrifice? 

(9) The performance of Upanayana of the Shudra, his learning to 

read the Vedas, his performing the sacrifices, whether they 
were of any value to the Shudra or not, were certainly 
occasions of benefit to the Brahmins in as much as it is the 
Brahmins who had the monopoly of officiating at ceremonies 
and of teaching the Vedas. It is the Brahmins who stood to 
earn large fees by allowing the Shudra the right to Upanayana, 
the performance of sacrifices and the reading of the Vedas. 
Why were the Brahmins so determined to deny these conces- 
sions to the Shudras, when granting them would have done 
no harm and would have increased their own earnings? 

(10) Even if the Shudra had no right to Upanayana, sacrifices and 
Vedas, it was open to the Brahmins to concede him these 
rights. Why were these questions not left to the free will of 
the individual Brahmins? Why were penalties imposed upon 
a Brahmin if he did any of these prohibited acts? 

How can these riddles be explained? Neither the orthodox Hindu 
nor the modern scholar has attempted to explain them. Indeed they 
do not seem to be aware of the fact that such riddles exist. The 
orthodox Hindu does not bother about them. He is content with the 
divine explanation contained in the Purusha Sukta that the Shudra 
was born from the feet of the Purusha. The modern scholar is content 
with the assumption that the Shudra in his origin is a non-Aryan 
aboriginal, for whom the Aryan quite naturally prescribed a different 
code of laws. It is a pity that none of these classes of people have 
cared to acquaint themselves with the riddles which surround the 
problem of the Shudra, much less have they thought of suggesting 
a theory of the origin of the position of the Shudra capable of solving 
them. 

With regard to my thesis it will be seen that it can explain 
everyone of these riddles. Postulates (1) to (4) explain how the 
Shudras could be kings and ministers and why the rishis should 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-12 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


209 


THE SHUDRAS : THE THEORY IN THE CRUCIBLE 209 

praise them and desire to be in their good books. Postulates (5) and 
(6) explain why there was a controversy over the Upanayana of the 
Shudra, also why the law not only denied the right to the Shudra 
but imposed penalties upon a Brahmin, helping to make it effective. 
Indeed there is no riddle which the thesis does not solve. The thesis, 
if I may say so, is a close and a perfect fit. Few theses can therefore 
have a better title deed than this. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


210 


Appendices 


APPENDIX I 


References to the word “Arya” (3pf) in the Rig Veda. 



D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 211 


APPENDIX II 


References to the word “Arya” (3ipf) 
(I) In the Rig Veda 



D:\AMBEDKARYVOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 212 


APPENDIX III 


Different meanings of the word “Arya” (3T*f) found in the Rig Veda. 


Meaning 

I 

H 

M 

II 

H 

M 

III 

H M 

IV 

H 

M 

V 

H 

M 

VI 

H 

M 

VII 

H 

M 

VIII 

H 

M 

IX 

H 

M 

X 

H 

M 

Enemy 

70 

1 




16 

19 

33 

2 

14 

3 

21 

9 

48 

8 

79 

1 

42 

1 


73 

5 








15 

3 

34 

18 

49 

12 



59 

3 


118 

9 








20 

1 

48 

3 





76 

2 


121 

15 








36 

5 

56 

22 





89 

3 


169 

6 










68 

2 



















92 

4 







Respectable 

33 

3 

23 

15 

43 2 

1 

7 

33 

6 

24 

5 

8 

1 

19 

36 



20 

4 

Noble 

81 

6 

35 

2 


2 

12 

33 

9 

25 

7 

21 

5 

21 

16 



27 

8 


81 

9 

43 

2 


4 

6 

34 

9 

47 

9 

31 

5 

24 

22 



27 

19 


121 

14 




20 

3 





86 

7 

34 

10 



34 

13 


184 

1 




24 

8 





100 

5 

55 

12 



86 

1 







29 

1 











86 

3 







38 

2 











116 

6 







48 

1 











148 

3 



















191 

1 

Citizen 






2 

18 



















20 

3 














CO 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 213 


APPENDIX IV 

References to “DASA” in the Rig Veda 



M 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 214 


APPENDIX V 

References to “Dasyu” in the Rig Veda 



IsS 

M 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 215 


APPENDIX VI 

References to the word “Varna” in the Rig Veda 



IsS 

M 

C5 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-13 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 216 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


217 


INDEX 


Acharya — Exclusive right to officiate 
at Upanayana, 173-74; Qualifica- 
tions, 173 

Aitarcya Brahmana — Manu the pro- 
genitor of Indo-Aryans, 29; Dis- 
abilities of Shudras under, 42; On 
Vaishyas’ sacrificial disabilities, 
56-57; List of coronations of Kings 
and officiating priests 123-24 

Alpine Race — Traits of, 67-68; Prof. 
Ripley on, 98-99; Its languages of 
Aryan Stock, 99 

Ambarisha — 145 

Anulomas — Who are, 199 (and foot- 
note); sec Nishada 

Apastamba Dharma Sutra — Support 
to Purusha Sukta, 23; Disabilities 
of Shudras under; 43, 47, 50-51; 
On qualifications of Acharya, 173 

Arjuna — 194-95 

Aryan — Race, an invader of India, 65; 
Type and its traits, 69; Four senses 
of term, 69; Not a race according to 
Prof. Max Muller, 69-70; Original 
home as traceable by common vo- 
cabulary, 71-72; Caucasia, not the 
original home of, 71-72; Mr. Tilak’s 
theory of Arctic region being home 
of, 72-74; Evidence against theory 
of, invasion of India, 74-75; and 
subjugation of Dasas and Dasyus, 
75-76, 86-87; Inseparable from 

Dasas and Dasyus, 77; Race theory, 
its failure, 78-79, its Indian vota- 
ries, 79-80, meaning of term 
Varna its mainstay, 80; Of Vedic 
times had no colour prejudice, 81; 
Two communities : with and with- 
out belief in Chaturvamya, 97, 100; 


Permitted to make other Aryans 
slaves, 112-13; Vedic, social orga- 
nization, 130-31; Rules of Impurity 
and Adoption, 160-61 

Ashwalayan Grihya Sutra — Description 
of Upanayana ceremony, 156-58 

Ashwins — Though Shudras entitled to 
Soma, 109 

Atharva Veda — On five tribes of Indo- 
Aryan nation, 31; Its four explana- 
tions of the origin of Vamas, 39; 
When it came to be regarded on par 
with Rig Veda, 87; Statements from, 
demarcating Shudra from Arya, 107; 
Statements from, showing basis of 
equality between Brahmins and 
Shudras, 107-108, 207-208 

Aupamanyava — Five tribes of Indo- 
Aryan nations according to, 30 

Avarnas — De jure connotation of, 
35-36, Who are, 36 

Balaji Avji — His part in Shivaji’s coro- 
nation, 177-78, 181-82 

Baudhayana — Prescription of 

Upanayana for Ashwathha tree, 169 

Belavalkar, Prof. — Theory of Synchro- 
nous composition of Vedic Litera- 
ture, 138. 

Benfey, Dr. — Summary of his views on 
original home of Aryans, 71 

Bhagavat Purana — On naming of India 
as ‘Bharata Bhumi’. 129 

Bhandarkar, Dr. D. R. — His view of 
Rajputs as descendants of foreign- 
ers, Gurjars, 179 

Bhandarkar Research Institute — colla- 
tion Sheet for shloka i.e. Paijavana, 
116 (footnote) 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-201 1 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bhishma — On ministers of four 
Varnas, 112 

Bharadwaja Sutra — Reference to 
Shudra’s right to sacrifice, 108-109 

Bharatas — 128-30, 192-93 

Bode, Dastur — Meaning of ‘Varna’ in 
Indo-Iranian Literature, 83 

Bopp, Dr. — Theory of common ances- 
try of Indo-Aryan and Indo-Ger- 
manic languages, 78 

Brahmanic — Literature full of legends 
of creation, 37-41; analysis of leg- 
ends, 41; Theories about origin of 
Shudras most unsatisfactory, 65- 
66; Literature, its two ideologies 
relating to creation, 87-96; Com- 
parison of the two ideologies — 
sacerdotal and secular, 97; Writ- 
ers’ invention of false etymologies 
to suit prevalent meaning of words, 
102-03; Forgeries of Purusha Sukta 
and Smritis, 137-38 

Brahmins — Origin of, according to 
Purusha Sukta, 22; Are Dwijas, 24; 
Superior to all other classes in 
status, 26, 32; As savarnas, Dwijas 
and Traivarnika, 36; Their special 
rights and privileges against 
Shudras, 56; Their indifference or 
apologetic attitude towards disabili- 
ties of Shudras, 57; Their Law 
compared with Roman Law is com- 
munal and arbitrary, 63-64; Accept 
theory of Aryan conquest of India 
for it establishes their kinship with 
Europeans, 80; Mentioned as sepa- 
rate Varna sixteen times in Rig 
Veda, 133; Dispute with 
Kshatriyas, 148-49; Conflict with 
Kshatriyas, 140-55; Technique for 
degrading Shudras: refusal of 

Upanayana, 156, 208; Exclusive 
right to officiate at Upanayana, 
173-74, 177, 184-85; Penalties on, 
or performing unauthorised 
Upanayana, 181, 208; Instances of 
denial of Upanayana to other 
Varnas, 175; Vs. Shivaji, 175-78, 


178-82; Their thesis: no Kshatriyas 
exist in Kaliyuga, 176; Alone can 
determine status of Hindu, 177, 
184; Never accepted law of prece- 
dents, 179-83; Fifty thousand, re- 
ceive Dakshina at Shivaji’s corona- 
tion, 179-80: Question Kshatriya 
status of Maharajas of Satara and 
Kolhapur, 182-84; Degraded Shudra 
community out of revenge against 
Shudra kings, 186-89; Enough 
provocation to, for conflict with 
Shudras, 189-90: Catalogue of privi- 
leges claimed by, 189-90: Chal- 
lenged by (Shudra) Kshatriyas in 
their privileges, 190-92 Stories of 
their reconciliation with Shudras, 
192-97 Stories to glorify, 197-98; 
Conscious of class interests in Rig 
Vedic times, 202 

Brihaspati Dharma Shastra — Disabili- 
ties of Shudras under, 48 

Brihaspati Smriti — Disabilities of 
Shudras under, 49 

Buddha — And Buddhism, their inabil- 
ity to shake Chaturvarnya, 23 

Buhler, Dr. — On Shudras’ eligibility 
to become Brahmins, 110 

Chandala — A Pratiloma, 198; Rights 
inferior to other Pratilomas, 199; 
Manu’s laws against, 199; and 
reasons for their severity, 200 

Chhandogya Upanishad — Explanation 
of origin of Vedas from deities, 33; 
Describes Rishi Janasruti, author 
of Rig Vedic Hymns as Shudra, 108 

Chaturvarnya — Ideal of Indo Aryan 
Society, 23; Buddha’s ineffective 
challenge to, 23; Manu invests, 
with divinity, 24; Basis of, graded 
inequality, 26; A political jugglery, 
31-33; Later development of, cre- 
ation of fifth Varna and separtaion 
of Shudras from Traivamikas, 35- 
36; One Aryan tribe believer in, 
the other non-believer in, 97; See 
also, 40-41,80, Varna, Aryan, 
Shudras, Manu 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


219 


THE SHUDRAS : INDEX 


Chitrao Shastri — On list of Sudas’ 
opponent, 126 (footnote) 

Chirstians — Emperors, their disabili- 
ties under Roman Law, 58-59 
Sacraments and Brahmanic 
Samskaras, 171; 

Crooke, Mr. Villiam — On Hinduisation 
of Gurjar tribes into Rajputs for 
representing Buddhism, 178-79 

Das, Mr. A. C. — Identifies Dasas and 
Dasyus with Shudras of later times, 
101 

Dasas — And Dasyus, according to 
Western Scholars: (i) a dark race 
different from Aryans, (ii) con- 
quered, enslaved and called 
Shudras by Aryans, 65; Paucity of 
references to, and Dasyus as en- 
emies of Aryans in Rig Veda, 75; 
United with Aryans against com- 
mon enemy, 75, conflict with 
Aryan’s, religious not racial, 75-76; 
And Dasyus terms not used in 
racial sense, 76-77; Their epithet 
‘Krishnayoni’ connotes no racial 
distinction with Aryans, 77; Appli- 
cation of word ‘Varna’ to, in Rig 
Veda, 83; And Dasyus not distinct 
from Aryans in race and complex- 
ion, 85; And Dasyus as allies of one 
Aryan community and enemies of 
the other, 86-87; can be identified 
with Azi Dahaka of Zend Avesta, 
104-05; A civilized people, 105-06; 
Cannot be identified with Shudras, 
106; And Dasyus, their complete 
disappearance from Post-Vedic lit- 
erature and absorption by Aryans, 
106; Term, occurs five times in Rig 
Veda in sense of slave, 111 

Dasharajna Yuddha — Account of, 
124-26; A war between Shudras 
and non-Shudra Kshatriyas, 202- 
OS; See also Sudas. 

Dasyus — Conflict with Aryans reli- 
gious not racial, 75-76; Correct 


219 

interpretation of epithet 
‘Mridhravak’ and ‘Anasa’, 76; Dis- 
tinct from Aryans not by race but 
by religion, 103-04; Existence of, in 
all Varnas according to 
Mahabharata, 104; A contemptu- 
ous term used by Indo-Aryans to 
designate Indo-Iranians, 104; More 
powerful than Aryans, 105, See 
also Dasa and Aryan 

Dharma Sutras — Evidentiary value 
of their statements on Shudras, 
107-08; Their prohibition of 
Upanayana, Vedic ceremonies and 
sacrifices and Soma drink to 
Shudras, 108-09; Evidence against 
their prohibitions from Brahmanic 
literature, 109-11 

Divodasa— 122-23, 128-29 

Dongre, Rao Bahadur — Siddhanta 
Vijaya, 182 (footnote) 

Egyptian — Cosmogony, 22; Classes in 
their society, 26 

Encylopaedia of Religion And Eth- 
ics — 22 

Fausboll, Dr. — Story of Chyavana, 109 
(footnote) 

Foster, Prof. Michael — On hypothesis, 
80 

Gagabhat — officiating priest at 
Shivaji’s coronation, 176; Bought 
over by huge Dakshina, 179-80; 
His twists and turns, 181-82; His 
attempt to prove Kayasthas bas- 
tards, 182 

Ganganath Jha — Purva Mimamsa, 172 
(footnote) 

Gautama Dharma Sutra — Disabili- 
ties of Shudra under, 47,49, 51-52, 
Enumeration of forty Samskaras 
from; 170 

Geiger — Summary of his views on 
original home of Aryans, 71 

Grant Maddison — Introduction of 
Aryan language in Europe, 99 (foot- 
note) 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-201 1 


220 


220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Greeks — Class composition of their 
society compared with ‘Varna’ sys- 
tem, 26 

Griffiths, Dr. — Perturbed over Tritsus 
being shown Non-Aryans, 129-30 

Guha Dr. — On two racial stocks of 
Indian people and their distribu- 
tion, 97-98 

Harishchandra — 141-44 

Harivamsha — Explanation of origin of 
Vedas from eyes, tongue and head 
of God, 34; Explanation of origin 
of priests from limbs of God Hari, 
34; Studious avoidance of feet as 
origin of any priest or Veda, 34-35; 
Story of Trishanku, 141-45; Story 
of Varna’s conflict with Brahmins, 
151-52 

Hearn, Mr. W.E. — On rule of estab- 
lishing nobility among Aryans, 110 

High Courts in India — Calcutta deci- 
sion about Kayasthas of Bihar 
being Shudras, 162; Allahabad’s 
non-acceptance of validity of ‘ 
Calcutta decision, 163; Calcutta 
(1916 and 1926) decision about 
Bengal Kayasthas being Shudras, 
163; Patna (1926) decision holding 
Bihar Kayasthas as Kshatriyas, 
163-64; Madras (1924) decision 
holding Marathas as Shudras, 164; 
Bombay (1928) decision holding five 
and ninty-six families of Marathas 
as Kshatriyas, rest as Shudras, 
164 : Madras (1927) holding 

Yadavas as Shudras, 164; Criteria 
adopted by, in determining Shudras 
and their relevance, 165; Failure 
to distinguish between de facto and 
de jure position of communities 
relating to Upanayana, 165-66; see 
also Privy Council 

India — Designed ‘Bharata Bhumi’ 
after Vedic and not Daushyanti 
Bharatas, 128-29 


Indo-Aryans — See Manu, Aryan, 
Chaturvarnya, Atharva Veda, 
Aupamanyava, Dr. Bopp, Dasas, 
Dasyus, Dr. Guha, Purusha Sukta 

Indo-Iranians — Three classes in their 
Society, 26; Meaning of ‘Varna’ in 
their literature, 82-85; Identifica- 
tion of Azi Dahaka with Dasa, 104- 
105, see also Dasyu 

Jabali, Satyakama — His story, and 
inferences from it, 175 

Jaimini — Cites Badari’s contention of 
Shudra’s right to sacrifice, 108; 
Spiritual significance of Samskaras 
according to, 171; His rules in 
‘Purva Mimamsa’ about property, 
sacrifice and Vedic mantras 170-71 

Jayaswal, Dr. — Shudra as a minister, 
112-13 (footnotes) 

Jews — Existence of classes in society 
of, 28; Disabilities under Roman 
Law, 61; A people not race, 66 

Justinian — Enfranchisement of slaves, 
60 

Kalikapurana — 160 (footnote) 

Kalmashapada — 145-46 

Kane, Mr. — Identifies Dasas and 
Dasyus with Shudras of later time, 
101; On demarcation line between 
Aryans and Shudras; see also 102, 
156, 158-60, 167,168, 174,190, 201, 
202 (footnote) 

Kathaka Samhita — Disabilities of 
Shudras under, 42; Statements 
from, demarcating Shudra from 
Arya, 107 

Katyayana Srauta Sutra — Commen- 
tary on, admits Shudra’s eligibility 
to perform Vedic rites, 109 

Kaushitaki Brahmana — On enmity 
between Sudas and Vasistha 
spreading to descendants, 151 

Kautilya — His reference to Shudras as 
Aryans in laws of slavery, 110-11 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


221 


THE SHUDRAS : INDEX 


Kayastha — Status of, of Bengal and 
Bihar, 163-64; Status, challenged 
by Brahmins, 175-85; Reaction to 
challenge, 177 (see also footnote); 
Gagabhat’s attempt to prove them 
bastards, 181-82 

Khnumu — The shaper in Egyptian 
cosmogony, 22 

Kinkaid, Mr — On Maratha Sardars’ 
attitude to Shivaji’s status, 176 
(footnote) 

Kolhapur — Palace priest’s controversy 
over eligibility of Maharaja to Vedic 
rites, 183-84 

Kritavirya — 193-94 

Kshatriyas — Origin, according to 
Purusha Sukta, 22; Are Dvijas, 24; 
Inferior to Brahmins and superior 
to other classes in status, 26,32; As 
Savarnas, Dwijas and Traivarnikas, 
36; Though Traivarnikas, their 
rights against Shudras very negli- 
gible, 57; Mention of, nine times as 
separate Varna in Rig Veda, 133; 
Conflict with Brahmins, 140-55; 
Kings conflicting with Brahmins 
belonged to Shudra tribe and solar 
line, 155, 187-88; Genealogies of 
Kings, 190-91; Of solar line supe- 
rior to Brahmins in prowess and 
learning, 191-92, Authors of Vedic 
Hymns, 191; Of Lunar line an 
imbecile people, 190-91; Stories of 
their reconciliaton with Brahmins, 
192-97; Enmity between Shudra 
and non-Shudra, 202-03 

Kurtakoti — 184 (footnote) 

Lassen — His identification of Shudras 
with Sodari tribe, 103 Law, Dr. B. 
C — 103 (footnote) 

Mahabharata — Ideology relating to 
creation, 92-93, On existence of 
Dasyus in all Varnas, 104; Shudra 
invited at coronation of 
Yudhishthira, 112; On ministers of 


221 

four Varnas, 112; Collation of 
stanza referring to Paijavana, 114, 
116-17; Nature of its manuscripts 
and recensions, 115; Results of 
scrutiny of texts of the stanza, 117- 
18; Story of Kalmashapada, 145-46 
and 195-96; Pururavas’ conflict with 
Brahmins, 152; Bharatas reconcili- 
ation with Vasishtha 192; Conflict 
and reconciliation of Kritavirya 
with Bhrigus, 193-94, 194-95 with 
Parshurama, 194-95; Saudasas’ 
reconciliation with Vasishtha and 
Brahmins, 196-97; Its statement 
about Paijavana record of true tra- 
dition, 205 

Maharashtra Dnyana Kosha — Mean- 
ing of Varna, 82 (footnote); Iden- 
tification of Dasa with Azi Dahaka, 
105 (footnote), Appendices I-VI, 
210-16 

Maitrayani Samhita — Disabilites of 
Shudras, under, 42; Reference to 
Shudra’s wealthiness, 112 

Manu — On divine origin of four varnas 
24-25; On disabilities of Shudras, 
43-44,45-55; On Shudras’ eligibil- 
ity to Brahmindom, 109-10; His 
injunctions to Brahmins against 
Shudra Kings, 112; On conflicts 
between Kings and Brahmins, 154- 
55; Laws against Chandala, 199 

Manu — The progenitor of Indo-Ary- 
ans, 29 

Matsya Purana — On Manu the pro- 
genitor of Aryans, 29; List of 
Kshatriya, authors of Rig Vedic 
hymns, 191 

Mediterranean Race — Traits of, 67- 
68; Facts about, 98 

Muir, Dr. — His failure to realize con- 
flicts between Brahmins and 
Kshatriyas as one between Brah- 
mins and Shudras, 155; see also 
30-31, 33-34, 38-41, 56, 87, 88-98, 
102, 131, 133-35, 141-42, 145, 147- 
49, 151-54, 187, 190,96 (footnote) 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-201 1 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Max Muller, Prof. — On disappointing 
nature of Brahmanas as literary 
productions, 41; On meaning of 
Arya, 69-70; His insistence on 
restriction of term Aryan to Philol- 
ogy, 195-96; His interpretation of 
term ‘Anasa’, 76-77; On Brahmanic 
etymologies, 102-03,108 

Nahusha — 152-54, 191, (footnote), 192 

Nimi — 154, 192 

Nishada — An Anuloma, 198; His in- 
eligibility to Upanayana, 198; an 
arbitrary exception and why, 198 

Old Testament — Genesis, 22; Com- 
parison of Genesis with Purusha 
Sukta, 28 

Oldenberg, Prof — Absence of Gotra 
name in description of famous men, 
202 (footnote), 206 

Padma Purana — 161 

Pagans — Disabilities under Roman 
Law, 59-60 

Palashes — Status challenged by Brah- 
mins, 175, 184 

Panchavimsa Brahmana — Disabilities 
of Shudras under, 42; On Shudra’s 
wealthiness, 112 

Papacy — Its forgeries, 137 

Patitasavitrika — 167 

Peshwas — Discontinued Rajya-bhisheka 
era, 182; Directed Upanayana of 
Shahu II to be performed by 
Pauranic rites, 182-83, 

Pingle, Moropant — Opposed to Shivaji’s 
coronation, 176; Huge presents to, 
at coronation, 180 

Plato — On class distinction, an ideal 
social structure, 26 

Pratapsinha II — Challenge to his 
Kshatriya status by Brahmins, 183 

Pratiloma — Who are, 199 (footnote); 
Uneven distribution of stigma on, 
200; see Chandala 


Premi Nathurama — 161 

Privy Council — Decision on existence 
of Kshatriyas in modern times, 162 

Pururavas — 152, 191 (footnote), 192 

Purus — 128 

Purushartha — Magazine, 169 (foot- 
note) 

Purusha Sukta — Text of, 21-22; As 
Indo-Aryan cosmogony, as expla- 
nation of origin of, and as manda- 
tory injunction prescribing four 
Varnas, 22-23; Its influence on 
Indo-Aryan Society, 23; Examina- 
tion of its claim to uniqueness’ and 
‘extraordinariness’, 25-27; Expla- 
nation of origin of classes — its 
difference with other cosmogonies, 
28; Contradicts secular theory of 
Rig Veda of origin of society, 
28-29; Its preference for commu- 
nalism than nationalism, 31; Its 
political jugglery in making 
Chaturvarnya a sacred institution, 
31-33; Its equation of classes with 
limbs of Purusha, deliberate and 
malicious, 33-35; A later interpo- 
lation, 132-37, 138-39 a forgery by 
Brahmins, 137 

Race — Jews, an illustration of people 
mistaken for, 66; A body of people 
possessing certain typical heredi- 
tary traits, 66-67; Traits constitut- 
ing a, old and modern views, 67- 
68; Cephalic Index and Facial 
Index, 67; Application of 
anthropometrical method to Euro- 
pean Races, a Table, 68 and 71-72; 
Is there an Aryan — , 70; Mediter- 
ranean, 98; Alpine, 98 

Ramayana — Ideology relating to cre- 
ation, 94-95; Story of Trishanku, 
149-50; See footnote 29 

Ranade, Prof. — Theory of Synchro- 
nous Composition of Vedic Litera- 
ture, 138 

Rig Veda — Purusha Sukta, 21-22; 
Another cosmogony besides 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


223 


THE SHUDRAS : INDEX 


Purusha Sukta, 27; Comparison of 
its two cosmogonies, 27; Its secular 
theory of origin of classes, 28-29; 
Consciousness of division of labour, 
30; On five tribes of Indo-Aryan 
nation, 30-31; Does not use term 
Arya in racial sense, 70; On united 
front of Aryans and Dasas against 
common enemy, 75; Description of 
Dasyus as people belonging in cult 
different from that of Aryans, 75- 
76; Occurrence of terms ‘Anasa’, 
‘Mridha vak’ and ‘Krishna Yoni’, 
76-77; On absence of racial distinc- 
tion between Aryans, Dasas and 
Dasyus, 77; On absence of colour 
prejudice amongst Aryans, 81-82; 
Occurrence of word ‘Varnas’ in, 82- 
83; Supports existence of, two 
opposing Aryan communities, 86- 
87; One of the two Vedas, 87; 
Description of Dasa in, 105-06; 
Dasharajna Yuddha, 124-27; Praise 
of Sudas’ philanthropy, 127; Tribes 
in and Sudas’ relation to them, 
128; On enmity between Bharatas 
and Tritsus, 192; Reasons for ab- 
sence of word ‘Shudra’ in its de- 
scription of Paijavana, 205 

Ripley, Prof. W. E. — On difference 
between a race and a people, 66; 
His table of European Racial Types, 
68; Disproves theory of Caucasia 
as cradle of Aryan race, 71-72; On 
dark complexion of earliest Euro- 
peans, 81; 98 (footnotes) 

Risley, Sir Herbert — On 

anthropometrical survey finds 
people of India mixture of four 
races, 97 

Romans — Classes in their society, 26; 
Need for comparison of Brahmanic 
Laws with theirs, 59-60; Classes 
and persons under their Law, 60; 
Basis for rights and disabilities; 
Caput and Existimatio, 59-61; Was 
their Law regulated by communal 


223 

considerations? 61-63; Their removal 
of social and political disabilities of 
Plebians, 61-63; Difference with 
Brahmanic Law on Equality of Law 
in Criminal matters and extinction 
of disabilities, 63-64 

Roy, Mr. — On authenticity of his 
Mahabharata text, 114-15 

Sadgurushishya — Reasons for Sudas’ 
cruelty to Sakti according to, 150 

Sakti — Vide Sadgurushishya and 
Satyayana Brahmana 

Sama Veda — A different form of Rig 
Veda, 87 

Samskara Ganapati — Its acceptance of 
Shudra’s eligibility for Upanayana, 
169 

Samskaras — Names of forty, 170; 
Jaimini, view on necessity of, 171- 
72; In narrower sense only sixteen, 
171; Spiritual in significance in 
earlier times, 171; And Christian 
Sacraments, 171 

Sardesai Rao Bahadur, G. S. — On 
Peshwa’s discontinuation of Rajya- 
bhisheka era, 182 (footnote) 

Sarup, Laxman — Edition of Nighantu 
and Nirukta, 118 (footnote) 

Satapatha Brahmana — Explanation of 
four Varnas, 39-40; disabilities of 
Shudras under, 42; ideolology relat- 
ing to creation, 88-89; Discrimina- 
tion in mode of address to different 
Varnas at sacrifices, 131, 207; Ex- 
planation of creation of three Varnas 
only, 128; On strength of Turvasa 
Tribe, 202 

Satyayana Brahmana — Story of Sudas’ 
atrocity on Sakti, 150 

Savarnas — De jure connotation of, 36; 
Who are, 36 

Sayanacharya — His interpretation of 
term ‘Anasa’, 77; List of Kings- 
authors of Rig Veda hymns, 126, 
126 (footnote) 

Senart, Prof — On social organization 
of Vedic times 130-31 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-201 1 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shahu Maharaja — Controversy with 
palace priests and Sankarachrya 
regarding eligibility of Vedic rites, 
183-84 

Shankaracharya, Karvir — His refusal 
to recognize Kayasthas as 
Kshatriyas: 183; Vs. Royal House 
of Kolhapur on eligibility to Vedic 
rites, 182-84 

Shivaji — Vs. Brahmins, 175; Corona- 
tion by Vedic rites dependent on 
acceptance of Kshatriya Status by 
Brahmins, 175; and on their per- 
formance of his Upanayana, 176; 
Regarded by Brahmin Ministers 
and Maratha Sardars as Shudra, 
176 (and footnote), 181; King at 
mercy of Brahmins, 177; His two 
coronations, 176-77 (footnote); Ge- 
nealogy connecting him to Sisodiya 
Rajputs, 177-78, 181-82; Money 
paid to Brahmins at coronation, 
180; His descendants vs. Brah- 
mins, 182-84; Peshwas discontinue 
his Rajyabhisheka era, 182 

Shrinivasa Iyengar, Mr. P. T. — On 
rare occurence of word ‘Arya’ in 
Rig Veda; a proof against theory of 
Invasion of India by Aryans, 74; 
Reference to 75 (footnote); on Civi- 
lization of Dasyus, 105 

Shudras — Riddle of, 21, 35 : Genesis of, 
according to Purusha Sukta, 22, 23; 
Position of, according to Apastambha 
Dharma Sutra, 23-24, Vasishtha 
Dharma Sutra, 24; and Manusmriti, 
24; Their status, 26,32 and 33; Was 
their inclusion implied in Rig Veda 
reference to five tribes. 31; are 
savarnas but not Dvijas and 
Traivarnikas, 36; Disabilities and 
penalties under Samhitas, 
Brahmanas, Sutras, Smritis, 42-57: 
Gist of penal legislations against, 

55- 56; Comparison between 
privileges of Brahmins and — , 

56- 57; Inequality and permanence 


of disabilities, 63-64; Derivation of 
word, in Vayu Purana and Vedant 
Sutra, 103; Proper name of a tribe, 
103; Lassen’s identification of, with 
Sodari tribe defeated by Alexander, 
103; Associates of Abhirs according 
to Patanjali, 103; A separate tribe 
according to Brahma, Markendeya 
and Vishnu Puranas, 103; Vedas 
silent on, and later literature full 
of, 106; Basis of arguments that, 
were non-Aryans, 107, and, Ary- 
ans, 107-08; Statements showing 
basis of equality with Brahmins, 
107-08, and eligibility to become 
Brahmins, 109-11; Aryan by birth 
according to Kautilya, 110-11; not 
slaves, 111; Participation in Coro- 
nation of kings during Brahmanic 
period. Ill; Members of political 
assemblies, 112; As Kings and 
Ministers, 112, and 206; Their 
Wealthiness 112; and 207; Ques- 
tions on assumption of their en- 
slavement, 113; Were Aryans of 
Kshatriya class, 114, 131, 139; Sig- 
nificance of term — clan, phratry or 
tribe?, 130; Conflict with Brah- 
mins, 140-55; not mentioned as 
separate Varna in Rig Veda, 139; 
Degradation to fourth Varna due 
to conflict with Brahmins, 140-203; 
Right to Upanayana, 166-70; De- 
nial of Upanayana to, results; loss 
of property and knowledge, 170-72; 
Brahmins’ power for degrading, 
173-74, 208; Shivaji a, 176; 

Kings of tribe of, 186-89; Stories 
of their reconciliation with, 
192-200; Growth of laws against, 
disproves reconciliation with Brah- 
mins, 198: Treatment ordained to 
Nishadas and Chandalas, 198-99; 
Did they suffer denial of 
Upanayana silently, 199-200; Name 
of single people in Indo-Aryan 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


225 


THE SHUDRAS : INDEX 


Society, 201, Epithet of uncultured 
class of people in Hindu Society, 
201-02; Of Indo-Aryan Society dif- 
ferent from those of Hindu Society, 

201- 02; ‘Nirvasit, ‘Anirvasit’, 
‘Sacchudra’ and ‘Asacchudra’, 201; 
Of Indo-Aryan Society a tribe of 
few thousands, 201-02; Their in- 
ability to break common front of 
Brahmins and denial of Upanayana, 

202- 03; Ten riddles of, 207-09 

Sisodiya Rajputs — Are they 
Kshatriyas of Indo-Aryan Commu- 
nity? 178-80 

Smith, Vincent — On Hinduisation of 
Gurjars into Rajputs, 178 

Social Organisation — According to 
Purusha Sukta, 25-26, 31-32; Of 
primitive Society, 129-30, 187; Of 
Vedic Aryans, 130-31 

Sudas Paijavana — Description in 
Mahabharata : A Shudra Paijavana, 
114,117-18, 205; Yaska’s interpre- 
tation of, 118-19; Family particu- 
lars of, in Rig Veda, 119, 122-24; 
Two in Vishnu Purana, 119; (i) 
Descendant of Sagar a, and his 
genealogy, 119; (ii) Descendant of 
Puru and his genealogy, 120; Tabu- 
lar results of genealogists of three, 
121-22; Rig Vedic different from 
Puranic, 121-22; Paijavana in 
Mahabharata is Rig vedic, 121-22; 
Agreement of Prof. Weber with the 
view, 122; Hero of Dasharajna 
Yuddha, 124; Author of Rigvedic 
hymns, 126; Performed 
Ashwamedha sacrifice, 126; Known 
for charity, 127. Belonged to 
Bharata, Puru or Tritsu tribe, 128- 
29; Removal of Vasishtha and 
appointment of Vishwamitra as 
chief priest, 150; Conflict with 
Vasishtha, 150-51, 196, Story of 
reconciliation of his descendants 
with Brahmins, 196-97; Being most 
famous man not described by name 
of community in Rig Veda, 205-06 


225 

Sukthanker, Dr. — On authenticity of 
Roy’s Text of Mahabharata, 115; 
Memorial Vol. 1, 115, 116 (foot- 
note) 

Taittiriya Aranyaka — Ideology relat- 
ing to creation, 91-92 

Taittiriya Brahmana — Explanation of 
origin of Shudras, 40, Ideology 
relating to creation, 90-91; 
Describes creation of Three Varnas 
only, 133, 206 

Taittiriya Samhita — Explanations of 
origin of four Varnas, 38-39; Ide- 
ology relating to creation, 87; On 
conflict between Vasishtha and 
Saudasas, 151 

Taylor, Prof. Isac — His summary of 
Benfy’s views on original home of 
Aryans, 71 

Thakare, Mr. K. S. — On twists and 
turns of Gagabhat and change of 
front of Moropant Pingle, 182, (foot- 
note); On Performance of 
Kayastha’s ceremonies by Kayas- 
thas, 184 (footnote) 

Thesis of the Book — Summary of, 204; 
Strength of its evidence, 205-06; 
Validity of, 206; Solves ten riddles 
of Shudras, 207-08 

Tilak, Mr. B. G. — On characteristics 
of Polar and Circum-polar regions, 

72- 74; On correspondence of the 
characteristics with myths and 
legends in Vedas; 73-74, His infer- 
ence : Arctic, the Home of Aryans, 

73- 74; Shortcomings of his theory, 
74; On origin of Yajnopavita, 159- 
60; Shortcomings of his explana- 
tion, 160-61 

Traivarnika — Who are, 35-36; Absence 
of Uniformity of rights among; 57 

Trishanku — 140-41, 149-50 

Tritsus — 130 

Triveda, Prof. D. S. — On proof against 
theory of Aryan invasion of India, 
75 

Turvasas-31 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-201 1 


226 


226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Untouchables — Are Atishudras, 

Avarnas and Advijas, 36 

Upanayana — Who have right to, 156- 
58; Purpose of : initiation to study 
of Vedas, 158; Articles essential 
for, 158; Yajnopavita essential for 
modern ceremony of, 158; Merger 
with ceremony of wearing 
Yajnopavita 161; Danger of, with- 
out Yajnopavita, 161; True mean- 
ing of, 161; Test of Shudradom 
absence of, 161, 165-66; Had 

Shudras a right to, 165-66, 169-70; 
Dead, dumb, blind, ‘Anuloma’, 166, 
Those crossing age-limit 167, their 
Sons and Vratyas 167-68, eligible 
to — ; Universal among Indo-Irani- 
ans, 169; Closed to women owing 
to child marriage 169; Open to 
Shudras according to Samskara 
Ganpati, 169, 206; Absence of rea- 
sons for withholding from Shudras, 
169-70; First spiritual in signifi- 
cance, 171; Acquisition of social 
significance after denial to Shudras, 
171; Confers right to property and 
knowledge, 172; Performance of, 
assigned to Acharya, 173; Shivaji’s 
right to, 175-77 

Vaidya, Mr. C. V. — His extract from 
Bhagavat Purana on Bharata 
Bhumi, 173-74; On second corona- 
tion of Shivaji, 176-77 (footnote); 
On money spent at Shivaji’s coro- 
nation on Dakshina to Brahmins, 
180; See also, 178-79 (footnote) 

Vaishampayana — Origin of classes of 
priests, 34-35 

Vaishyas — Origin of, according to 
Purusha Sukta, 22; Are twice born 
(Dvijas) 24; Superior only to 
Shudras in status, 26, 32-33; As 
Savarnas, Dvijas, Traivarnikas, 36; 
Oppressed class in Indo-Aryan 


Society, 56; Fury against them di- 
rected later on towards Shudras, 56; 
Though a Traivarnika, their rights 
against Shudras very negligible, 
56-57 

Vajasaneyi Samhita — Two theories of 
origin of classes (Varnas) 38-39; 
Statements demarcating Shudra 
from Arya, 107; Statement showing 
basis of equality between Brahmins 
and Shudras, 107-08; Pours scorn on 
Shudras, 108 

Varna — In sense of colour mainstay of 
Aryan Race theory, 81; Occurrence 
of terms in Rig Veda and its con- 
notations, 82-83; Occurrence of term, 
in Zend Avesta connoting ‘a class 
holding particular faith’, 83-85; 
System with three Varnas in Rig 
Veda, 132-33, 139 See also Purusha 
Sukta and Chaturvarnya 

Vasishtha — His conflict with 
Vishwamitra, 140-55; Stories of his 
reconciliation with Bharatas, 
Kalmashapada and Saudasas, 192- 
93, 195-96 See also Sudas and 
Vishwamitra 

Vasishtha Dharma Sutra — Its support 
to Purusha Sukta, 24; Disabilities of 
Shudras under, 43-45, 52 

Vayu Purana — 102-03 

Vedic Literature — Origin of, and Brah- 
manic view, 33-35, Max Muller’s 
order to growth of 138 : Professors 
Ranade and Belavalkar’s theory of 
synchronous composition of, 138 ; 
See also Rig Veda, Atharva Veda, 
Yajur Veda and Veda. 

Vena — 151-52 

Vishnu Purana — Manu, the Progenitor 
of the Indo-Aryans, 29; Explanation 
of origin of Vedas from different 
mouths of Brahma, 34; Ideology 
relating to creation, 95-97; Geneal- 
ogy of two Sudas and Table 96-97; 
Story of Harishchandra, 141-45; On 
Nimi’s conflict with Brahmins, 154 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-14 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2011 


227 


THE SHUDRAS : INDEX 


Vishnu Smriti — Disabilities of 
Shudras under, 44, 46, 49, 52 

Vishwamitra — His conflict with 
Vasishtha, 140-41; His part in epi- 
sodes of Trishanku, 141; 
Harishchandra, 141-45; Ambarisha, 
145, and Kalmashapada, 145-46; 
Wants to murder Vasishtha, 147-48; 
Biographical particulars about, 148; 
Feud with Vasishtha on points of 
privileges, in story of Trishanku, 
149-50; Dishonour to, avenged by 
Sudas, 150-51 

Vratya — 39; Who were they, 168-69; 
Stoma, 168; Shuddhisangraha’s pro- 
vision for purification of, 168 

Vyavahara Mayukha — Kalipurana quo- 
tation of rule of adoption, 160 (foot- 
note); 174 (footnote) 

Weber, Prof. — Traces Sudas in 
Mahabharata to Sudas in Rig Veda, 
122; On Shudras, an Aryan tribe 
immigrating into India before oth- 
ers, 131 

Western Writers — Theory about origin 
of Shudras from Dasas and Dasyus 
according to, 65-66; Basis of their 
theory — inference drawn from 
Bopp’s theory, of common ancestry 
of languages, 78, Inferences : 
(i) common habitat and social stock 
of Aryans, 78-79; (ii) Conquest of 


227 

India by Aryans, 79 (iii) Subjuga- 
tion of Dasas, 79; (iv) Practice of 
colour distinction by Aryans in 
Varna system, 79-80; Reasons for 
failure of their theory, 78-79; Scru- 
tiny of their theory, 79-85; 

Conflict of their theory with Rig Veda, 
99-100; Its shortcomings, 100 Wil- 
son, Dr. — Extract from his transla- 
tion of Rig Veda, 27 (footnote), 119- 
20 

Yajnopavita — Importance of, 158; 
Rules about manufacture and use 
of, 158-59; Mr. Tilak on its origin, 
159-60; Real object of, to tie one to 
particular ‘Gotra’ 160-61; Once 
Brahmins alone wore, 161; Merger 
with Upanayana, 161 

Yajnavalkya — On Yajnopavita, 158 

Yajurveda — Its two recensions, 37; 
Ashwamedha Yajna, 74; A differ- 
ent form of Rig Veda, 86 

Yaska — On five tribes of Indo-Aryan 
nation, 30; On meaning of 
Paijavana 118 

Zend Avesta — Occurrence of word 
Varna in, in sense of ‘a class hold- 
ing a particular faith’, 82-85; Azi 
Dahaka in, 104-05 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


228 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


229 



UNTOUCHABLES 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


230 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


231 


THE UNTOUCHABLES 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


232 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


233 


THE 

UNTOUCHABLES 


WHO WERE THEY 
AND WHY THEY 
BECAME UNTOUCHABLES ? 


By 

DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 


(Reprint of the edition of 1948) 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


234 


First Published, October 1948 
by Amrit Book Co., New Delhi. 


Government of Maharashtra’s 
First Edition - January 26, 1990 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


235 


Inscribed to the memory of 

NANDNAR 

RAVIDAS 

CHOKHAMELA 

THREE RENOWNED SAINTS WHO WERE BORN 

AMONG THE UNTOUCHABLES AND WHO BY 

THEIR PIETY AND VIRTUE WON THE ESTEEM OF ALL. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


236 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


237 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Preface .. .. .. 239 

PART I 

A Comparative Survey 

Chapter 

I. Untouchability among Non-Hindus .. 249 

II. Untouchability among Hindus. .. 256 

PART II 

Problem of Habitat 

III. Why do the Untouchables live outside 

the Village? .. .. 271 

IV. Are the Untouchables Broken Men ? .. 278 

V. Are there Parallel Cases ? .. .. 281 

VI. How did Separate Settlements for 

Broken Men disappear elsewhere ? .. 284 

PART III 

Old Theories of the Origin of Untouchability. 

VII. Racial Difference as the Origin of 

Untouchability .. .. 289 

VIII. Occupational Origin of Untouchability .. 305 

PART IV 

New Theories of the Origin of Untouchability. 

IX. Contempt for Buddhists as the Root of 

Untouchability .. .. 311 

X. Beef-eating as the Root of Untouchability .. 318 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


238 


PART V 

The New Theories and some Hard Questions. 

XL Did the Hindus never eat Beef ? .. 323 

XII. Why did Non-Brahmins give up Beef-eating ? 329 

XIII. What made the Brahmins become 

Vegetarians ? .. .. 334 

XIV. Why should Beef-eating make Broken Men 

Untouchables ? .. .. 350 

PART VI 

Untouchability and the Date of its Birth. 

XV. The Impure and The Untouchables .. 359 

XVI. When did Broken Men become 

Untouchables ? .. .. 370 

INDEX.. .. .. .. 381 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


239 


PREFACE 

This book is a sequel to my treatise called The Shudras — Who they 
were and How they came to he the Fourth Varna of the Indo-Aryan 
Society which was published in 1946. Besides the Shudras, the Hindu 
Civilization has produced three social classes whose existence has not 
received the attention it deserves. The three classes are 

(i) The Criminal Tribes who number about 20 millions or so; 

(ii) The Aboriginal Tribes who number about 15 millions; and 

(iii) The Untouchables who number about 50 millions. 

The existence of these classes is an abomination. The Hindu 
Civilization, gauged in the light of these social products, could hardly 
be called civilization. It is a diabolical contrivance to suppress and 
enslave humanity. Its proper name would be infamy. What else can 
be said of a civilization which has produced a mass of people who 
are taught to accept crime as an approved means of earning their 
livelihood, another mass of people who are left to live in full bloom 
of their primitive barbarism in the midst of civilization and a third 
mass of people who are treated as an entity beyond human intercourse 
and whose mere touch is enough to cause pollution? 

In any other country the existence of these classes would have led 
to searching of the heart and to investigation of their origin. But 
neither of these has occurred to the mind of the Hindu. The reason 
is simple. The Hindu does not regard the existence of these classes 
as a matter of apology or shame and feels no responsibility either 
to atone for it or to inquire into its origin and growth. On the other 
hand, every Hindu is taught to believe that his civilization is not 
only the most ancient but that it is also in many respects altogether 
unique. No Hindu ever feels tired of repeating these claims. That 
the Hindu Civilization is the most ancient, one can understand and 
even allow. But it is not quite so easy to understand on what grounds 
they rely for claiming that the Hindu Civilization is a unique one. 
The Hindus may not like it, but so far as it strikes non-Hindus, such 
a claim can rest only on one ground. It is the existence of these classes 
for which the Hindu Civilization is responsible. That the existence of 
such classes is a unique phenomenon, no Hindu need repeat, for nobody 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


240 


240 

can deny the fact. One only wishes that the Hindu realized that it 
was a matter for which there was more cause for shame than pride. 

The inculcation of these false beliefs in the sanity, superiority and 
sanctity of Hindu Civilization is due entirely to the peculiar social 
psychology of Hindu scholars. 

To-day all scholarship is confined to the Brahmins. But unfortu- 
nately no Brahmin scholar has so far come forward to play the part 
of a Voltaire who had the intellectual honesty to rise against the 
doctrines of the Catholic Church in which he was brought up; nor 
is one likely to appear on the scene in the future. It is a grave 
reflection on the scholarship of the Brahmins that they should not 
have produced a Voltaire. This will not cause surprise if it is 
remembered that the Brahmin scholar is only a learned man. He is 
not an intellectual. There is a world of difference between one who 
is learned and one who is an intellectual. The former is class- 
conscious and is alive to the interests of his class. The latter is an 
emancipated being who is free to act without being swayed by class 
considerations. It is because the Brahmins have been only learned 
men that they have not produced a Voltaire. 

Why have the Brahmins not produced a Voltaire? The question can 
be answered only by another question. Why did the Sultan of Turkey 
not abolish the religion of the Mohammedan World? Why has no Pope 
denounced Catholicism? Why has the British Parliament not made 
a law ordering the killing of all blue-eyed babies? The reason why 
the Sultan or the Pope or the British Parliament has not done these 
things is the same as why the Brahmins have not been able to produce 
a Voltaire. It must be recognized that the selfish interest of a person 
or of the class to which he belongs always acts as an internal 
limitation which regulates the direction of his intellect. The power 
and position which the Brahmins possess is entirely due to the Hindu 
Civilization which treats them as supermen and subjects the lower 
classes to all sorts of disabilities so that they may never rise and 
challenge or threaten the superiority of the Brahmins over them. As 
is natural, every Brahmin is interested in the maintenance of 
Brahmanic supremacy be he orthodox or unorthodox, be he a priest 
or a grahastha, be he a scholar or not. How can the Brahmins 
afford to be Voltaires? A Voltaire among the Brahmins would be a 
positive danger to the maintenance of a civilization which is contrived 
to maintain Brahmanic supremacy. The point is that the intellect of 
a Brahmin scholar is severely limited by anxiety to preserve his 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


241 


241 

interest. He suffers from this internal limitation as a result of which 
he does not allow his intellect full play which honesty and integrity 
demands. For, he fears that it may affect the interests of his class 
and therefore his own. 

But what annoys one is the intolerance of the Brahmin scholar 
towards any attempt to expose the Brahmanic literature. He himself 
would not play the part of an iconoclast even where it is necessary. 
And he would not allow such non-Brahmins as have the capacity to 
do so to play it. If any non-Brahmin were to make such an attempt 
the Brahmin scholars would engage in a conspiracy of silence, take 
no notice of him, condemn him outright on some flimsy grounds or 
dub his work useless. As a writer engaged in the exposition of the 
Brahmanic literature I have been a victim of such mean tricks. 

Notwithstanding the attitude of the Brahmin scholars, I must 
pursue the task I have undertaken. For the origin of these classes 
is a subject which still awaits investigation. This book deals with 
one of these unfortunate classes namely, the Untouchables. The 
Untouchables are the most numerous of the three. Their existence 
is also the most unnatural. And yet there has so far been no 
investigation into their origin. That the Hindus should not have 
undertaken such an investigation is perfectly understandable. The old 
orthodox Hindu does not think that there is anything wrong in the 
observance of Untouchability. To him it is a normal and natural thing. 
As such it neither calls for expiation nor explanation. The new modern 
Hindu realizes the wrong. But he is ashamed to discuss it in public 
for fear of letting the foreigner know that Hindu Civilization can be 
guilty of such a vicious and infamous system or social code as 
evidenced by Untouchability. But what is strange is that Untouch- 
ability should have failed to attract the attention of the European 
student of social institutions. It is difficult to understand why. The 
fact, however, is there. 

This book may therefore, be taken as a pioneer attempt in the 
exploration of a field so completely neglected by everybody. The book, 
if I may say so, deals not only with every aspect of the main question 
set out for inquiry, namely, the origin of Untouchability, but it also 
deals with almost all questions connected with it. Some of the 
questions are such that very few people are even aware of them; and 
those who are aware of them are puzzled by them and do not know 
how to answer them. To mention only a few, the book deals with 
such questions as : Why do the Untouchables live outside the village? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


242 


242 

Why did beef-eating give rise to Untouchability ? Did the Hindus 
never eat beef ? Why did non-Brahmins give up beef-eating ? What 
made the Brahmins become vegetarians, etc.? To each one of these, 
the book suggests an answer. It may be that the answers given in 
the book to these questions are not all-embracing. Nonetheless it 
will be found that the book points to a new way of looking at old 
things. 

The thesis on the origin of Untouchability advanced in the book 
is an altogether novel thesis. It comprises the following propositions :- 

(1) There is no racial difference between the Hindus and the 
Untouchables; 

(2) The distinction between the Hindus and Untouchables in its 
original form, before the advent of Untouchability, was the 
distinction between Tribesmen and Broken Men from alien 
Tribes. It is the Broken Men who subsequently came to be 
treated as Untouchables; 

(3) Just as Untouchability has no racial basis so also has it no 
occupational basis; 

(4) There are two roots from which Untouchability has sprung: 

(a) Contempt and hatred of the Broken Men as of Buddhists 
by the Brahmins: 

(b) Continuation of beef-eating by the Broken Men after it 
had been given up by others. 

(5) In searching for the origin of Untouchability care must be 
taken to distinguish the Untouchables from the Impure. All 
orthodox Hindu writers have identified the Impure with the 
Untouchables. This is an error. Untouchables are distinct from 
the Impure. 

(6) While the Impure as a class came into existence at the time 
of the Dharma Sutras the Untouchables came into being much 
later than 400 A.D. 

These conclusions are the result of such historical research as 
I have been able to make. The ideal which a historian should place 
before himself has been well defined by Goethe who said 1 : 

“The historian’s duty is to separate the true from the false, the certain 
from the uncertain, and the doubtful from that which cannot be 

accepted Every investigator must before all things look upon 

himself as one who is summoned to serve on a jury. He has 

1 Maxims and Reflections of Goethe, Nos. 453, 543. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 


243 


243 

only to consider how far the statement of the case is complete and 
clearly set forth by the evidence. Then he draws his conclusion and 
gives his vote, whether it be that his opinion coincides with that of 
the foreman or not.” 

There can be no difficulty in giving effect to Goethe’s direction 
when the relevant and necessary facts are forthcoming. All this 
advice is of course very valuable and very necessary. But Goethe 
does not tell what the historian is to do when he comes across a 
missing link, when no direct evidence of connected relations between 
important events is available. I mention this because in the course 
of my investigations into the origin of Untouchability and other inter 
connected problems I have been confronted with many missing links. 
It is true that I am not the only one who has been confronted with 
them. All students of ancient Indian history have had to face them. 
For as Mount Stuart Elphinstone has observed in Indian history “no 
date of a public event can be fixed before the invasion of Alexander: 
and no connected relation of the natural transactions can be at- 
tempted until after the Mohamedan conquest.” This is a sad confes- 
sion but that again does not help. The question is: “What is a student 
of history to do? Is he to cry halt and stop his work until the link 
is discovered?” I think not. I believe that in such cases it is 
permissible for him to use his imagination and intuition to bridge 
the gaps left in the chain of facts by links not yet discovered and 
to propound a working hypothesis suggesting how facts which cannot 
be connected by known facts might have been inter-connected. I must 
admit that rather than hold up the work, I have preferred to resort 
to this means to get over the difficulty created by the missing links 
which have come in my way. 

Critics may use this weakness to condemn the thesis as violating 
the canons of historical research. If such be the attitude of the critics 
I must remind them that if there is a law which governs the 
evaluation of the results of historical results then refusal to accept 
a thesis on the ground that it is based on direct evidence is bad law. 
Instead of concentrating themselves on the issue of direct evidence 
versus inferential evidence and inferential evidence versus specula- 
tion, what the critics should concern themselves with is to examine 
(i) whether the thesis is based on pure conjecture, and ( ii ) whether 
the thesis is possible and if so does it fit in with facts better than 
mine does? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-l 1-2013 244 

244 

On the first issue I could say that the thesis would not be unsound 
merely because in some parts it is based on guess. My critics should 
remember that we are dealing with an institution the origin of which 
is lost in antiquity. The present attempt to explain the origin of 
Untouchability is not the same as writing history from texts which 
speak with certainty. It is a case of reconstructing history where 
there are no texts, and if there are, they have no direct bearing 
on the question. In such circumstances what one has to do is to 
strive to divine what the texts conceal or suggest without being even 
quite certain of having found the truth. The task is one of gathering 
survivals of the past, placing them together and making them tell 
the story of their birth. The task is analogous to that of the 
archaeologist who constructs a city from broken stones or of the 
palaeontologist who conceives an extinct animal from scattered bones 
and teeth or of a painter who reads the lines of the horizon and 
the smallest vestiges on the slopes of the hill to make up a scene. 
In this sense the book is a work of art even more than of history. 
The origin of Untouchability lies buried in a dead past which nobody 
knows. To make it alive is like an attempt to reclaim to history 
a city which has been dead since ages past and present it as it was 
in its original condition. It cannot but be that imagination and 
hypothesis should pay a large part in such a work. But that in itself 
cannot be a ground for the condemnation of the thesis. For without 
trained imagination no scientific inquiry can be fruitful and hypoth- 
esis is the very soul of science. As Maxim Gorky has said 1 : 

“Science and literature have much in common; in both, 
observation, comparison and study are of fundamental importance; 
the artist like the scientist, needs both imagination and intuition. 
Imagination and intuition bridge the gaps in the chain of facts by 
its as yet undiscovered links and permit the scientist to create 
hypothesis and theories which more or less correctly and successfully 
direct the searching of the mind in its study of the forms and 
phenomenon of nature. They are of literary creation; the art of 
creating characters and types demands imagination, intuition, the 
ability to make things up in one’s own mind”. 

It is therefore unnecessary for me to apologize for having resorted 
to constructing links where they were missing. Nor can my thesis be 
said to be vitiated on that account for nowhere is the construction of 


1 Literature and life. A selection from the writings of Maxim Gorky. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


245 


245 

links based on pure conjecture. The thesis in great part is based 
on facts and inferences from facts. And where it is not based on 
facts or inferences from facts, it is based on circumstantial evidence 
of presumptive character resting on considerable degree of probabil- 
ity. There is nothing that I have urged in support of my thesis which 
I have asked my readers to accept on trust. I have at least shown 
that there exists a preponderance of probability in favour of what 
I have asserted. It would be nothing but pedantry to say that a 
preponderance of probability is not a sufficient basis for a valid 
decision. 

On the second point with the examination of which, I said, my 
critics should concern themselves what I would like to say is that 
I am not so vain as to claim any finality for my thesis. I do not 
ask them to accept it as the last word. I do not wish to influence 
their judgement. They are of course free to come to their own 
conclusion. All I say to them is to consider whether this thesis is 
not a workable and therefore, for the time being, a valid hypothesis 
if the test of a valid hypothesis is that it should fit in with all 
surrounding facts, explain them and give them a meaning which in 
its absence they do not appear to have. I do not want anything more 
from my critics than a fair and unbiased appraisal. 


January 1, 1948 
1, Hardinge Avenue, 
New Delhi. 


B. R. AMBEDKAR 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-15 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


246 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


247 


Chapter I. 
Chapter II. 


PART I 

A COMPARATIVE SURVEY 


Untouchability Among Non-Hindus 
Untouchability Among Hindus 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


248 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


249 


CHAPTER I 

UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG NON-HINDUS 


WHO are the Untouchables and what is the origin of Untouchability? 
These are the main topics which it is sought to investigate and the 
results of which are contained in the following pages. Before launch- 
ing upon the investigation it is necessary to deal with certain 
preliminary questions. The first such question is : Are the Hindus 
the only people in the world who observe Untouchability? The second 
is: If Untouchability is observed by Non-Hindus also how does 
Untouchability among Hindus compare with Untouchability among 
non-Hindus? Unfortunately no such comparative study has so far been 
attempted. The result is that though most people are aware of the 
existence of Untouchability among the Hindus they do not know what 
are its unique features. A definite idea of its unique and distinguish- 
ing features is however essential not merely for a real understanding 
of the position of the Untouchables but also as the best means of 
emphasising the need of investigating into their origin. 

It is well to begin by examining how the matter stood in Primitive 
and Ancient Societies. Did they recognize Untouchability? At the 
outset it is necessary to have a clear idea as to what is meant by 
Untouchability. On this point, there can be no difference of opinion. 
It will be agreed on all hands that what underlies Untouchability 
is the notion of defilement, pollution, contamination and the ways 
and means of getting rid of that defilement. 

Examining the social life of Primitive Society 1 in order to find out 
whether or not it recognized Untouchability in the sense mentioned 
above there can be no doubt that Primitive Society not only did 
believe in the notion of defilement but the belief had given rise to 
a live system of well-defined body of rites and rituals. 


1 The facts relating to pollution among non-Hindus are drawn from “Hastings 
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics”, Vol. X, Article Purification, pp. 455-504. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


250 


250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Primitive Man believed that defilement was caused by 

(1) the occurrences of certain events; 

(2) contact with certain things; and 

(3) contact with certain persons. 

Primitive Man also believed in the transmission of evil from one 
person to another. To him the danger of such transmission was 
peculiarly acute at particular times such as the performance of 
natural functions, eating, drinking, etc. Among the events the 
occurrence of which was held by Primitive Man as certain to cause 
defilement included the following : — 

(1) Birth 

(2) Initiation 

(3) Puberty 

(4) Marriage 

(5) Cohabitation 

(6) Death 

Expectant mothers were regarded as impure and a source of 
defilement to others. The impurity of the mother extended to the child 
also. 

Initiation and puberty are stages which mark the introduction of 
the male and the female to full sexual and social life. They were 
required to observe seclusion, a special diet, frequent ablutions, use 
of pigment for the body and bodily mutilation such as circumcision. 
Among the American Tribes not only did the initiates observe a 
special dietary but also took an emetic at regular intervals. 

The ceremonies which accompanied marriage show that marriage 
was regarded by the Primitive Man as impure. In some cases the 
bride was required to undergo intercourse by men of the tribe as 
in Australia or by the chief or the medicine man of the tribe as in 
America or by the friends of the grooms as among the East African 
Tribes. In some cases there takes place the tapping of the bride by 
a sword by the bridegroom. In some cases, as among the Mundas, 
there takes place marriage to a tree before marriage with the 
bridegroom. All these marriage observances are intended to neutralize 
and prepare the individual against the impurity of marriage. 

To the Primitive Man the worst form of pollution was death. Not 
only the corpse, but the possession of the belongings of the deceased 
were regarded as infected with pollution. The widespread custom of 
placing implements, weapons, etc., in the grave along with the corpse 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


251 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG NON-HINDUS 251 


indicates that their use by others was regarded as dangerous and 
unlucky. 

Turning to pollution arising out of contact with objects Primitive 
Man had learned to regard certain objects as sacred and certain 
others as profane. For a person to touch the sacred was to contami- 
nate the sacred and to cause pollution to it. A most striking example 
of the separation of the sacred and the profane in Primitive Society 
is to be found among the Todas, the whole of whose elaborate ritual 
and (it would not be too much to say) the whole basis of whose social 
organisation is directed towards securing the ceremonial purity of the 
sacred herds, the sacred dairy, the vessels, and the milk, and of those 
whose duty it is to perform connected rites and rituals. In the dairy, 
the sacred vessels are always kept in a separate room and the milk 
reaches them only by transfer to and fro of an intermediate vessel 
kept in another room. The dairyman, who is also the priest, is 
admitted to office only after an elaborate ordination, which in effect 
is a purification. He is thereby removed from the rank of ordinary 
men to a state of fitness for sacred office. His conduct is governed 
by regulations such as those which permit him to sleep in the village 
and only at certain times, or that which entails that a dairyman who 
attends a funeral should cease from that time to perform his sacred 
function. It has, therefore, been conjectured that the aim of much 
of the ritual is to avert the dangers of profanation and prepare or 
neutralise the sacred substance for consumption by those who are 
themselves unclean. 

The notion of the sacred was not necessarily confined to objects. 
There were certain classes of men who were sacred. For a person 
to touch them was to cause pollution. Among the Polynesians, the 
tabu character of a Chief is violated by the touch of an inferior, 
although in this case the danger falls upon the inferior. On the other 
hand, in Efate, the ‘sacred man’ who comes into contact with Namin 
(ceremonial uncleanliness) destroys his sacredness. In Uganda, before 
building a temple, the men were given four days in which to purify 
themselves. On the other hand, the Chief and his belongings are very 
often regarded as sacred and, therefore, as dangerous to others of 
an inferior rank. In the Tonga island, anyone who touches a Chief 
contacted tabu; it was removed by touching the sole of the foot of 
a superior chief. The sacred quality of the chief in Malaya Peninsula 
also resided in the Royal Regalia and anyone touching it was invited 
with serious illness or death. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Contact with strange people was also regarded as a source of 
Untouchability by the Primitive Man. Among the Bathonga, a tribe 
in South Africa, it is belived that those who travel outside their own 
country are peculiarly open to danger from the influence of foreign 
spirits and in particular from demoniac possession. Strangers are 
tabu because, worshipping strange gods, they bring strange influence 
with them. They are, therefore, fumigated or purified in some other 
way. In the Dieri and neighbouring tribes even a member of the tribe 
returning home after a journey was treated as a stranger and no 
notice was taken of him until he sat down. 

The danger of entering a new country is as great as that which 
attaches to those who come from thence. In Australia, when one tribe 
approaches another, the members carry lighted sticks to purify the 
air, just as the Spartan kings in making war had sacred fires from 
the altar carried before them to the frontier. 

In the same manner, those entering a house from the outside world 
were required to perform some ceremony, even if it were only to 
remove their shoes, which would purify the incomer from the evil 
with which otherwise he might contaminate those within, while the 
threshold, door-posts and lintel — important as points of contact with 
outer world — are smeared with blood or sprinkled with water when 
any member of household or of the community has become a source 
of pollution, or a horse-shoe is suspended over the door to keep out 
evil and bring goodluck. 

Of course, the rites and ceremonies connected with birth, death, 
marriage, etc., do not positively and unequivocally suggest that they 
were regarded as sources of pollution. But that pollution is one 
element among many others is indicated by the fact that in every 
case there is segregation. There is segregation and isolation in birth, 
initiation, marriage, death and in dealing with the sacred and the 
strange. 

In birth the mother is segregated. At puberty and initiation there 
is segregation and seclusion for a period. In marriage, from the time 
of betrothal until the actual ceremony bride and bride-groom do not 
meet. In menstruation a woman is subjected to segregation. Segre- 
gation is most noticeable in the case of death. There is not only 
isolation of the dead-body but there is isolation of all the relatives 
of the dead from the rest of the community. This segregation is 
evidenced by the growth of hair and nail and wearing of old clothes 
by the relatives of the dead which show that they are not served by 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


253 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG NON-HINDUS 253 


the rest of the society such as the barber, washerman, etc. The period 
of segregation and the range of segregation differ in the case of death 
but the fact of segregation is beyond dispute. In the case of defilement 
of the sacred by the profane or of defilement of the kindred or by 
intercourse with the non-kindred there is also the element of 
segregation. The profane must keep away from the sacred. So the 
kindred must keep away from the non-kindred. It is thus clear that 
in Primitive Society pollution involved segregation of the polluting 
agent. 

Along with the development of the notion of defilement, Primitive 
Society had developed certain purificatory media and purificatory 
ceremonies for dispelling impurity. 

Among the agents used for dispelling impurity are water and blood. 
The sprinkling of water and the sprinkling of blood by the person 
defiled were enough to make him pure. Among purificatory rites were 
included changing of clothes, cutting hair, nail, etc., sweat-bath, fire, 
fumigation, burning of incense and fanning with the bough of a tree. 

These were the means of removing impurity. But Primitive Society 
had another method of getting rid of impurity. This was to transfer 
it to another person. It was transferred to some one who was already 
tabu. 

In New Zealand, if anyone touched the head of another, the head 
being a peculiarly ‘sacred’ part of the body, he became tabu. He 
purified himself by rubbing his hands on fernroot, which was then 
eaten by the head of the family in female line. In Tonga, if a man 
ate tabued food he saved himself from the evil consequences by having 
the foot of a chief placed on his stomach. 

The idea of transmission also appears in the custom of the 
scapegoat. In Fiji, a tabued person wiped his hands on a pig, which 
became sacred to the chief, while in Uganda, at the end of the period 
of mourning for a king a ‘scapegoat’ along with a cow, a goat, a dog, 
a fowl and the dust and fire from the king’s house was conveyed to 
the Bunyoro frontier, and there the animals were maimed and left 
to die. This practice was held to remove all uncleanliness from the 
king and queen. 

Such are the facts relating to the notion of pollution as it prevailed 
in Primitive Society. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Turning to Ancient Society the notion of pollution prevalent 
therein was not materially different from what was prevalent in 
Primitive Society. There is difference as to the sources of pollution. 
There is difference regarding purificatory ceremonies. But barring 
these differences the pattern of pollution and purification in Primi- 
tive and Ancient Society is the same. 

Comparing the Egyptian system of pollution with the Primitive 
system there is no difference except that in Egypt it was practised 
on an elaborate scale. 

Among the Greeks the causes of impurity were bloodshed, the 
presence of ghost and contact with death, sexual intercourse, child- 
birth, the evacuation of the body, the eating of certain food such as 
pea-soup, cheese and garlic, the intrusion of unauthorised persons 
into holy places, and, in certain circumstances, foul speech and 
quarrelling. The purificatory means, usually called kaopoia by Greeks, 
were lustral water, sulphur, onions, fumigation and fire, incense, 
certain boughs and other vegetative growths, pitch, wool, certain 
stones and amulets, bright things like sunlight and gold, sacrificed 
animals, especially the pig and of these specially the blood and the 
skin; finally, certain festivals and festival rites particularly the ritual 
of cursing and the scapegoat. One unusual method was the cutting 
of the hair of the polluted person or sacrificial communion with the 
deity. 

A striking feature of the Roman notion of pollution and 
purification is to be found in the belief of territorial and communal 
pollution and purification. Parallel to the lustratio of the house is 
the periodical purificatory ritual applied to a country district (Pagi). 
The lustractio pagi consisted in a religious procession right round 
its boundaries, with sacrifice. There seems to have been in ancient 
days a similar procession round the walls of the city, called amburbium. 
In historical times special purification of the City was carried out 
when a calamity called for it, e.g.’ after the early disasters in the 
Second Punic War. The object of all such expiations was to seek 
reconciliation with the gods. Lustral ceremony accompanied the 
foundation of a colony. The Therminalia protective of boundaries, and 
the Compitalia of streets in the City were also probably lustral in 
their origin. Down to the late period, priests called Luperci peram- 
bulated in the boundaries of the earliest Rome, the settlement on 
the Palatinate. Earlier there was an annual solemn progress round 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-16 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013>DK>10-ll-2013 


255 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG NON-HINDUS 255 


the limits of the most ancient territory of the Primitive City. It was 
led by the Archaic priesthood called the Arval brotherhood. The 
ceremony was called ambravalia and it was distinctly piacular. When 
Roman territory was expanded no corresponding extension of the 
lustral rite seems ever to have been made. These round-about piacular 
surveys were common elsewhere, inside as well as outside Italy and 
particularly in Greece. The solemn words and prayers of the tradi- 
tional chant, duly gone through without slip of tongue, seem to have 
had a sort of magical effect. Any error in the pronouncement of these 
forms would involve a need of reparation, just as in the earliest 
Roman legal system, the mispronunciation of the established verbal 
forms would bring loss of the lawsuit. 

Other forms of quaint ancient ritual were connected with the 
piacular conception. The Salii, ancient priests of Mars, made a 
journey at certain times round a number of stations in the City. They 
also had a ‘cleaning of the weapons’ and a ‘cleaning of the trumpets’ 
which testify to a primitive notion that the efficiency of the army’s 
weapons required purification. The ‘washing’ (lustrum) with which the 
census ended was in essence military; for it was connected with the 
Comitia Centuriata, which is merely the army in civil garb. Lustratio 
exercitus was often performed when the army was in the field, to 
remove superstitious dread which sometimes attacked it at other 
times, it was merely prophylactic. There was also a lustration of the 
fleet. 

Like all Primitive people the Hebrews also entertained the notion 
of defilement. The special feature of their notion of defilement was 
the belief that defilement was also caused by contact with the carcass 
of unclean animals, by eating a carcass or by contact with creeping 
things, or by eating creeping things and by contact with animals 
which are always unclean such as “every beast which divideth the 
hoof, and is not cloven footed, nor cheweth the cud. ..whatsoever goeth 
upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on all four”. 
Contact with any unclean person was also defilement to the Hebrews. 
Two other special features of the Hebrew notion of defilement may 
be mentioned. The Hebrews believed that defilement might be caused 
to persons by idolatrous practices or to a land by the sexual impurities 
of the people. 

On the basis of this survey, we can safely conclude that there are 
no people Primitive or Ancient who did not entertain the notion of 
pollution. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


256 


CHAPTER II 

UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 


IN the matter of pollution there is nothing to distinguish the Hindus 
from the Primitive or Ancient peoples. That they recognized pollution 
is abundantly clear from the Manu Smriti. Manu recognises physical 
defilement and also notional defilement. 

Manu treated birth, 1 death and menstruation 2 as sources of 
impurity. With regard to death, defilement was very extensive in its 
range. It followed the rule of consanguinity. Death caused difilement 
to members of the family of the dead person technically called 
Sapindas and Samanodakas? It not only included maternal relatives 
such as maternal uncle 4 but also remote relatives. 5 It extended even 
to nonrelatives such as (1) teacher 6 , (2) teacher’s 7 son, (3) teacher’s 8 
wife, (4) pupil, 9 (5) fellow 10 student, (6) Shrotriya, 11 (7) king, 12 (8) 
friend, 13 (9) members of the household, 14 (10) those who carried the 
corpse, 15 and (11) those who touched the corpse. 16 

Anyone within the range of defilement could not escape it. There 
were only certain persons who were exempt. In the following verses 
Manu names them and specifies the reasons why he exempts them : — 

1. Chapter V. 58, 61- 63, 71, 77, 79. 

2. Chapter III, 45-46 : IV 40-41, 57, 208 ; V. 66,85,108. 

3. Chapter V. 58, 60, 75-77, 83-94. 

4. Chapter V. 81. 

5. Chapter V. 78. 

6. Chapter V. 65, 80, 82. 

7. Chapter V. 80. 

8. Chapter V. 80. 

9. Chapter V. 81. 

10. Chapter V. 71. 

11. Chapter V. 81. 

12. Chapter V. 82. 

13. Chapter V. 82. 

14. Chapter V. 81. 

15. Chapter V. 64-65, 85. 

16. Chapter V. 64, 85 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


257 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 257 


“V.93. The taint of impurity does not fall on kings and those engaged 
in the performance of a vow, or of a Sattra; for the first are seated 
on the throne of India, and the (last two are) ever pure like 
Brahman. 

94. For a king, on the throne of magnanimity, immediate purification 
is prescribed, and the reason for that is that he is seated (there) 
for the protection of (his) subjects. 

95. (The same rule applies to the kinsmen) of those who have fallen 
in a riot or a battle, (of those who have been killed) by lightning 
or by the king, and for cows and Brahmins, and to those whom 
the king wishes to be pure (in spite of impurity). 

96. A king is an incarnation of the eight guardian deities of the world, 
the Moon, the Fire, the Sun, the Wind, Indra, the Lords of wealth 
and water (Kubera and Varuna) and Yama. 

97. Because the king is pervaded by those lords of the world, no 
impurity is ordained for him for purity and impurity of mortals 
is caused and removed by those lords of the world.” 

From this it is clear that the king, the kinsmen of those who have 
fallen in a noble cause as defined by Manu and those whom the king 
chose to exempt were not affected by the normal rules of defilement. 
Manu’s statement that the Brahmin was ‘ever pure’ must be under- 
stood in its usual sense of exhalting the Brahmin above everything. 
It must not be understood to mean that the Brahmin was free from 
defilement. For he was not. Indeed besides being defiled by births 
and deaths the Brahmin also suffered defilement on grounds which 
did not affect the Non-Brahmins. The Manu Smriti is full of tabus 
and don’ts which affect only the Brahmins and which he must observe 
and failure to observe which makes him impure. 

The idea of defilement in Manu is real and not merely notional. 
For he makes the food offered by the polluted person unacceptable. 

Manu also prescribes the period of defilement. It varies. For the 
death of a Sapinda it is ten days. For children three days. For fellow 
students one day. Defilement does not vanish by the mere lapse of 
the prescribed period. At the end of the period there must be 
performed a purificatory ceremony appropriate to the occasion. 

For the purposes of purification Manu treats the subject of 
defilement from three aspects : (1) Physical defilement, (2) notional 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


or psychological defilement, and (3) ethical defilement. The rule 1 for 
the purification of ethical defilement which occurs when a person 
entertains evil thoughts are more admonitions and exhortations. But 
the rites for the removal of notional and physical defilement are the 
same. They include the use of water. 2 earth. 3 cow’s urine, 4 the kusa 
grass 5 and ashes. 6 Earth, cow’s urine, Kusa grass and ashes are 
prescribed as purificatory agents for removing physical impurities 
caused by the touch of inanimate objects. Water is the chief agent 
for the removal of notional defilement. It is used in three ways (1) 
sipping, (2) bath, and (3) ablution. 7 Later on panchagavya became 
the most important agency for removing notional defilement. It 
consists of a mixture of the five products of the cow, namely, milk, 
urine, dung, curds and butter. 

In Manu there is also provision for getting rid of defilement by 
transmission through a scapegoat 8 namely by touching the cow or 
looking at the sun after sipping water. 

Besides the individual pollution the Hindus believe also in terri- 
torial and communal pollution and purification very much like the 
system that prevailed among the early Romans. Every village has 
an annual jatra. An animal, generally a he buffalo, is purchased on 
behalf of the village. The animal is taken round the village and is 
sacrificed, the blood is sprinkled round the village and towards the 
end toe meat is distributed among the villagers. Every Hindu, every 
Brahmin even though he may not be a beef eater is bound to accept 
his share of the meat. This is not mentioned in any of the Smritis 
but it has the sanction of custom which among the Hindus is so strong 
that it always overrides law. 


II 

If one could stop here, one could well say that the notion of 
defilement prevalent among the Hindus is not different from that 
which obtained in Primitive and in Ancient Societies. But one cannot 
stop here. For there is another form of Untouchability observed by 


1. 

Chapter 

V. 

105-109; 127-128. 

2. 

Chapter 

V. 

127. 

3. 

Chapter 

V. 

134-136. 

4. 

Chapter 

V. 

121, 124. 

5. 

Chapter 

V. 

115. 

6. 

Chapter 

V. 

111. 

7. 

Chapter 

V. 

143. 

8. 

Chapter 

V. 

87. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


259 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 259 

the Hindus which has not yet been set out. It is the hereditary 
Untouchability of certain communities. So vast is the list of such 
communities that it would be difficult for an individual with his unaided 
effort to compile an exhaustive list. Fortunately such a list was prepared 
by the Government of India in 1935 and is attached to the Orders-in- 
Council issued under the Government of India Act of 1935. To this 
Order-in-Council there is attached a Schedule. The Schedule is divided 
into nine parts. One part refers to one province and enumerates the 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within steps which are 
deemed to be Untouchables in that province either in the whole of that 
province or part thereof. The list may be taken to be both exhaustive 
and authentic. To give an idea of the vast number of communities which 
are regarded as hereditary Untouchables by the Hindus. I reproduce 
below the list given in the Order-in-Council. 

SCHEDULE 

PART I. - MADRAS 

(1) Scheduled Castes throughout the Province : — 


Adi-Andhra. 

Gosangi. 

Paidi. 

Adi-Dravida. 

Haddi 

Painda. 

Adi-Karnataka. 

Hasla 

Paky. 

Ajila. 

Holeya. 

Pallan. 

Arunthuthiyar. 

Jaggali. 

Pambada. 

Baira. 

Jambuvulu. 

Pamidi. 

Bakuda. 

Kalladi 

Panchama. 

Bandi. 

Kanakkan 

Paniyan. 

Bariki. 

Kodalo. 

Panniandi. 

Battada. 

Koosa. 

Paraiyan. 

Bavuri 

Koraga. 

Parvan. 

Bellara. 

Kudumban 

Pulayan. 

Bygari 

Kuravan. 

Puthirai Vanan. 

Chachati. 

Madari. 

Raneyar. 

Chakkiliyan. 

Madiga. 

Relli. 

Chalvadi. 

Maila 

Samagara. 

Chamar. 

Mala. 

Samban 

Chandala. 

Mala Dasu. 

Sapari. 

Cheruman. 

Matangi. 

Semman. 

Dandasi. 

Moger. 

Thoti. 

Devendrakulathan. 

Muchi. 

Tiruvalluvar. 

Ghasi. 

Mundala. 

Valluvan. 

Godagali. 

Nalakcyava. 

Valmiki. 

Godari. 

Nayadi. 

Vettuvan. 

Godda. 

Paga dai 



D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(2) Scheduled Castes throughout the Provinces except in any special 
constituency constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935, for 
the election of a representative of backward areas and backward tribes 
to the Legislative Assembly of the Province : — 


Arnadan. 

Kattunayakan. 

Kuruman. 

Dombo. 

Kudiya. 

Malasar. 

Kadan. 

Kudubi. 

Mavilan. 

Karimpalan. 

Kurichchan. 

Pano. 

PART II.— BOMBAY 

Scheduled Castes : — 

(1) Throughout the Province : — 

Asodi. Dhor. Mang Garudi. 

Bakad. 

Garode. 

Maghval, or Menghwar. 

Bhambi. 

Halleer. 

Mini Madig. 

Bhangi. 

Halsar, or Haslar. 

Mukri. 

Chakrawadya-Dasar. 

Hulsavar. 

Nadia. 

Chalvadi. 

Holaya. 

Shenva, or Shindhava. 

Chambhar, or Mochi 
gar, or 

Khalpa. 

Shinghdav, or Shingadya. 

Samagar. 

Kolcha, or Kolgha. 

Sochi. 

Chena-Dasaru. 

Koli-Dhor. 

Timali. 

Chuhar, or Chuhra. 

Lingader. 

Turi. 

Dakaleru. 

Madig, or Mang. 

Vankar. 

Dhed. 

Mahar. 

Vitholia. 

Dhegu-Megu. 

(2) Throughout the Province except in the Ahmedabad, Kaira, Broach 

and Panch Mahals and 

Surat Districts — Mochi. 

(3) In the Kanara district — Kotegar. 

PART III.— BENGAL 
Scheduled Castes throughout the Province : — 

Agaria. 

Bhumij. 

Gonrhi. 

Bagdi. 

Bind. 

Hadi. 

Bahelia. 

Binjhia. 

Hajang. 

Baiti. 

Chamar. 

Halalkhor. 

Bauri. 

Dhcnuar. 

Hari. 

Bediya. 

Dhoba. 

Ho. 

Beldar. 

Doai. 

Jalia Kaibartta. 

Berua. 

Dom. 

Jhalo Malo, or Malo. 

Bhatiya. 

Dosadh. 

Kadar. 

Bhuimali. 

Garo. 

Kalpahariya. 

Bhuiya. 

Ghasi. 

Kan. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


261 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 261 


Kandh. 

Lodha. 

Oraon. 

Kandra. 

Lahor. 

Paliya. 

Kaora. 

Mahli. 

Pan. 

Kapuria. 

Mai. 

Pasi. 

Karenga. 

Mahar. 

Patni. 

Kastha. 

Mallah. 

Pod. 

Kaur. 

Mech. 

Rabha. 

Khaira. 

Mehtor. 

Rajbanshi. 

Khatik. 

Muchi. 

Rajwar. 

Koch. 

Munda. 

Santal. 

Konai. 

Musahar. 

Sunri. 

Konwar. 

Nagesia. 

Tiyar. 

Kora. 

Namasudra. 

Turi. 

Kotal. 

Nat. 


Lalbegi, 

Nuniya. 


PART IV.— UNITED PROVINCES 

Scheduled Castes : — 

(1) Throughout the 

Province : — 


Agariva. 

Chamar. 

Kharwar (except 

Aheriya. 

Chero. 

Benbansi) 

Badi. 

Dabagar. 

Khatik. 

Badhik. 

Dhangar. 

Kol. 

Baheliya. 

Dhanuk (Bhangi). 

Korwa. 

Bajaniya. 

Dharkar. 

Lalbegi. 

Bajgi. 

Dhobi. 

Majhawar. 

Balahar. 

Dorn. 

Nat. 

Balmiki. 

Domar. 

Pankha. 

Banmanus. 

Gharami. 

Parahiya. 

Bansphor. 

Ghasiya. 

Pasi. 

Barwar. 

Gual. 

Patari. 

Basor. 

Habura. 

Rawat. 

Bawariya. 

Hari. 

Saharya. 

Beldar. 

Hela. 

Sanaurhiya. 

Bengali. 

Khairaha. 

Sansiya. 

Berya. 

Kalabaz. 

Shilpkar. 

Bhantu. 

Kanjar. 

Tharu. 

Bhuiya. 

Kapariya. 

Turaiha. 

Bhuiyar. 

Karwal. 


Boriya. 

Kharot. 



(2) Throughout the Province except in the Agra, .Meerut and 
Rohilkhand divisions — Kori. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


PART V— PUNJAB 


Scheduled Castes throughout the 

Province : — 

Ad Dharmis. 

Marija, or Marecha. Khatik. 

Bawaria. 

Bengali. 

Kori. 

Chamar. 

Barar. 

Nat. 

Chuhra, or Balmiki. 

Bazigar. 

Pasi. 

Dagi and Koli. 

Bhanjra. 

Perna. 

Dhumna. 

Chanal. 

Sepela. 

Od. 

Dhanak. 

Sirkiband. 

Sansi. 

Gagra. 

Megha. 

Sarera. 

Gandhila. 

Ramdasis. 


PART VI.- 

-BIHAR 

Scheduled Castes : — 



(1) Throughout the 

Province : — 


Chamar. 

Halalkhor. 

Mochi. 

Chaupal. 

Hari. 

Musahar. 

Dhobi. 

Kanjar. 

Nat. 

Dusadh. 

Kurariar. 

Pasi 

Dom. 

Lalbegi. 


(2) In the Patna and Tirhut divisions and the Bhagalpur, Monghyr, 

Palamau and Purnea 

districts : — 


Bauri. 

Bhumij. 

Rajwar. 

Bhogta. 

Ghasi. 

Turi. 

Bhauya. 

Pan. 


(3) In the Dhanbad sub-division of the Manbhum district and the 


Central Manbhum general rural constituency, and the Purulia and 
Raghunathpur municipalities : — 

Bauri. Ghasi. Rajwar. 

Bhogta. Pan. Turi. 

Bhuiya. 

PART VH.— CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR 


Scheduled 
Basor, or 

Castes 

Burud 

■ ) 

Chamar 


• ) 

Dom 


■ ) 

Ganda 

Mang 


) 

■ ) 

Mehtar or 

Bhangi 

) 

Mochi 


■ ) 

Satnami 


■ ) 

Audhelia 



Bahna 




Localities 


Throughout the Province 


In the Bilaspur district. 
In the Amraoti district 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


263 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 263 


Scheduled Castes 


Localities 


Balahi, or Balai. 


Bedar 

Chadar 

Chauhan 

Dahayat 

Dewar 

Dhanuk 

Dhimar 

Dhobi 


Dohar 

Ghasia 


Holiya 

Jangam 

Kaikari 

Katia 


Khangar 


Khatik 


Koli 

Kori 


Kumhar 


In the Berar division and the Balaghat, Bhandara Belul, 
Chanda, Chhindwara, Hoshangabad, Jabbulpore, 
Mandla, Nagpur, Nimar, Saugor and Wardha districts. 

In the Akola, Amraoti and Buldhana districts. 

In the Bhandara and Saugor districts. 

In the Durg district. 

In the Damoh sub-division of the Saugor district. 

In the Bilaspur, Durg and Raipur districts. 

In the Saugor district, except in the Damoh sub-division 
thereof. 

In the Bhandara district. 

In the Bhandara, Bilaspur, Raipur and Saugor districts 
and the Hoshangabad and Seoni-Malwa tahsils of the 
Hoshangabad district. 

In the Berar division and the Balaghat, Bhandara, 
Chanda, Nagpur and Wardha districts. 

In the Berar division and in the Balaghat, Bhandara, 
Bilsaspur, Chanda, Durg, Nagpur, Raipur and Wardha 
districts. 

In the Balaghat and Bhandara districts. 

In the Bhandara district. 

In the Berar division, and in Bhandara, Chanda, Nagpur 
and Wardha districts. 

In the Berar division, in the Balaghat, Betul, Bhandara, 
Bilaspur, Chanda, Durg, Nagpur, Nimar, Raipur and 
Wardha districts, in the Hoshangabad and Seoni- 
Malwa tahsils of the Hoshangabad district, in the 
Chhindwara district, except in the Seoni sub-division 
thereof, and in the Saugor district, except in the 
Damoh sub-division thereof. 

In the Bhadara, Buldhana and Saugor districts and the 
Hoshangabad and Seoni Malwa tahsils of the 
Hoshangabad district. 

In the Berar division, in the Balaghat, Bhandara, 
Chanda, Nagpur and Wardha districts, in the 
Hoshangabad tahsil of the Hoshangabad district, in 
the Chhindwara district, except in the Seoni sub- 
division thereof, and in the Saugor district, except in 
the Damoh sub-division thereof. 

In the Bhandara and Chanda districts. 

In the Amraoti, Balaghat, Betul, Bhandara, Buldhana, 
Chhindwara, Jubbulpore, Mandla, Nimar, Raipur and 
Saugor districts, and in the Hoshangabad district, 
except in the Harda and Sohagpur tahsils thereof. 

In the Bhandara and Saugor districts and the 
Hoshangabad and Seoni-Malwa tahsils of the 
Hoshangabad district. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


264 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Scheduled Castes 


Localities 


Madgi 

Mala 

Mehra or Mahar 

Nagarchi 

Ojha 

Panka 

Pardhi 

Pradhan 

Rajjhar 


In the Berar division and in the Balaghat, Bhandara, 
Chanda, Nagpur and Wardha districts. 

In the Balaghat, Betul, Chhindwara, Hoshangabad, 
Jubbulpore Mandla, Nimar and Saugor districts. 

Throughout the Province, except in the Harda and 
Sohagpur tahsils of the Hoshangabad district. 

In the Balaghat, Bhandara, Chhindwara, Mandla, Nagpur 
and Raipur districts. 

In the Balaghat, Bhandara and Mandla districts and the 
Hoshangabad tahsil of the Hoshangabad district 

In the Berar division, in the Balaghat, Bhandara, 
Bilaspur, Chanda, Durg, Nagpur, Raipur, Saugor and 
Wardha districts and in the Chhindwara district, 
except in the Seoni subdivison thereof. 

In the Narsinghpura sub-division of the Hoshangabad 
district. 

In the Berar division, in the Bhandara, Chanda, Nagpur, 
Nimar, Raipur and Wardha districts and in the 
Chhaindwara district, except in the Seoni sub-division 
thereof. 

In the Sohagpur tahsil of the Hoshangabad district 

PART VIII. - ASSAM 


Scheduled Castes 

(1) In the Assam Valley 

Namasudra. Hira. 

Kaibartta. Lalbegi. 

Bania, or Brittial-Bania. 


(2) In the Surma Valley 


Mali, or Bhuimali. 
Dhupi, or Dhobi. 
Dugla, or Dholi. 
Jhalo and Malo, 
Mahara. 


Sutradhar. 

Muchi. 

Patni. 

Namasudra. 


Mchtar, or Bhangi. 
Bansphor. 


Kaibartta, or Jaliya. 
Lalbegi. 

Mehtar, or Bhangi. 
Bansphor. 


PART EX. - ORISSA 


Scheduled Castes 
(1) Throughout the 
Adi-Andhra. 

Audhelia. 

Bariki. 

Bansor, or Burud. 
Bavuri. 

Chachati. 


Province 

Chamar. 

Chandala. 

Dandasi. 

Dewar. 

Dhoba or Dhobi. 
Ganda. 


Ghusuria. 

Godagali. 

Godari. 

Godra. 

Gokha. 

Haddi, or Hari. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


265 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 265 


Irika. 

Mala. 

Panchama 

Jaggali. 

Mang. 

Panka 

Kandra. 

Mangan. 

Relli. 

Katia. 

Mehra, or Mahar. 

Sapari. 

Kela. 

Mehtar, or Bhangi. 

Satnami. 

Kodalo. 

Mochi or Muchi. 

Siyal. 

Madari. 

Paidi. 

Valmiki. 

Madiga. 

Painda. 


Mahuria. 

Pamidi. 



(2) Throughout the Province except in the Khondmals district, the 
district of Sambalpur and the areas transferred to Orissa under the 
provisions of the Government of India (Constitution of Orissa) Order, 
1936, from the Vizagapatam and Ganjam Agencies in the Presidency 
of Madras 

Pan, or Pano. 

(3) Throughout the Province except in the Khondmals district and 
the areas so transferred to Orissa from the said Agencies 

Dom, or Dambo. 

(4) Throughout the Province except in the district of Sambalpur : 

Bauro. Bhumij. Turi. 

Bhuiya. Ghasi, or Ghasia. 

(5) In the Nawapara sub-division of the district of Sambalpur 

Kori. Nagarchi. Pradhan. 

This is a very terrifying list. It includes 429 communities. Reduced 
to numbers it means that today there exist in India 50-60 millions 
of people whose mere touch causes pollution to the Hindus. Surely, 
the phenomenon of Untouchability among primitive and ancient 
society pales into insignificance before this phenomenon of hereditary 
Untouchability for so many millions of people which we find in India. 
This type of Untouchability among Hindus stands in a class by itself. 
It has no parallel in the history of the world. It is unparalleled not 
merely by reason of the colossal numbers involved which exceed the 
number of great many nations in Asia and in Europe but also on 
other grounds. 

There are some striking features of the Hindu system of Untouch- 
ability affecting the 429 Untouchable communities which are not to 
be found in the custom of Untouchability as observed by Non- Hindu 
communites, primitive or ancient. 

The isolation prescribed by Non-Hindu societies as a safeguard 
against defilement, if it is not rational, is at least understandable. It 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is for specified reasons such as birth, marriage, death, etc., But the 
isolation prescribed by Hindu society is apparently for no cause. 

Defilement as observed by the Primitive Society was of a temporary 
duration which arose during particular times such as the performance 
of natural functions, eating, drinking, etc. or a natural crisis in the 
life of the individual such, as birth, death, menstruation, etc. After 
the period of defilement was over and after the purificatory ceremo- 
nies were performed the defilement vanished and the individual 
became pure and associable. But the impurity of the 50-60 millions 
of the Untouchables of India, quite unlike the impurity arising from 
birth, death, etc., is permanent. The Hindus who touch them and 
become polluted thereby can become pure by undergoing purificatory 
ceremonies. But there is nothing which can make the Untouchables 
pure. They are born impure, they are impure while they live, they 
die the death of the impure, and they give birth to children who are 
born with the stigma of Untouchability affixed to them. It is a case 
of permanent, hereditary stain which nothing can cleanse. 

In the third place, Non-Hindu societies which believed in defilement 
isolated the individuals affected or at the most those closely connected 
with them. But the Untouchability among the Hindus involves the 
isolation of a class-a class which today numbers about 50 to 60 million 
people. 

In the fourth place, Non-Hindu societies only isolated the affected 
individuals. They did not segregate them in separate quarters. The 
Hindu society insists on segregation of the Untouchables. The Hindu 
will not live in the quarters of the Untouchables and will not allow 
the Untouchables to live inside Hindu quarters. This is a fundamental 
feature of Untouchability as it is practised by the Hindus. It is not 
a case of social separation, a mere stoppage of social intercourse for 
a temporary period. It is a case of territorial segregation and of a 
cordon sanitaire putting the impure people inside a barbed wire into 
a sort of a cage. Every Hindu village has a ghetto. The Hindus live 
in the village and the Untouchables in the ghetto. 

Such is the Hindu system of Untouchability. Who can deny that it 
is not altogether different from what is found to exist among Non- 
Hindu societies? That Untouchability among Hindus is a unique 
phenomenon is beyond question. Persons were treated by non-Hindu 
communities as impure but as individuals. Never a whole class was 
treated as impure. But their impurity was of a temporary duration and 
was curable by the performance of some purificatory rites. There has 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7-17 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 11-10-2013 


267 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : UNTOUCHABILITY AMONG HINDUS 267 


never been a case of permanent impunity based on the rule ‘once 
impure always impure’. Persons were treated as impure by Non-Hindu 
Communities and they were even cut off from social intercourse. But 
there has never been a case of persons having been put into 
permanent segregation camps. A whole body of people have been 
treated as impure by Non-Hindu communities. But they were strang- 
ers outside the fold of the kindred. There has never been a case of 
a people treating a section of their own people as permanently and 
hereditarily impure. 

Untouchability among Hindus is thus a unique phenomenon, 
unknown to humanity in other parts of the world. Nothing like it 
is to be found in any other society- primitive, ancient or modern. The 
many problems that arise out of a study of Untouchability and which 
call for investigation may be reduced to two : 

(1) Why do the Untouchables live outside the village? 

(2) What made their impurity permanent, and ineradicable? 

The following pages are devoted to finding answers to these two 
questions. 


D:\AMBEDKARWOL-07WOL7- 1 7 


Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013 


11-10-2013 


268 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


269 



PART II 

PROBLEM OF HABITAT 

Chapter III. 

Why do the Untouchables Live Outside the Village ? 

Chapter IV. 

Are the Untouchables Broken Men ? 

Chapter V. 

Are there Parallel Cases ? 

Chapter VI. 

How did Separate Settlements for Broken Men 
Disappear Elsewhere ? 


270 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


271 


CHAPTER III 

WHY DO THE UNTOUCHABLES LIVE 
OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE ? 


THAT the Untouchables live outside the village is so notorious a fact 
that it must be taken to be within the cognizance even of those whose 
knowledge about them is not very profound. Yet, nobody has thought 
that this was a serious question calling for satisfactory answer. How 
did the Untouchables come to live outside the village? Were they 
declared to be Untouchables first and then deported out of the village 
and made to live outside? Or were they from the very beginning living 
outside the village and were subsequently declared to be Untouch- 
ables? If the answer is that they were living outside the village from 
the very beginning, there arises a further question, namely, what can 
be the reason for it ? 

As the question of the separate settlement of the Untouchables has 
never been raised before, naturally there exists no theory as to how 
the Untouchables came to live outside the village. There is, of course, 
the view of the Hindu Shastras and if one wants to dignify it by 
calling it a theory one may do so. The Shastras of course say that 
the Antyajas should live and have their abode outside the village. 
For instance, Manu says : 

“X. 51. But the dwellings of the Chandalas and the Shvapakas 
shall be outside the village, they must be made Apapatras 
and their wealth (shall be) dogs and donkeys. 

X. 52. Their dress (shall be) the garments of the dead, (they 
shall eat) their food from broken dishes, black iron 
(shall be) their ornaments and they must always wander 
from place to place. 

X. 53. A man who fulfils a religious duty, shall not seek 
intercourse with them; their transactions (shall be) 
among themselves and their marriages with their 
equals. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


272 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


X. 54. Their food shall be given to them by others (than an 
Aryan giver) in a broken dish; at night they shall not 
walk about in village and in towns. 

X. 55. By day they may go about for the purpose of their work, 
distinguished by marks at king’s command, and they 
shall carry out the corpses (of persons) who have no 
relatives; that is a settled rule. 

X. 56. By the King’s order they shall always execute the 
criminals, in accordance with the law, and they shall 
take for themselves the clothes, the beds, and the 
ornaments of (such) criminals.” 

But what conclusion can one draw from these statements of the 
Shastras? They are capable of double interpretation. When the 
Shastras say that the Untouchables should stay outside the village, 
they may be purporting to say no more than that the Untouchables 
should stay where they have been staying, i.e. outside the village. 
This is one interpretation. The second interpretation is that those 
who are declared Untouchables should not be allowed to stay inside 
the village but should be required to go out of the village and live 
outside. Following up the alternate interpretations of the Shastras 
there are two different possibilities which call for consideration. One 
is that the Untouchability has nothing to do with the Untouchables 
living outside the village. From the very beginning they lived outside 
the village. Thereafter when the stigma of Untouchability fell on them 
they were prohibited from coming to live inside the village. The other 
possibility is that Untouchability has everything to do with the 
Untouchables, living outside the village. In other words, the Untouch- 
ables originally lived inside the village and that thereafter when the 
stigma of untouchability fell on them they were forced to vacate and 
live outside the village. 

Which of the two possibilities is more acceptable? 

The second possibility is on the face of it absurd and fantastic. 
One argument is quite enough to expose its absurdity. The phenom- 
enon we are discussing is not confined to a single village or single 
area. It exists all over India. The transplantation of the Untouchables 
from within, the village to outside the village is a vast operation. How 
and who could have carried on an operation of such colossal dimensions? 
It could not have been carried out except by the command of an 
Emperor having his sway over the whole of India. Even to him such 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


273 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY DO THE VILLAGE ? 273 


a transplantation would have been impossible. But possible and 
impossible it can only be the work of an Emperor. Who is the Emperor 
to whom the credit or discredit of this task can be assigned? 
Obviously, India had no Emperor to perform this task. If there was 
no Emperor to do the transplantation, then the second possibility 
must be abandoned. 

That those who are called Untouchables lived outside the village 
from the very beginning even before they became Untouchables and 
that they continued to live outside the village because of the 
supervention of untouchability at a later stage is the only possibility 
worth consideration. But this raises a very difficult question: Why 
did they live outside the village? What made them or forced them 
to do so? The answer is that having regard to the factors which are 
known to students of Sociology to have influenced the transformation 
of Primitive Society into Modern Society all over the world it is only 
natural to suppose that the Untouchables should have from the 
beginning lived outside the village. 

Not many will realise why this is natural without some explanation 
of the factors which have affected the condition of Primitive Society 
into Modern Society. For a clear understanding of the matter it is 
necessary to bear in mind that Modern Society differs from Primitive 
Society in two respects. Primitive Society consisted of nomadic 
communities while Modern Society consists of settled communities. 
Secondly, Primitive Society consisted of tribal communities based on 
blood relationship. Modern Society consists of local communities 
based on territorial affiliation. In other words there are two lines 
of evolution along which Primitive Society has proceeded before it 
became transformed into Modern Society. One line of evolution has 
led the Primitive Society to become a territorial community from 
being a tribal community. There can be no doubt that such a change 
has taken place. Clear traces of the change are to be seen in the 
official style of kings. Take the style of the English kings. King John 
was the first to call himself the king of England. His predecessors 
commonly called themselves kings of the English. The former 
represent a territorial community. The latter represent a tribal 
community. England was once the country which Englishmen inhab- 
ited. Englishmen are now the people who inhabit England. The same 
transformation can be seen to have taken place in the style of the 
French kings who were once called kings of the Franks and later 
as kings of France. The second line of evolution had led Primitive 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


274 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Society to become a settled community instead of the Nomadic 
community which it was. Here again, the change is so definite and 
so impressive that no illustration is required to convince anybody of 
its reality. 

For the purpose in hand all we need is to confine ourselves to a 
consideration of the second line of evolution. How did Primitive 
Society become a settled community? The story of how Primitive 
Society became a settled community is too long to be detailed in a 
chapter- much too long to be compressed in a section thereof. It is 
enough to note two things. The first thing to understand is what made 
Primitive Society give up its nomadic life and secondly what happened 
in the transition from nomadic to settled life. 

Primitive Society was no doubt nomadic. But it was nomadic not 
because of any migratory instinct. Nor was it due to any mental trait 
peculiar to it. It was the result of the fact that the earliest form 
of the wealth held by Primitive Society was cattle. Primitive Society 
was migratory because its wealth, namely the cattle, was migratory. 
Cattle went after new pastures. Primitive Society by reason of its 
love for cattle, therefore, went wherever its cattle carried it. Primitive 
Society became fixed in its abode, in other words became a settled- 
community, when a new species of wealth was discovered. This new 
species of wealth was land. This happened when Primitive Society 
learned the art of farming and of cultivating land. Wealth became 
fixed at one place when it changed its form from cattle to land. With 
this change Primitive Society also became settled at the same place. 

This explains why Primitive Society was at one time nomadic and 
what led it take to settled life. 

The next thing is to note the events that have happened when 
Primitive Society was on the road to becoming a Settled Society. The 
problems which faced Primitive Society in its transition from Nomadic 
life to Settled life were mainly two. One confronted the Settled 
Community. The other confronted the Broken men. The problem that 
confronted the Settled community was that of its defence against the 
Nomadic tribes. The problem which confronted the Broken men was 
that of the protection and shelter. It may be desirable to elucidate 
how and why these problems arose. 

For an understanding of the problem which confronted the Settled 
tribes, it is necessary to bear in mind the following facts. All tribes 
did not take to settled life at one and the same time. Some became 
settled and some remained nomadic. The second thing to remember 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


275 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY DO THE VILLAGE ? 275 


is that the tribes were never at peace with one another. They were 
always at war. When all tribes were in a Nomadic state the chief 
causes for intra-tribal warfare were (1) stealing cattle, (2) stealing 
women, and (3) stealthily grazing of cattle in the pastures belonging 
to other tribes. When some tribes became settled, the tribes that 
remained nomadic found it more advantageous to concentrate their 
fight against the settled tribes. It was more paying than a war against 
other Nomadic tribes. The Nomadic tribes had come to realize that 
the Settled tribes were doubly wealthy. Like the Nomadic tribes, they 
had cattle. But in addition to cattle, they had corn which the Nomadic 
tribes had not and which they greatly coveted. The Nomadic tribes 
systematically organized raids on the Settled tribes with the object 
of stealing the wealth belonging to the Settled tribes. The third fact 
is mat the Settled tribes were greatly handicapped in defending 
themselves against these raiders. Being engaged in more gainful 
occupation, the Settled tribes could not always convert their ploughs 
into swords. Nor could they leave their homes and go in pursuit 
of the raiding tribes. There is nothing strange in this. History shows 
that peoples with civilization but no means of defence are not able 
to withstand the attacks of the barbarians. This explains how and 
why during the transition period the Settled tribes were faced with 
the problem of their defence. 

How the problem of the Broken men arose is not difficult to 
understand. It is the result of the continuous tribal warfare which was 
the normal life of the tribes in their primitive condition. In a tribal 
war it often happened that a tribe instead of being completely 
annihilated was defeated and routed. In many cases a defeated tribe 
became broken into bits. As a consequence of this there always existed 
in Primitive times a floating population consisting of groups of Broken 
tribesmen roaming in all directions. To understand what gave rise 
to the problem of the Broken men it is necessary to realize that 
Primitive Society was fundamentally tribal in its origanization. That 
Primitive Society was fundamentally tribal meant two things. 
Firstly, every individual in Primitive Society belonged to a tribe. Nay, 
he must belong to the tribe. Outside the tribe no individual had any 
existence. He could have none. Secondly tribal organization being 
based on common blood and common kinship an individual born in 
one tribe could not join another tribe and become a member of it. 
The Broken Men had, therefore, to live as stray individuals. In 
Primitive Society where tribe was fighting against tribe a stray 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


collection of Broken Men was always in danger of being attacked. 
They did not know where to go for shelter. They did not know who 
would attack them and to whom they could go for protection. That 
is why shelter and protection became the problem of the Broken Men. 

The foregoing summary of the evolution of Primitive Society shows 
that there was a time in the life of Primitive Society when there 
existed two groups — one group consisting of Settled tribes faced with 
the problem of finding a body of men who would do the work of watch 
and ward against the raiders belonging to Nomadic tribes and the 
other group consisting of Broken Men from defeated tribes with the 
problem of finding patrons who would give them food and shelter. 

The next question is: How did these two groups solve their 
problems? Although we have no written text of a contract coming 
down to us from antiquity we can say that the two struck a bargain 
whereby the Broken Men agreed to do the work of watch and ward 
for the Settled tribes and the Settled tribes agreed to give them food 
and shelter. Indeed, it would have been unnatural if such an 
arrangement had not been made between the two especially when 
the interest of the one required the co-operation of the other. 

One difficulty, however, must have arisen in the completion of the 
bargain, that of shelter. Where were the Broken Men to live? In the 
midst of the settled community or outside the Settled community? 
In deciding this question two considerations must have played a 
decisive part. One consideration is that of blood relationship. The 
second consideration is that of strategy. According to Primitive 
notions only persons of the same tribe, i.e.. of the same blood, could 
live together. An alien could not be admitted inside the area occupied 
by the homesteads belonging to the tribe. The Broken men were 
aliens. They belonged to a tribe which was different from the Settled 
tribe. That being so, they could not be permitted to live in the midst 
of the Settled tribe. From the strategic point of view also it was 
desirable that these Broken men should live on the border of the 
village so as to meet the raids of the hostile tribes. Both these 
considerations were decisive in favour of placing their quarters 
outside the village. 

We can now return to the main question, namely, why do the 
Untouchables live outside the village? The answer to the question can 
be sought along the lines indicated above. The same processes must 
have taken place in India when the Hindu Society was passing from 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-18 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


277 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY DO THE VILLAGE ? 277 


Nomadic life to the life of a settled village community. There must 
have been in Primitive Hindu society, Settled tribes and Broken Men. 
The Settled tribes founded the village and formed the village 
community and the Broken Men lived in separate quarters outside 
the village for the reason that they belonged to a different tribe and, 
therefore, to different blood. To put it definitely, the Untouchables 
were originally only Broken Men. It is because they were Broken Men 
that they lived outside the village. 

This explains why it is natural to suppose that the Untouchables 
from the very beginning lived outside and that Untouchability has 
nothing to do with their living outside the village. 

The theory is so novel that critics may not feel satisfied without 
further questioning. They will ask: 

(1) Is there any factual evidence to suggest that the Untouchables 
are Broken Men? 

(2) Is there evidence that the process of settlement suggested 
above has actually taken place in any country? 

(3) If Broken Men living outside the village is a universal feature 
of all societies, how is it that the separate quarters of the 
Broken Men have disappeared outside India but not in India? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-19 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


278 


CHAPTER IV 

ARE THE UNTOUCHABLES BROKEN MEN ? 


TO the question : Are the Untouchables in their origin only Broken 
Men, my answer is in the affirmative. An affirmative answer is bound 
to be followed by a call for evidence. Direct evidence on this issue 
could be had if the totems of the Touchables and the Untouchables 
in the Hindu villages had been studied. Unfortunately the study of 
the totemic organization of the Hindus and the Untouchables has not 
yet been undertaken by students of anthropology. When such data 
is collected it would enable us to give a decisive opinion on the 
question raised in this Chapter. For the present, I am satisfied from 
such inquiries as I have made that the totems of the Untouchables 
of a particular village differ from the totems of the Hindus of the 
village. 

Difference in totems between Hindus and Untouchables would be 
the best evidence in support of the thesis that the Untouchables are 
Broken Men belonging to a tribe different from the tribe comprising 
the village community. It may, however, be admitted that such direct 
evidence as has a bearing on the question remains to be collected. 
But facts have survived which serve as pointers and from which it 
can be said that the Untouchables were Broken men. There are two 
sets of such evidentiary facts. 

One set of facts comprise the names Antya, Antyaja and Antyavasin 
given to certain communities by the Hindu Shastras. They have come 
down from very ancient past. Why were these names used to indicate 
a certain class of people? There seem to be some meaning behind 
these terms. The words are undoubtedly derivative. They are derived 
from the root Anta. What does the word Anta mean? Hindus 
learned in the Shastras argue that it means one who is born last 
and as the Untouchable according to the Hindu order of 
Divine creation is held to be born last, the word Antya means an 
Untouchable. The argument is absurd and does not accord with the 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-19 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


279 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : ARE THE UNTOUCHABLES BROKEN MEN? 279 


Hindu theory of the order of creation. According to it, it is the Shudra 
who is born last. The Untouchable is outside the scheme of creation. 
The Shudra is Savarna. As against him the Untouchable is Avarna, 
i.e outside the Varna system. The Hindu theory of priority in creation 
does not and cannot apply to the Untouchable. In my view, the word 
Antya means not end of creation but end of the village. It is a name 
given to those people who lived on the outskirts of the village. The 
word Antya has, therefore, a survival value. It tells us that there 
was a time when some people lived inside the village and some lived 
outside the village and that those who lived outside the village, i.e. 
on the Antya of the village, were called Antyaja. 

Why did some people live on the border of the village? Can there 
be any other reason than that they were Broken Men who were aliens 
and who belonged to tribes different from those who lived inside the 
village? I cannot see any. That this is the real reason is to be found 
in the use of these particular words to designate them. The use of 
the words Antya, Antyaja and Antyavasin has thus double signifi- 
cance. In the first place, it shows that living in separate quarters 
was such a peculiar phenomenon that a new terminology had to be 
invented to give expression to it. Secondly, the words chosen express 
in exact terms the conditions of the people to whom it applied namely 
that they were aliens. 

The second set of facts which shows that the Untouchables were 
Broken men relates to the position of a community called the Mahars. 
The Mahar community is a principal Untouchable community in 
Maharashtra. It is the single largest Untouchable community found 
in Maharashtra. The following facts showing the relations between 
the Mahars and the Touchable Hindus are worthy of note: (1) The 
Mahars are to be found in every village; (2) Every village in 
Maharashtra has a wall and the Mahars have their quarters outside 
the wall; (3) The Mahars by turn do the duty of watch and ward 
on behalf of the village; and (4) The Mahars claim 52 rights against 
the Hindu villagers. Among these 52 rights the most important are:- 

(i) The right to collect food from the villagers; 

(ii) The right to collect corn from each villager at the harvest 
season; and 

(iii) The right to appropriate the dead animal belonging to the 
villagers. 

The evidence arising from the position of the Mahars is of course 
confined to Maharashtra. Whether similar cases are to be found in other 
parts of India has yet to be investigated. But if the Mahars case 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-19 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


280 


280 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


can be taken as typical of the Untouchables throughout India it will 
be accepted that there was a stage in the history of India when 
Broken Men belonging to other tribes came to the Settled tribes and 
made a bargain whereby the Broken men were allowed to settle on 
the border of the village, were required to do certain duties and in 
return were given certain rights. The Mahars have a tradition that 
the 52 rights claimed by them against the villagers were given to 
them by the Muslim kings of Bedar. This can only mean that these 
rights were very ancient and that the kings of Bedar only confirmed 
them. 

These facts although meagre do furnish some evidence in support 
of the theory that the Untouchables lived outside the village from 
the very beginning. They were not deported and made to live outside 
the village because they were declared Untouchables. They lived 
outside the village from the beginning because they were Broken Men 
who belonged to a tribe different from the one to which the Settled 
tribe belonged. 

The difficulty in accepting this explanation arises largely from the 
notion that the Untouchables were always Untouchables. This 
difficulty will vanish if it is borne in mind that there was a time 
when the ancestors of the present day Untouchables were not 
Untouchables vis-a-vis the villagers but were merely Broken Men, no 
more and no less, and the only difference between them and the 
villagers was that they belonged to different tribes. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-20 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013M 1-10-2013 


281 


CHAPTER V 

ARE THERE PARALLEL CASES ? 


ARE there any cases known to history of Broken Men living outside 
the village? To this question it is possible to give an affirmative 
answer. Fortunately for us we have two reported cases which show 
that what is said to have occurred in India particularly has also 
actually occurred elsewhere. The countries wherein such a develop- 
ment has actually been reported to have taken place are Ireland and 
Wales. 

The organization of the Irish village in primitive times can be seen 
from the Brehon Laws of Ireland. Some idea of it as revealed in these 
Laws may be obtained from the following summary given by Sir 
Henry Maine. Says Sir Henry Maine 1 

“The Brehon Law discloses a stage when the tribe has long been settled, 
in all probability upon the tribal territory. It is of sufficient size and 
importance to constitute a political unit, and possibly at its apex is one of 
the numerous chieftain whom the Irish records call kings. The primary 
assumption is that the whole of the tribal territory belongs to the whole of 
the tribe, but in fact large portions of it have been permanently appropriated 
to minor bodies of tribesmen; A part is allotted in special way to the chief 
as appurtenant to his office, and descends from chief to chief according to 
a special rule of succession. Other portions are occupied by fragments of the 
tribe, some of which are under minor chiefs while others, though not strictly 
ruled by a chief, have somebody of noble class to act as their representative 
. All the unappropriated tribelands are in a more special way the property 
of the tribe as a whole, and no portion can theoretically be subjected to more 
than a temporary occupation. Such occupations are, however, frequent and 
among the holders of tribeland, on these terms, are groups of men calling 
themselves tribesmen, but being in reality associations formed by contract, 
chiefly for the purpose of pasturing cattle. Much of the common tribeland 
is not occupied at all, but constitutes, to use the English expression, the 
‘waste’ of the tribe. Still this waste is constantly brought under tillage 
or permanent pasture by settlements of tribesmen, and upon it cultivators 
and servile states are permitted to squat, particularly towards the border. 

It is part of the territory over which the authority of the chief tends 


1 Early History of Institutions, Lecture HI, pp. 92-93. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-20 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X1 1-10-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


steadily to increase, and here it is that he settles his ‘fuidhir’ or stranger — 
tenants a very important class — the outlaws and ' broken men’ from other tribes 
who come to him for protection, and who are only connected with their new 
tribe by their dependence on its chief, and through the responsibility which 
he incurs for them.” 

Who were the Fuidhirs? According to Sir Henry Maine the Fuidhirs 
were : 

“Strangers or fugitives from other territories, men in fact, who had broken 
the original tribal bond which gave them a place in the community, and who 
had to obtain and then as best they might in a new tribe and new place. 
Society was violently disordered. The result was probably to fill the country 
with ‘Broken Men’ and such men could only find a home and protection by 
becoming Fuidhir tenants. 

“The Fuidhir was not a tribesman but an alien. In all societies cemented 
together by kinship the position of the person who has lost or broken the 
bond of union is always extraordinarily miserable. He has not only lost his 
natural place in them but they have no room for him anywhere else.” 


II 


Now as to Wales. The organization of the Welsh village in primitive 
times is described 1 by Mr. Seebhom. According to Mr. Seebhom a 
village in Wales was a collection of homesteads. The homesteads were 
separated into two groups, the homesteads of the Free-tenants and 
the homesteads of the Unfree-tenants. Mr. Seebhom says that this 
separation in habitation was a common feature of the primitive 
village in Wales. Why were these Unfree-tenants made to live in a 
separate and detached place? The reason for this separation is 
explained 2 by Mr. Seebhom in the following terms 

“At first sight there is a great confusion in the class of men mentioned 
in the ancient Welsh Laws — of tribesmen, Uchelore bryre and innate 
boneddings : of non-tribesmen, talogo Aillte, Alltude, etc. The confusion 
vanishes only when the principle underlying the constitution of tribal 
society is grasped. And this principle would apparently be a very simple 
one if could be freed from the complications of conquest and permanent 
settlement of land from the inroads of foreign law, custom, and nomen- 
clature. To begin with there can be little doubt that the ruling principle 
underlying the structure of tribal society was that of blood relationship 
among the free tribesmen. No one who did not belong to a kindred could 
be a member of the tribe, which was in fact, a bundle of Welsh kindred. 
Broadly then under the Welsh tribal system there were two classes, those 
of Cymric blood — and those who were stranger in blood. There was 

1 The Tribal System in Wales p. 9 

2 Ibid pp. 54-55. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-20 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013M 1-10-2013 


283 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : ARE THERE PARALLEL CASES ? 283 


a deep, if not unpassable, gulf between these two classes quite apart from 
any question of land or of conquest. It was a division in blood and it soon 
becomes apparent that the tenacity with which the distinction was maintained 
was at once one of the strong distinctive marks of the tribal system and one 
of the main secrets of its strength.” 


Ill 

This description of the organisation of the Irish and the Welsh 
villages in the primitive times leave no doubt that the case of the 
Untouchables of India is not the only case of a people living outside 
the village. It proves that in it was exhibited a universal phenomenon, 
and was marked by the following features : 

1. That in primitive times the Village Settlement consisted of two 
parts. One part occupied by the community belonging to one 
tribe and another part occupied by the Broken Men of different 
tribes. 

2. The part of the settlement occupied by the tribal community 
was regarded as the village proper. The Broken Men lived in 
the outskirts of the village. 

3. The reason why the Broken Men lived outside the village was 
because they were aliens and did not belong to the tribal 
community. 

The analogy between the Untouchables of India and the Fuidhirs 
of Ireland and the Alltudes of Wales is complete. The Untouchables 
lived outside the village for the same reason for which the Fuidhirs 
and Alltudes had to live outside the village in Ireland and Wales. 
It is, therefore, clear that what is said about the Untouchables on 
the issue of their living outside the village is not without a parallel 
elsewhere. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-21 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X1 1-10-2013 


284 


CHAPTER VI 

HOW DID SEPARATE SETTLEMENTS FOR 
BROKEN MEN DISAPPEAR ELSEWHERE ? 


THAT the Fuidhirs of Ireland and the Alltudes of Wales were Broken 
Men is true. That they lived in separate quarters is also a fact. But 
it is also true that the separate quarters of those Broken Men 
disappeared and they became part of the Settled tribe and were 
absorbed in it. This is somewhat strange. The Broken Men according 
to the theory set out before were given quarters outside the village 
because they belonged to a different tribe and, therefore, to different 
blood. How is it then that they were absorbed by the tribe later on? 
Why such a thing did not happen in India? These are questions which 
are natural and which call for an answer. 

The question is integrally connected with the process of evolution 
through which Primitive Society came to be transferred into Modern 
Society. As has already been said this evolution has proceeded along 
two different lines. One marked the transformation of Primitive 
Society from Nomadic into a settled community. The other marked 
the transformation of Primitive Society from tribal into a territorial 
community. The question with which we are immediately concerned 
relates to the second line of evolution. For it is the substitution of 
common territory for common blood as the bond of union that is 
responsible for the disappearance of the separate quarters of the 
Broken Men. Why did Primitive Society substitute common territory 
for common blood as the bond of union? This is a question for which 
there is no adequate explanation. The origin of the change is very 
obscure. How the change was brought about is however quite clear. 

At some stage there came into being in Primitive Society a rule 
whereby a non-tribesman could become a member of the tribe and 
become absorbed in it as a kindred. It was known as a rule of 
ennoblement. This rule was that if a non-tribesman lived next to the 
tribe or married within a tribe for a given number of generations he 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-21 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013M 1-10-2013 


285 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : HOW DID.... DISAPPEAR ELSEWHERE ? 285 


became their kindred. 1 Mr. Seebhom gives the following rules for a 
non-tribesman becoming a tribesman as it was found in the Welsh 
village system. 

(1) Residence in Cymru (Wales) according to the tradition of 
South Wales made the descendant of a stranger at last, a 
Cymru, but not until continued to the ninth generation. 

(2) Intermarriage with innate Cymraeses generation after gen- 
eration made the descendent of a stranger an innate Cymru 
in the fourth generation. In other words, the original stranger’s 
great grandson, whose blood was at least seven-eighths Cymric 
was allowed to attain the right to claim the privileges of a 
tribesman. 

Should not such a thing have happened in India? It could have — 
indeed it should have. For a rule similar to that which existed in 
Ireland and Wales also existed in India. It is referred to by Manu. 
In Chapter X, verses 64-67, he says that a Shudra can be a Brahmin 
for seven generations (if he marries) within the Brahmin Community. 
The ordinary rule of Chaturvarna was that a Shudra could never 
become a Brahmin. A Shudra was born a Shudra and could not be 
made a Brahmin. But this rule of antiquity was so strong that Manu 
had to apply rule of Untouchability to the Shudra. It is obvious that 
if this rule had continued to operate in India, the Broken Men of 
India would have been absorbed in the village community and their 
separate quarters would have ceased to exist. 

Why did this not happen? The answer is that the notion of 
Untouchability supervened and perpetuated difference between kin- 
dred and non-kindred, tribesmen and non-tribesmen in another form; 
namely; between Touchables and Untouchables. It is this new factor 
which prevented the amalgamation taking place in the way in which 
it took place in Ireland and Wales, with the result that the system 
of separate quarters has become a perpetual and a permanent feature 
of the Indian village. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-21 


Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X11-10-2013 


286 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


287 


Chapter VII. 
Chapter VIII. 


PART III 

OLD THEORIES OF THE ORIGIN 
OF UNTOUCHABILITY 

Racial Difference as the Origin of Untouchability. 
Occupational Origin of Untouchability. 


288 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


289 


CHAPTER VII 

RACIAL DIFFERENCE AS THE ORIGIN OF 
UNTOUCHABILITY 


WHAT is the origin of Untouchability? As has been said the field 
is quite unexplored. No student of Sociology has paid any attention 
to it. Writers, other than Sociologists, who have written about India 
and her people have been content with merely recording the custom 
of Untouchability with varying degrees of disapprobation and leaving 
it at that. So far as my researches go, I have come across only one 
author who has attempted to explain how Untouchability has come 
about. It is Mr. Stanley Rice 1 . According to Mr. Rice — 

There is a strong probability that the outcasts were the survivors of the 
conquered peoples, who, as caste tended to coincide with occupation, became 
the drum-beating, leather-working, and farm labouring classes to which as 
serfs they had been relegated from early times. They were not the races 
conquered by the Aryans; the Paraiyans belonged to the aborigines who were 
conquered by the Dravidians and being of a different race they were not 
admitted to the totem of similar clans with which marriage is always 
intimately connected, since that would have led to free intercourse and the 
gradual degradation of race. But this prohibition cannot have been absolute; 
there are always exceptions. In the course of the centuries, some forty or 
more, the inevitable miscegenation may very well have obliterated the racial 
distinctions between aboriginal and early Dravidian. These people have been 
admitted to a sort of lowly participation in the Hindu system in the 
atmosphere of which they have lived for so long, for Hinduism is at once 
the most tolerant and intolerant of creeds. It does not proselytize; you cannot 
become a Hindu as you can become a Mussalman, and those within the fold 
are liable to the most rigid restrictions. But it has always been ready to 
embrace aboriginal tribes who arc willing to submit to its laws, though it 
may assign to them a very lowly place and they have always been kept at 
a distance and have been excluded from the temples. It would seem, therefore, 
that anthropological arguments are in any case not conclusive when we 
consider these factors which must have profoundly modified the original racial 
characteristics and must have changed their outlook. Thus the Dravidians 
applied to the Paraiyans the same test which the Aryans are assumed to have 


1. Hindu Customs And Their Origins : pp. 113-115. (Italics not in the original.) 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


applied to the conquered inhabitants. They reduced them to the position of 
serfs and assigned to them those duties which it was thought beneath their 
own dignity to perform. Nor was marriage the only consideration. The 
disabilities of the Paraiyans were due also— and to an even greater degree- 
to the mystical qualities inherent in Tabu. To admit such a man to the totem 
family was not only contrary to the social order, it would bring upon the 
clan the anger of their particular god. But to admit him to the worship of 
the god within the sacred precincts of a temple was to call clown authentic 
fire from Heaven, whereby they would be consumed. It would be sacrilege 
of the same kind as the offering of unconsecrated or unorthodox fire by Koran, 
Dathan and Abhiram. But though debarred from taking an active part in 
worship, the Paraiyans might yet do the menial services connected with it, 
provided that they did not entail the pollution of the sacred building. In 
Christian terminology the Paraiyan, although he could neither officiate at 
the altar, nor preach a sermon nor even be one of the congregation, might 
still ring the bell— on one condition. He could not regard himself as of the 
communion; he was, in fact, ex-communicate. And as such, he was ceremo- 
nially unclean. No washing with water, no cleansing ceremony, could remove 
that stain which was indelibly fixed by the operation of Tabu. To touch him, 
to have any dealings with him save as it were, at arm’s length, was by a 
sort of contagious magic a defilement You could employ him to till your field 
because that entailed no contact of any kind, beyond giving an order, you 
need have no further communication with him. The seal of pollution was set 
on his forehead; it was inherent in him as surely as the blood in his veins. 
And so from being the vile, degraded fellow which Indian opinion had made 
him, he became viler and more degraded from the kinds of occupation left 
open to him.” 

The theory of Mr. Rice really divides itself into two parts. For, 
according to him, the origin of untouchability is to be found in two 
circumstances — Race and Occupation. Obviously, they require sepa- 
rate consideration. This Chapter will be devoted to an exaimination 
of his theory of racial difference as the origin of untouchability. 

The racial theory of Mr. Rice contains two elements :— 

(1) That the Untouchables are non-Aryan, non-Dravidian 
aboriginals; and 

(2) That they were conquered and subjugated by the Dravidians. 

This theory raises the whole question of the invasions of India by 
foreign invaders, the conquests made by them and the social and 
cultural institutions that have resulted therefrom. According to 
Mr. Rice, there have been two invasions of India. First is the invasion 
of India by the Dravidians. They conquered the non-Dravidian 
aborigines, the ancestors of the Untouchables, and made them 
Untouchables. The second invasion is the invasion of India by the 
Aryans. The Aryans conquered the Dravidians. He does not say how 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


291 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 291 


the conquering Aryans treated the conquered Dravidians. If pressed 
for an answer he might say they made them Shudras. So that we 
get a chain. The Dravidians invaded India and conquered the 
aborigines and made them Untouchables. After Dravidians came the 
Aryans. The Aryans conquered the Dravidians and made them 
Shudras. The theory is too mechanical, a mere speculation and too 
simple to explain a complicated set of facts relating to the origin of 
the Shudras and the Untouchables. 

When students of ancient Indian history delve into the ancient past 
they do often come across four names, the Aryans, Dravidians, Dasas 
and Nagas. What do these names indicate? This question has never 
been considered. Are these names Aryans, Dravidians, Dasas and 
Nagas the names of different races or are they merely different names 
for a people of the same race? The general assumption is that they 
are different races. It is an assumption on which theories like that 
of Mr. Rice, which seek to explain the social structure of the Hindu 
Society, particularly its class basis, are built. Before such a theory 
is accepted it is necessary to examine its foundations. 

Starting with the Aryans it is beyond dispute that they were not 
a single homogeneous people. That they were divided into two 1 
sections is beyond dispute. It is also beyond dispute that the two 
had different cultures. One of them may be called Rig Vedic Aryans 
and the other the Atharva Vedic Aryans. Their cultural cleavage 
appears to be complete. The Rig Vedic Aryans believed in Yajna. The 
Atharva Vedic Aryans believed the Magis. Their mythologies were 
different. The Rig Vedic Aryans believed in the Deluge and the 
creation of their race from Manu. The Atharva Vedic Aryans did not 
believe in Deluge but believed in the creation of their race from 
Brahma or Prajapati. Their literary developments also lay along 
different paths. The Rig Vedic Aryans produced Brahmanas, Sutras 
and Aranyakas. The Atharva Vedic Aryans produced the Upanishads. 
Their cultural conflict was so great that the Rig Vedic Aryans would 
not for a long time admit the sanctity of the Atharva Veda nor of 
the Upanishads and when they did recognize it they called it Vedanta 
which contrary to the current meaning of the word — namely, essence 
of the Vedas — originally meant something outside the boundary of 
the Vedas and, therefore, not so sacred as the Vedas and regarded its 
study as Anuloma. Whether these two sections of Aryans were two 


1. For an exhaustive treatment of the subject see my book “Who Were the 
Shudras?” 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


different races we do not know. We do not know whether the word 
Aryan is a term indicative of race. Historians have therefore made 
a mistake in proceeding on the assumption that the Aryans were a 
separate race. 

A greater mistake lies in differentiating the Dasas from the Nagas. 
The Dasas are the same as Nagas. Dasas is merely another name 
for Nagas. It is not difficult to understand how the Nagas came to 
be called Dasas in the Vedic literature. Dasa is a Sanskritized form 
of the Indo-Iranian word Dahaka. Dahaka was the name of the king 
of the Nagas. 1 Consequently, the Aryans called the Nagas after the 
name of their king Dahaka, which in its Sanskrit form became Dasa 
a generic name applied to all the Nagas. 

Who were the Nagas? Undoubtedly they were non-Aryans. A careful 
study of the Vedic literature 2 reveals a spirit of conflict, of a dualism, 
and a race for superiority between two distinct types of culture and 
thought. In the Rig Veda, we are first introduced to the Snake-god 
in the form of Ahi Vitra, the enemy of the Aryan god Indra. Naga, 
the name under which the Snake-god was to become so famous in 
later days, does not appear in early Vedic literature. Even when it 
does for the first time in the Satapatha Brahmana (XI. 2, 7, 12), it is 
not clear whether a great snake or a great elephant is meant. But 
this does not conceal the nature of Ahi Vitra, since he is described 
always in Rig Veda as the serpent who lay around or hidden in 
waters, and as holding a full control over the waters of heaven and 
earth alike. 

It is also evident from the hymns that refer to Ahi Vitra, that he 
received no worship from the Aryan tribes and was only regarded 
as an evil spirit of considerable power who must be fought down. 

The mention of the Nagas in the Rig Veda shows that the Nagas 
were a very ancient people. It must also be remembered that the 
Nagas were in no way an aboriginal or uncivilized people. History 
shows a very close association by intermarriage between the Naga 
people with the Royal families of India. The Devagiri record of the 
Kadamba king Krisnavarma 3 connects the beginning of the Kadamba- 
kula with the Nagas. The Royakota 4 grant of 9th Century A.D. 

1. On this point see my Volume : “ Who Were the Shudras?” 

2. For the facts stated in the next few pages, see a Paper on the Nagas and the 
Naga cult in Ancient Indian History by Miss Karunakara Gupta in the Proceedings 
of the Third Session of the Indian History Congress (1939), p. 214 onwards. 

3. I. a. VII. p. 34 

4. E.L XV. p. 246 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


293 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 293 


mentions the marriage of Asvathama with a Nagi and the foundation 
of the Pallava line by Skandasishya, the issue of this marriage. 
Virakurcha, who according to another Pallava inscription dated in 
the 9th century A.D. was the ruler of the dynasty, is also mentioned 
in the same inscription as having married a Nagi and obtained from 
her the insignia of royalty.’ 1 The marriage of Gautamiputra, the son 
of the Vakataka king Pravarasena, with the daughter of the Bharasiva 
king Bhava Naga, is a historical fact. So is the marriage of 
Chandragupta II with princess Kuvera Naga ‘of Naga Kula’. 2 A Tamil 
poet asserts that Kokkilli, an early Chola king, had married a Naga 
princess. 3 Rajendra Chola is also credited to have won ‘by his radiant 
beauty the hand of the noble daughter of Naga race.’ 4 The 
Navasahasanka Charita describes the marriage of the Paramara king 
Sindhuraja (who seems to have reigned towards the early part of the 
10th Century A. D.) with the Naga princess Sasiprabha, with such 
exhaustive details in so matter-of-fact-a-manner as to make us almost 
feel certain that there must have been some historical basis for this 
assertion. 5 From the Harsha inscription of V.S. 1030-973 A.D. we 
know that Guvaka I, who was the sixth king in the genealogy upwards 
from Vigraharaja Chahamana and thus might be supposed to have 
been ruling towards the middle of the 9th Century was “famous as 
a hero in the assemblies of the Nagas and other princes.” 6 Sanatikara 
of the Bhaumn dynasty of Orissa, one of whose dates was most 
probably 921 A.D., is mentioned in an inscription of his son as having 
married Tribhuana Mahadevi of the Naga family. 7 

Not only did the Naga people occupy a high cultural level but 
history shows that they ruled a good part of India. That Maharashtra 
is the home of the Nagas goes without saying. Its people and its kings 
were Nagas. 8 

That Andhradesa and its neighbourhood were under the Nagas during 
the early centuries of the Christian era is suggested by evidence from 
more sources than one. The Satavahanas, and their successors, the 
Chutu Kula Satakarnis drew their blood more or less from the 
Naga stock. As Dr. H.C. Roy Chaudhari has pointed out, the 

1. S.I. I. II. p. 508 

2. E.L XV.p.41 

3. EL XV. p. 249 

4. I.A. XXII. pp. 144-149 

5. E.I.I. p. 229. 

6. E.I.I. p. 117 

7. J. B. O. R. S. XVI. p.771 

8. Rajwade. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Dvatrima Satpukalitta represents Salivahana, the mythological rep- 
resentative of the Satavahana dynasty, as of mixed Brahmana and 
the Naga origin. 1 This is amply attested to by the typical Naga names 
which occur in their dynastic lists. That the Naga grew to be very 
powerful towards the end of the Satavahana rule is also proved by 
a number of facts. A chief called Skandanaga is found ruling the 
Bellary district, in the reign of Pulumavi, the last king of the main 
Satavahana line. Secondly, Naga Mulanika the daughter of a Chutu 
king, is mentioned as making a gift of a Naga, together with her 
son, who is called Sivakanda-Naga-Sri. All the known kings of this 
line bear the same name and thus prove a close association with the 
Nagas. Thirdly, the name of Uragapura, the capital of Soringoi, 
suggests not an isolated reign of one Naga king but a Naga Settlement 
in that locality of tolerably long duration. 

From Buddhist tradition of Ceylon and Siam we also know that 
there was a Naga country called Majerika near the Diamond Sands, 
i.e. Karachi. 2 

Then during the third and early part of the 4th Century A.D. 
Northern India also was ruled by a number of Naga kings is clearly 
proved by Puranic as well as numismaric and epigraphic evidence. 
Three independent groups of Vidisa, Campavati or Padmavati and 
Mathura are distinctly mentioned in such a way as to leave little 
doubt of their importance. The name Bhava Naga, the only known 
king of the Bharasiva dynasty, also seems to connect him with the 
Nagas. It is not possible to enter here into a discussion of the coins 
of the second group, or the question of indentification of Achyuta 
Ganapati Naga or Nagasena of Allahabad Pillar inscription with these 
Puranic Naga kings. 3 Of all the Nagas referred to in ancient Indian 
History, the North Indian Naga houses 4 of the 4th century A.D. stand 
out as the most prominent and historically the most tangible. We 
do not know whether Nagabhatta and his son Maharaja Mohesvara 
Naga of the Lahore Copper Seal 5 belonged to any of these three groups 
or formed a separate Naga family by themselves. But all this sufficiently 
justifies the conclusion of Dr. C. C. Roy Chaudhari that the Kushana 
kingdom of Northern India disappeared in the 4th Century A.D. 
having been conquered by the Nagas. These Nagas must have been 

1. I. P. H. A. I, p. 280 

2. Cunningham A. Geo. India, pp. 611-12 

3. G. M. I. pp. 23-24 

4. P. H. A. I. p. 364 

4. G. I. p. 284 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


295 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 295 


ruling over different portions of Uttarapatha till they were themselves 
swept away before the conquering arms of Samudragupta. 

As late as the time of Skandagupta, however we find one Sarvanaga 
as the governor of Antarvedi 1 In the neighbourhood of Saurashtra 
and Bharukaccha especially, the Nagas seem to have held a promi- 
nent position down to the 6th Century A.D. From the Junagadh 
inscription Skandagupta appears to have dealt severely with a Naga 
rebellion. 2 In 570 A. D. Dadda I Gurjara uprooted the Nagas. 3 who 
have been identified with the jungle tribes ruled over by Brihul laka 
of Broach. 4 Dhruvasena II’s grant of G.S. 334 (645 A.D.) also mentions 
as Dutaka the Pramatri Srinaga. 5 

The next important revival of the Nagas particularly in Central 
India seems to date about the 9th Century A.D. In 800 A.D. Maharaja 
Tivaradeva of Sripura in Kosala most probably defeated a Naga tribe. 6 
Sometime after this period, we also note two references to Nagas in 
the inscription of Bengal. The Ramganj record of Mahamandalika 
Isvara Ghosha introduces us to a Ghosha Naga family of Dhekkari, 
which was to be assigned to 11th century 7 A.D. The Bhuvanesvara 
Prasasti of Bhatta Bhavadeva, the minister of Harivarmadeva in 12th 
century 8 A.D. also refers to destruction of Naga kings by him. The 
Ramacharita mentions the conquest of Utkala, the kingdom of Bhava- 
Bhushana-Santati, by Ramapala, but it is not clear whether in this 
case the Nagas or the Chandras were meant. The greater probability 
would however lie in favour of the former, since they were the more 
well known. 

It was in the period 10th-12th Century A.D. that the different 
branches of the Sendraka, Sinda, or Chindaka family, which called 
themselves lords of Bhogavati and Nagavamsi gradually spread 
themselves over different portions of Central India, particularly 
Baster. The Nagattaras of Begur, too, appear in an inscription of the 
10th Century 9 A.D. as having fought against king Viramahendra, 
on behalf of the W. Ganga king Ereyappa and being distinguished 
for bravery in the fight. If the evidence of Navashasanka Charita is 

1. G. I. p. 68 

2. G.I. p. 59 

3. I. A. XIII pp. 82 

4. B.Gaz. Li. 115 

5. ELI. p. 92 

6. G.I. p. 298 

7. Bhandarkar’s List No. 2100 

8. Inscription of Bengal III pp. 30 ff. 

9. E.I.VI p.45 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


accepted, then the Naga king, whose daughter Sasiprabha was 
married to Sindhuraja Paramara, must also have been ruling in 
Ratnavati on the Narmada at about this period. 

Who are the Dravidians? Are they different from the Nagas? Or 
are they two different names for a people of the same race? The 
popular view is that the Dravidians and Nagas are names of two 
different races. This statement is bound to shock many people. 
Nonetheless, it is a fact that the term Dravidians and Nagas are 
merely two different names for the same people. 

It is not to be denied that very few will be prepared to admit the 
proposition that the Dravidians and Nagas are merely two different 
names for the same people and fewer that the Dravidians as Nagas 
occupied not merely South India but that they occupied the whole 
of India — South as well as North. Nonetheless, these are historical 
truths. 

Let us see what the authorities have to say on the subject. This 
is what Mr. Dikshitiar, a well-known South Indian scholar, has to 
say on the subject in his 1 Paper on South India in the Ramayana: 

“The Nagas, another tribe-semi-divine in character, with their totems as 
serpent, spread throughout India, from Taksasila in the North-West to Assam 
in the North-East and to Ceylon and South India in the South. At one time 
they must have been powerful. Contemporaneous with the Yakwas or perhaps 
subsequent to their fall as a political entity, the Nagas rose to prominence 
in South India. Not only parts of Ceylon but ancient Malabar were the 

territories occupied by the ancient Nagas In the Tamil classics of the 

early centuries after Christ, we hear frequent references to Naganadu 

Remnants of Naga worship are still lingering in Malabar, and the temple 
in Nagercoil in South Travancore is dedicated to Naga worship even today. 

All that can be said about them is that they were a sea-faring tribe. Their 
womenfolk were renowned for their beauty. Apparently the Nagas had become 
merged with the Cheras who rose to power and prominence at the commence- 
ment of the Christian Era.” 

Further light is thrown on the subject by C. F. Oldham who has 
made a deep study of it. According to Mr. Oldham : 2 

“The Dravidian people have been divided, from ancient times, into Cheras, 
Cholas and Pandyas. Chera, or Sera (in old Tamil Sarai) is the Dravidian 
equivalent for Naga; Cheramandala, Nagadwipa, or the Naga country. This 
seems to point distinctly to the Asura origin of the Dravidians of the South. 
But in addition to this there still exists, widely spread over the Ganges valley, 
a people who call themselves Cherus or Seoris, and who claim descent from 
the serpentgods . 3 The Cherus are of very ancient race; they are believed to have 

1. Proceedings of the Seventh All-India Oriental Conference, pp. 248-49. 

2. The Sun and the Serpent, pp. 157-161. 

3. Elliot Sup. Glossary N. W. F.. 135. 136. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


297 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 297 


once held a great portion of the valley of the Ganges, which, as we have 
already seen, was occupied in very early times by Naga tribes. The Cherus 
appear to have been gradually ousted from their lands, during the troublous 
times of the Mohammedan invasions, and they are now poor and almost 
landless. There can be little doubt that these people are kinsmen of the 
Dravidian Cheras. 

The Cherus have several peculiar customs and amongst them one which seems 
to connect them with the Lichhavis, as well as with the Newars of Nepal. This is 
the election of a raja for every five or six houses, and his investiture, in due form, 
with the tilak or royal frontal mark . 1 Both Lichavis and Newars had many customs 
in common with the Dravidians of the South. Each venerated the serpent, 
Karkotaka Naga being to Nepal what Nila Naga was to Kashmir. A Naga, too, was 
the tutelary deity of Vaisali, the Lichavi capital. The marital relations of Newars 
and Lichavis closely resembled those of the Tamil people, and go far to show a 
common origin. 

Property amongst the Newars descended in the female line, as it once did 
amongst the Arattas, Bahikas or Takhas of the Punjab, whose sisters’ sons, 
and not their own, were their heirs . 2 This is still a Dravidian custom. In 
short, a recent Dravidian writer, Mr. Balakrishna Nair, says that his people 
‘appear to be, in nearly every particular, the kinsfolk of the Newars .’ 3 

Besides all this, however, there are other links connecting the Naga people 
of the South with those of the north of India. In an inscription discovered 
by Colonel Tod at Kanswah near the river Chambal, a Raja, called Salindra, 
‘of the race of Sarya, a tribe renowned amongst the tribes of the mighty’ 
is said to be ruler of Takhya . 4 

This was evidently the Takhya or Takha kingdom of the Punjab, which was 
visited by Hiou-en-Tsiang , 5 and which has been already referred to. It seems, 
therefore, that the Naga people of Takhya were known also by the name of Sarya. 

Again, in the outer Himalaya, between the Sutlej and Beas Valleys, is 
a tract of country called Sara, or Scoraj. In this district the Naga demigods 
are the chief deities worshipped. 

There is another Seoraj in the Upper Chinab Valley, and this too is occupied 
by a Naga worshiping people. 

The name Saraj, or Seoraj, appears to be the same as the Sarya of Colonel Tod’s 
inscription and as Seori, which is the alternative name of the Cherus of the Ganges 
Valley. It also seems to be identical with Sarai, which we have already seen, is the 
old Tamil name for the Chera or Naga. Apparently, therefore, the Saryas or 
Takhya, the Saraj people of the Sutlej Valley, the Seoris or Cherus of the valley 
of the Ganges, and the Cheras, Seras, or Keralas of Southern India, are but 
different branches of the same Naga-worshipping people. 

It may be noted, too, that in some of the Himalayan dialects, Kira or Kiri 
means a serpent. This name, from which was perhaps derived the term Kirate 

1. Sherring Races of N.W.P., 376,377 

2. Mahabharata, Kama, p. xiv 

3. Calcutta Review, July, 1896 

4. Annals of Rajasthan, i. 795 

5. Hiouen Tsiang, Beal, i. 165 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


so often applied to the people of the Himalayas, is found in the Rajatarangini, 
where it is applied to a people in or near Kashmir. The Kiras are mentioned 
by Varaha Mihira, and in a copper plate published by Prof. Kielhorn . 1 

An inscription at the Baijnath temple in the Kangra valley gives Kiragrams 
as the then name of the place . 2 This, in the local dialect, would mean the 
village of serpents. The Naga is still a popular deity at Baijnath, and 
throughout the neighbouring country. The term Kira is thus an equivalent 
for Naga, and it can scarcely be doubted that the serpent-worshipping Kiras 
of the Himalayas were closely related to the Dravidian Keras, Cheras or 
Keralas of the South. 

Similarity of name is not always to be trusted, but here we have something 
more. These people, whose designation is thus apparently the same, are all 
of Solar race; they all venerate the hooded serpent; and they all worship, 
as ancestors, the Naga demi-gods. 

From the foregoing it would seem tolerably certain that the Dravidians 
of Southern India were of the same stock as the Nagas or Asuras of the 
North.” 

It is thus clear that the Nagas and Dravidians are one and the 
same people. Even with this much of proof, people may not be found 
ready to accept the thesis. The chief difficulty in the way of accepting 
it lies in the designation of the people of South India by the name 
Dravidian. It is natural for them to ask why the term Dravidian has 
come to be restricted to the people of South India if they are really 
Nagas. Critics are bound to ask : If the Dravidians and the Nagas 
are the same people, why is the name Nagas not used to designate 
people of South India also. This is no doubt a puzzle. But it is a 
puzzle which is not beyond solution. It can be solved if certain facts 
are borne in mind. 

The first thing to be borne in mind is the situation regarding 
language. Today the language of the Southern India differs from that 
of the people of Northern India. Was this always so? On this question 
the observations of Mr. Oldham 3 are worth attention. 

“It is evident that the old Sanskrit grammarians considered the language 
of the Dravidian countries to be connected with the vernaculars of northern 
India; and that, in their opinion, it was especially related to the speech of 
those people who, as we have seen, were apparently descendants of the Asura 
tribes. Thus, in the ‘Shahasha Chandrika’, Lakshmidhara says that the 
Paisachi language is spoken in the Paisachi countries of Pandya, Kekaya, 
Vahlika, Sahya, Nepala, Kuntala, Sudesha, Bhota, Gandhara, Haiva and 
Kanoj; and that these are the Paisachi countries . 4 Of all the vernacular 
dialects, the paisachi is said to have contained the smallest infusion of 
Sanskrit . 5 

1. Rajatarangini, Stein, viii. 27, 67, Rapson J. R. A. S., July 1900, 533 

2. J. R. A. S., Jan., 1903, p. 37 

3. The Sun and the Serpent. 

3. and 5. Muir O.S.T. ii.49 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


299 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 299 


That the Asuras originally spoke a language which differred from that of 
the Aryas seems evident. Several passages are quoted by Prof. Muir, from 
the Rig Veda, in which the word ‘mridavach’ is applied to the speech of the 
Asuras (R.vi.74, 2; v. vi.3; v.vii.6). Of these passages, Professor Muir observes: 
“The word mridavach, which I have translated “injuriously speaking”, is 
explained by Sayana as meaning “one whose organs of speech are destroyed”. 1 
The original meaning of the expression was, doubtless that the language of 
the Asuras was more or less unintelligible to the Aryas. The same explanation 
will apply to another passage in the Rig Veda, where it is said : ‘May we 
(by propitiating Indra) conquer the ill speaking man.’ 2 

From the Satapatha Brahmana we find that ‘the Asuras, being deprived 
of speech, were undone, crying. ‘He lava’, ‘He lava’. Such was the unintelligible 
speech which they uttered. And he who speaks thus is a Mlecha. Hence, let 
no Brahman speak barbarous language, since such is the speech of Asuras 3 

We learn from Manu, that ‘those tribes who are outside of the classes 
produced from the mouth, arms, thighs and feet of Brahman, whether they 
speak the language of the Mlechas or of the Aryas, are called Dasyus., 4 In 
the time of Manu, therefore, the Aryan language and that of the Mlechas 
or Asuras were both in use. At the period described in the Mahabharata, 
however, the Asura language must have almost died out amongst the 
Aryanized tribes; as Vidura addressed Yudhishthira in the Mlecha tongue, 
so as to be unintelligible to all except Yudhishthira. 5 

At a later period than this, however, the grammarian Rama Tarkavagisa 
refers to ‘those who speak like Nagas.’ 6 It would seem, therefore, that the 
unregenerate Asuras retained the language, as well as the religion and 
customs, of their forefathers long after their converted brethren had discarded 
them. It was evidently amongst these unregenerate tribes that the Paisachi 
dialects were in use; and amongst these tribes, as we have just seen, were 
the Dravidian Pandyas. 7 

This view, that the Tamil and cognate tongues were founded upon the 
ancient Asura speech, is very strongly confirmed by the fact that the language 
of the Brahuis, a tribe on the borders of Sind, has been found to be very 
closely allied to them. Indeed, Dr. Caldwell says: ‘The Brahui (language) 
enables us to trace the Dravidian race, beyond the Indus, to the southern 
confines of Central Asia. This country, as I have already pointed out, was 
the home of the Asuras or Nagas, to which race apparently belonged the 
founders of the Dravidian kingdoms.’ 

Taking into consideration all the evidence which has been brought forward, 
the only possible conclusion seems to be, that the Dravidians, of the south 
of India, were of the same stock as the Asuras or Nagas of the North.” 

The second thing to be borne in mind is that the word ‘Dravida’ is 
not an original word. It is the Sanskritized form of the word Tamil’. 

1. Muir, O.S.T. ii. 49 

2. Rig Veda, Wilson VII, XVIII, 13 

3. Satapatha Br. iii. 2, 1, 23 

4. Muir, Haughton x. 45 

5. Mahabharata, Adi. Jatagriha, p. cx/vii 

6. Muir, O.S.T. ii. 52 

7. Ibid. 49 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


300 


300 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The original word ‘Tamil’ when imported into Sanskrit became 
Damita 1 and later on Damilla became Dravida. The word Dravida 
is the name of the language of the people and does not denote the 
race of the people. The third thing to remember is that Tamil or 
Dravida was not merely the language of South India but before the 
Aryans came it was the language of the whole of India , 2 and was 
spoken from Kashmere to Cape Camorin. In fact, it was the language 
of the Nagas throughout India. The next thing to note is the contact 
between the Aryan and the Nagas and the effect it produced on the 
Nagas and their language. Strange as it may appear the effect of 
this contact on the Nagas of North India was quite different from 
the effect it produced on the Nagas of South India. The Nagas in 
North India gave up Tamil which was their mother tongue and 
adopted Sanskrit in its place. The Nagas in South India retained 
Tamil as their mother tongue and did not adopt Sanskrit the language 
of the Aryans. If this difference is borne in mind it will help to explain 
why the name Dravida came to be applied only for the people of South 
India. The necessity for the application of the name Dravida to the 
Nagas of Northern India had ceased because they had ceased to speak 
the Dravida language. But so far as the Nagas of South India are 
concerned not only the propriety of calling them Dravida had 
remained in view of their adherence to the Dravida language but the 
necessity of calling them Dravida had become very urgent in view 
of their being the only people speaking the Dravida language after 
the Nagas of the North had ceased to use it. This is the real reason 
why the people of South India have come to be called Dravidians. 

The special application of the use of the word Dravida for the people 
of South India must not, therefore, obscure the fact that the Nagas 
and Dravidas are the one and the same people. They are only two 
different names for the same people. Nagas was a racial or cultural 
name and Dravida was their linguistic name. 

Thus the Dasas are the same as the Nagas and the Nagas are 
the same as the Dravidians. In other words what we can say about 
the races of India is that there have been at the most only two races 
in the field, the Aryans and the Nagas. Obviously the theory of 
Mr. Rice must fall to the ground. For it postulates three races in 
action when as a matter of fact we see that there are only two. 


1. B. R. Bhandarkar, Lectures on the Ancient History of India (1919), p: 80 . 

2. Ibid pp., 25-28 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


301 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 301 


II 

Granting however that there was a third aboriginal race living in 
India before the advent of the Dravidians, can it be said that these 
pre-Dravidian aboriginals were the ancestors of the present day 
Untouchables of India? There are two tests we can apply to find the 
truth. One is the anthropometric test and the other is the ethnological. 

Considered in the light of the anthropometric characteristics of the 
Indian people Prof. Ghurye has something very striking to say in his 
volume on ‘Caste and Race in India’ from which the following is an 
extract : 

“Taking the Brahmin of the United Provinces as the typical representative 
of the ancient Aryans we shall start comparisons with him. If we turn to 
the table of differential indices we find that he shows a smaller differential 
index as compared with the Chuhra and the Khatri of the Punjab than with 
any caste from the United Provinces except the Chhatri. The differential index 
between the Khatri and the Chuhra 1 is the only slightly less than that between 
the Brahmin of the United Provinces and the Chuhra of the Punjab. This 
means that the Brahmin of the United Provinces has closer physical affinities 
with the Chuhra and the Khatri of the Punjab than with any caste from 

his own province except the very high caste of the Chhatri The reality 

of this close affinity between the United Provinces Brahmin and the Punjab 
Chuhra is more clearly brought out if we look at the table of differential 
indices between the United Provinces Brahmin and the Brahmins of other 
regions. Even the differential index between the United Provinces Brahmin 
and the Bihar Brahmins, who from what we know about the history of spread 
of the Aryan culture, is expected to be very nearly allied to the former, is 
just as high as that between the United Provinces Brahmin and the 

Chuhra On historical ground we expect Bihar to approximate to the United 

Provinces. On referring to the table we find that the Kurmi comes near to 
the Brahmin, and the Chamar and the Dom 2 stand much differentiated from 
him. But the Chamar in this case is not as much distinct from the Brahmin 
as the United Provinces Chamar is from the United Provinces Brahmin. The 
table for Bengal shows that the Chandal 3 who stands sixth in the scheme 
of a social precedence and whose touch pollutes, is not much differentiated 
from the Brahmin, from whom the Kayasthas, second in rank, can hardly 
be said to be distinguished. In Bombay the Deshastha Brahmin bears as closer 
affinity to the Son-Koli, a fisherman caste, as to his own compeer, the 
Chitpavan Brahmin. The Mahar, the Untouchable of the Maratha region, come 
next together with the Kunbi, the peasant. Then follow in order the Shenvi 
Brahmin, the Nagar Brahmin and the high caste Maratha. These results are 
rather old. Stated in a generalized form they mean that there is no 
correspondence between social gradation and physical differentiation in 
Bombay. 

1. Chuhra is an Untouchable of the Punjab. 

2. Dom is an Untouchable of Bihar. 

3. Chandal is an Untouchable of Bengal. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


302 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Finally we come to Madras. Here we must treat the different linguistic areas 
separately for the schemes of social precedence in the various areas are different. 
According to the average given by Risely and by E. Thurston the order of castes 
is as follows: 

Kapu, Sale, Malla, Golla, Madiga, Fogata and Komati. 

According to their social status they are ranked as below: 

Brahmin, Komati, Golla, Kapu and others and Sale, Fagota and others. Mala 
Madiga occupy the lowest rank being the Pariahs of the Telugu country. 

In the Canarese the nasal index gives the following order : 

Karnatak Smarts, Brahmin, Bant, Billiva, Mandya Brahmin, Vakkaliga, 
Ganiga, Linga Banajiga, Panchala, Kurha, Holeya, Deshastha Brahmin, Toreya 
and Bedar. 

In the scheme of social precedence the castes are as under: 

Brahmin, Bant and Vakkaliga, Toreya, etc., Kuruba and Ganiga, Badaga and 
Krumba and Solaga, Billiva, Beda Holeya. 

The significance of the comparison is enhanced when we remember that the 
nasal index of the Holeya, the Untouchables of the Canarese region is 75.1 that 
of the highest of the Brahmin being 71.5 while those of the jungle Krumba and 
the Solaga, who when Hinduised occupy the rank allotted to them in the list, 
arc 86.1 and 85.1 respectively. 

The Tamil castes may be arranged according to their nasal index as follows: 

Ambattan, Vellai, Ediayan, Agamudaiyan, Tamil Brahmin, Palli, Malaiyali, 
Shanan and Parayan. The Nasal indices of four typical Malayalam castes are: 
Tiyan, 75; Nambudri 75.5; Nayar 76.7; Charuman 77.2. The order of social 
precedence among these is: Nambudri, Nayar, Tiyan and Charuman. The nasal 
index of the Kanikar, a jungle tribe of Tranvancore is 8.46. Thus, the Charuman 
(an Unapproachable) belonging to the same race as the Brahmin rather than 
to Kanikar.” 

To omit from the above extract what is said about other commu- 
nities and to draw attention to what relates to the Untouchables only, 
it is clear that the nasal index of the Chuhra (the Untouchables) of 
the Punjab is the same as the nasal index of the Brahmin of the 
United Provinces; the nasal index of the Chamar (the Untouchables) 
of Bihar is not very much distinct from the Brahmin of Bihar; the 
nasal index of the Holeya (an Untouchable) of the Canarese is far 
higher than that of the Brahmin of Karnatak and that the nasal index 
of the Cheruman (an Unapproachable lower than the Pariah) of the 
Tamil belongs to the same race as the Brahmin of the Tamil Nad. 
If anthropometry is a science which can be depended upon to 
determine the race of a people, then the result obtained by the 
application of anthropometry to the various strata of Hindu 
society disprove that the Untouchables belong to a race different 
from the Aryans and the Dravidians. The measurements establish 
that the Brahmin and the Untouchables belong to the same race. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


303 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : RACIAL DIFFERENCE ... 303 


From this it follows that if the Brahmins are Aryans the 
Untouchables are also Aryans. If the Brahmins are Dravidians the 
Untouchables are also Dravidians. If the Brahmins are Nagas, the 
Untouchables are also Nagas. Such being the facts, the theory 
propounded by Mr. Rice must be said to be based on a false 
foundation. 


Ill 

The racial theory of Untouchability not only runs counter to the 
results of anthropometry, but it also finds very little support from 
such facts as we know about the ethnology of India. That the people 
of India were once organized on tribal basis is quite well known, and 
although the tribes have become castes the tribal organization still 
remains intact. Each tribe was divided into clans and the clans were 
composed of groups of families. Each group of families had a totem 
which was some object, animate or inanimate. Those who had a 
common totem formed an exogamous group popularly known as Gotra 
or Kula. Families having a common gotra were not allowed to 
intermarry for they were supposed to be descended from the same 
ancestor having the same blood running in their veins. Having regard 
to this fact an examination of the distribution of the totems among 
the different castes and communities should serve as good a test for 
determining race as anthropometry has been. 

Unfortunately, the study of the totems and their distribution among 
different communities has been completely neglected by students of 
sociology. This neglect is largely due to the current view propagated 
by the Census Commissioners that real unit of the Hindu social 
system and the basis of the fabric of Hindu society is the sub-caste 
founded on the rule of endogamy. Nothing can be a greater mistake 
than this. The unit of Hindu society is not the sub-caste but the family 
founded on the rule of exogamy. In this sense the Hindu family is 
fundamentally a tribal organization and not a social organization as 
the sub-caste is. The Hindu family is primarily guided in the matter 
of marriage by consideration of Kul and Gotra and only secondarily 
by considerations of caste and sub-caste. Kul and Gotra are Hindu 
equivalents of the totem of the Primitive Society. This shows that 
the Hindu society is still tribal in its organization with the family at 
its base observing the rules of exogamy based on Kul and Gotra. Castes 
and sub-castes are social organizations which are superimposed over 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-22 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the tribal organization and the rule of endogamy enjoined by them 
does not do away with the rule of exogamy enjoined by the tribal 
organizations of Kul and Gotra. 

The importance of recognizing the fact that it is the family which 
is fundamental and not the sub-caste is obvious. It would lead to 
the study of the names of Kul and Gotra prevalent among Hindu 
families. Such a study would be a great help in determining the racial 
composition of the people of India. If the same Kul and Gotra were 
found to exist in different castes and communities it would be possible 
to say that the castes though socially different were racially one. Two 
such studies have been made, one in Maharashtra by Risley 1 and 
another in the Punjab , 2 by Mr. Rose and the result flatly contradict 
the theory that the Untouchables are racially different from the 
Aryans or the Dravidians. The main bulk of the population in 
Maharashtra consists of Marathas. The Mahars are the Untouchables 
of Maharashtra. The anthropological investigation shows that both 
have the same Kul. Indeed the identity is so great that there is hardly 
a Kul among the Marathas which is not to be found among the Mahars 
and there is no Kul among the Mahars which is not to be found among 
the Marathas. Similarly, in the Punjab one main stock of people 
consists of Jats. The Mazabi Sikhs are Untouchables most of them 
being Chamars by caste. Anthropological investigation shows that the 
two have the same Gotras. Given these facts how can it be argued 
that the Untouchables belong to a different race? As I have said if 
totem, kul, and gotra, have any significance it means that those who 
have the same totem must have been kindred. If they were kindred 
they could not be persons of different race. 

The racial theory of the origin of Untouchability must, therefore, 
be abondoned. 

• • 


1. Census of India 1901. Ethnographical Appendices. 

2. Glossary of Tribes and Castes in the Punjab by Rose, Vol., Ill, p. 76. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-23 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013M 1-10-2013 


305 


CHAPTER VIII 

OCCUPATIONAL ORIGIN OF 
UNTOUCHABILITY 


WE may now turn to the occupational theory of the origin of 
Untouchability. According to Mr. Rice, the origin of Untouchability 
is to be found in the unclean and filthy occupations of the Untouch- 
ables. The theory is a very plausible one. But there are certain 
difficulties in the way of its being accepted as a true explanation 
of the origin of Untouchability. The filthy and unclean occupations 
which the Untouchables perform are common to all human societies. 
In every human Society there are people who perform these occu- 
pations. Why were such people not treated as Untouchables in other 
parts of the world? The second question is : Did the Dravidians have 
a nausea against such callings or against persons engaged in them? 
On this point, there is no evidence. But we have evidence about the 
Aryans. That evidence shows that the Aryans were like other people 
and their notions of purity and impurity did not fundamentally differ 
from those of other ancient people. One has only to consider the 
following texts from Narada Smriti to show that the Aryans did not 
at all mind engaging themselves in filthy occupations. In Chapter 
V Narada is dealing with the subject matter of breach of contract 
of service. In this Chapter, there occur the following verses : 

1. The sages have distinguished five sorts of attendants according 
to law. Among these are four sorts of labourers; the slaves 
(are the fifth category of which there are) fifteen species. 

2. A student, an apprentice, a hired servant, and fourthly an 
official. 

3. The sages have declared that the state of dependence is 
common to all these but their respective position and income 
depends on their particular caste and occupations. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-23 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X1 1-10-2013 


306 


306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


4. Know that there are two sorts of occupations; pure work and 
impure work; impure work is that done hy the slaves. Pure work 
is that done by labourers. 

5. Sweeping the gateway, the privy, the road and the place for 
rubbish; shampooing the secret parts of the body; gathering and 
putting away the leaving of food, ordure and urine. 

6. And lastly, rubbing the master’s limbs when desired; this should 
be regarded as impure work. All other work besides this is pure. 

25. Thus have the four classses of servants doing pure work been 
enumerated. All the others who do dirty work are slaves, of whom 
there are fifteen kinds: 1 

It is clear that impure work was done by the slaves and that the 
impure work included scavenging. The question that arises is: Who were 
these slaves? Were they Aryans or non-Aryans? That slavery existed 
among the Aryans admits of no doubt. An Aryan could be a slave of 
an Aryan. No matter to what Varna an Aryan belonged he could be 
a slave. A Kshatriya could be a slave. So could a Vaishya. Even a 
Brahmin was not immune from the law of slavery. It is when 
Chaturvarna came to be recognized as a law of the land that a change 
was made in the system of slavery. What this change was can be seen 
from the following extract from the Narada Smriti : 

“39. In the inverse order of the (four) castes slavery is not ordained, except 
where a man violated the duties peculiar to his caste. Slavery (in that respect) 
is analogous to the condition of a wife”. 

Yajnavalkya also says that : 

“183(2) Slavery is in the descending order of the Varnas and not in the 
ascending order” 

This is explained by Vijnaneswara in his Mitakshara, a Commentary 
on Yajnavalkya Smriti in the following terms:- 

“Of the Varna such as the Brahmin and the rest, a state of slavery shall 
exist in the descending order (Anulomcyna). Thus, of a Brahmin, a Kshatriya, 
and the rest may become a slave; of a Kshatriya, the Vaishya and the Shudra; 
and of a Vaishya, a Shudra; this state of slavery shall operate in the descending 
order.” 

1 The fifteen classes of slaves are defined by the Narada Smriti in the following 
verses ; 

V. 26. One born at (his master’s) house; one purchased; one received (by 
gift); one obtained by inheritance; one maintained during a general 
famine; one pledged by his rightful owner. 

V. 27. One released from heavy debt; one made captive in fight; one won 
through a wager; one who has come forward declaring ‘I am thine.’ 

An apostate from asceticism; one enslaved for a stipulated period. 

V. 28. One who has become slave in order to get a maintenance; one enslaved 
on account of his connection with a female slave; and one self-sold. 
These are 15 classes of slaves as declared by law. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-23 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013M 1-10-2013 


307 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : OCCUPATIONAL... UNTOUCHABILITY 307 


The change was a mere reorganization of slavery and the basis 
of the principles of graded inequality which is the soul of Chaturvarna. 
To put it in a concrete form, the new law declared that a Brahmin 
could have a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and a Shudra as his slave. 
A Kshatriya could have Kshatriya, a Vaishya and a Shudra as his 
slave. A Vaishya could have a Vaishya and and a Shudra as his slave. 
A Shudra could have a Shudra only. With all this, the law of slavery 
remained and all Aryans whether they were Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas or Shudras if they become slaves were subject to it. 

Having regard to the duties prescribed for the slaves, this change 
in the law of slavery does not matter at all. It still means that a 
Brahmin if he was a slave, a Kshatriya if he was a slave, a Vaishya 
if he was a slave, did the work of a scavenger. Only a Brahmin would 
not do scavenging in the house of a Kshatriya, Vaishya or a Shudra. 
But he would do scavenging in the house of a Brahmin. Similarly, 
a Kshatriya would do scavenging in the house of a Brahmin and the 
Kshatriya. Only he would not do it in the house of a Vaishya or 
Shudra and a Vaishya would do scavenging in the house of a Brahmin, 
Kshatriya and Vaishya. Only he would not do it in the house of a 
Shudra. It is, therefore, obvious that the Brahmins, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas who are admittedly the Aryans did the work of scavengers 
which is the filthiest of filthy occupations. If scavenging was not 
loathsome to an Aryan how can it be said that engaging in filthy 
occupations was the cause of Untouchability. The theory of filthy 
occupation as an explanation of Untouchability is, therefore, not 
tenable. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-23 Mk 


S.K.— 27-09-2013X11-10-2013 


308 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10- 1 1-2013 


309 


Chapter IX. 
Chapter X. 


PART IV 

NEW THEORIES OF THE ORIGIN 
OF UNTOUCHABILITY 


Contempt for Buddhists as the Root of Untouchability. 
Beef-eating as the Root of Untouchability. 


310 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


311 


CHAPTER IX 

CONTEMPT FOR BUDDHISTS AS THE 
ROOT OF UNTOUCHABILITY 

I 

THE Census Reports for India published by the Census Commis- 
sioner at the interval of every ten years from 1870 onwards contain 
a wealth of information nowhere else to be found regarding the social 
and religious life of the people of India. Before the Census of 1910 
the Census Commissioner had a column called “Population by 
Religion”. Under this heading the population was shown (1) Muslims, 
(2) Hindus, (3) Christians, etc. The Census Report for the year 1910 
marked a new departure from the prevailing practice. For the first 
time it divided the Hindus under three separate categories, 
(i) Hindus, (ii) Animists and Tribal, and (iii) the Depressed Classes 
or Untouchables. This new classification has been continued ever 
since. 


II 

This departure from the practice of the previous Census Commis- 
sioners raises three questions. First is what led the Commissioner 
for the Census of 1910 to introduce this new classification. The second 
is what was the criteria adopted as a basis for this classification. 
The third is what are the reasons for the growth of certain practices 
which justify the division of Hindus into three separate categories 
mentioned above. 

The answer to the first question will be found in the address 
presented in 1909 by the Muslim Community under leadership of H.H. 
The Aga Khan to the then Viceroy, Lord Minto, in which they asked 
for a separate and adequate representation for the Muslim community 
in the legislature, executive and the public services. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


312 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


In the address 1 there occurs the following passage 

“The Mohamedans of India number, according to the census taken in the 
year 1901 over sixty-two millions or between one-fifth and one-fourth of the 
total population of His Majesty’s Indian dominions, and if a reduction be made 
for the uncivilised portions of the community enumerated under the heads of 
animist and other minor religions, as well as for those classes who are 
ordinarily classified as Hindus but properly speaking are not Hindus at all, 
the proportion of Mohamedans to the Hindu Majority becomes much larger. 2 
We therefore desire to submit that under any system of representation 
extended or limited a community in itself more numerous than the entire 
population of any first class European power except Russia may justly lay 
claim to adequate recognition as an important factor in the State. 

“We venture, indeed, with Your Excellency’s permission to go a step further, 
and urge that the position accorded to the Mohamedan community in any 
kind of representation direct or indirect, and in all other ways effecting their 
status and influence should be commensurate, not merely with their numerical 
strength but also with their political importance and the value of the 
contribution which they make to the defence of the empire, and we also hope 
that Your Excellency will in this connection be pleased to give due consid- 
eration to the position which they occupied in India a little more than hundred 
years ago and of which the traditions have naturally not faded from their 
minds.” 

The portion in italics has a special significance. It was introduced 
in the address to suggest that in comprising the numerical strength 
of the Muslims with that of the Hindus the population of the animists, 
tribals and the Untouchables should be excluded. The reason for this 
new classification of ‘Hindus’ adopted by the Census Commissioner in 
1910 lies in this demand of the Muslim community for separate 
representation on augmented scale. At any rate this is how the Hindus 
understood this demand. 3 

Interesting as it is, the first question as to why the Census 
Commissioner made this departure in the system of classification is of 
less importance than the second question. What is important is to know 
the basis adopted by the Census Commissioner for separating the 
different classes of Hindus into (1) those who were hundred per cent 
Hindus and (2) those who were not. 

1 For the text of the address see my Pakistan p. 431 

2 Italics not in the original. 

3 This operation came soon after the address given by Muslim community to 
Lord Minto in 1909 in which they asked for a separate and adequate representation 
for the Muslim community. The Hindu smelt a rat in it. As the Census Commissioner 
observed : — 

“Incidentally, the enquiry generated a certain amount of heat, because unfortunately 
it happened to be made at a time when the rival claims of Hindus and Mohammedans 
to representation on the Legislative Councils were being debated and some of the 
former feared that it would lead to the exclusion of certain classes from the category 
of Hindus and would thus react unfavourably on their political importance”. Part 
I. p. 116 . 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


313 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : CONTEMPT FOR... UNTOUCHABILITY 313 


The basis adopted by the Census Commissioner for separation is 
to be found in the circular issued by the Census Commissioner in 
which he laid down certain tests for the purpose 1 of distinguishing 
these two classes. Among those who were not hundred per cent 
Hindus were included castes and tribes which 

(1) Deny the supremacy of the Brahmins. 

(2) Do not receive the Mantra from a Brahmin or other recognized 
Hindu Guru. 

(3) Deny the authority of the Vedas. 

(4) Do not worship the Hindu gods. 

(5) Are not served by good Brahmins as family priests. 

(6) Have no Brahmin priests at all. 

(7) Are denied access to the interior of the Hindu temples. 

(8) Cause pollution (a) by touch, or (b) within a certain distance. 

(9) Bury their dead. 

(10) Eat beef and do no reverence to the cow. 

Out of these ten tests some divide the Hindus from the Animists 
and the Tribal. The rest divide the Hindus from the Untouchables. 
Those that divide the Untouchables from the Hindus are (2), (5), (6), 
(7), and (10). It is with them that we are chiefly concerned. 

For the sake of clarity it is better to divide these tests into parts 
and consider them separately. This Chapter will be devoted only to 
the consideration of (2), (5), and (6). 

The replies received by the Census Commissioner to questions 
embodied in tests (2), (5) and (6) reveal (1) that the Untouchables 
do not receive the Mantra from a Brahmin; (2) that the Untouchables 
are not served by good Brahmin priests at all; and (3) that 
Untouchables have their own priests reared from themselves. On 
these facts the Census Commissioners of all Provinces are unani- 
mous. 2 

Of the three questions the third is the most important. Unfortu- 
nately the Census Commissioner did not realize this. For in making 
his inquiries he failed to go to the root of the matter to find out: 
Why were the Untouchables not receiving the Mantra from the 
Brahmin? Why Brahmins did not serve the Untouchables as their 
family priests? Why do the Untouchables prefer to have their own 
priests? It is the ‘why’ of these facts which is more important than the 
existence of these facts. It is the ‘why’ of these facts which must be 

1. See Census of India (1911). Pan 1. p. 117 

2. See Census of 1911 for Assam p.40; for Bengal, Bihar and Orisa p. 282; for 
CP.p.73; 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


investigated. For the clue to the origin of Untouchability lies hidden 
behind it. 

Before entering upon this investigation, it must be pointed out that 
the inquiries by the Census Commissioner were in a sense one-sided. 
They showed that the Brahmins shunned the Untouchables. They did 
not bring to light the fact that the Untouchables also shunned the 
Brahmins. Nonetheless, it is a fact. People are so much accustomed 
to thinking that the Brahmin is the superior of the Untouchables 
and the Untouchable accepts himself as his inferior; that this 
statement that the Untouchables look upon the Beahmin as an impure 
person is sure to come to them as a matter of great surprise. The 
fact has however been noted by many writers who have observed and 
examined the social customs of the Untouchables. To remove any 
doubt on the point, attention is drawn to the following extracts from 
their writings. 

The fact was noticed by Abbe Dubois who says * 1 : 

“Even to this day a Pariah is not allowed to pass a Brahmin Street in 
a village, though nobody can prevent, or prevents, his approaching or passing 
by a Brahmin’s house in towns. The Pariahs, on their part will under no 
circumstances, allow a Brahmin to pass through their paracherries (collection 
of Pariah huts) as they firmly believe it will lead to their ruin”. 

Mr. Hemingsway, the Editor of the Gazetteer of the Tanjore District 
says : 

“These castes (Parayan and Pallan or Chakkiliyan castes of Tanjore 
District) strongly object to the entrance of a Brahmin into their quarters 
believing that harm will result to them therefrom ”. 2 

Speaking of the Holeyas of the Hasan District of Mysore, Captain 
J.S.F. Mackenzie says:- 

“Every village has its Holigiri as the quarters inhabited by the Holiars, 
formerly agrestic serfs, is called outside the village boundary hedge. This, 

I thought was because they were considered as impure race, whose touch 
carries defilement with it ” 3 

Such is the reason generally given by the Brahmins who refuse 
to receive anything directly from the hands of a Holiar, and yet the 
Brahmins consider great luck will wait upon them if they can manage 
to pass through the Holigiri without being molested. To this Holiars 


for Madras p. 51; for Punjab p. 109; for U.P. p. 121; for Baroda p.55. for Mysore 
p.53; for Rajputana pp. 94 — 105; for Travancore p.198 

1. Hindu Manners and Customs (3rd Edition) p. 61 f.n. 

2. Gazetteer of Tanjore District (1906) p. 80. 

3. Indian Antiquary 1873 11.65. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


315 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : CONTEMPT FOR... UNTOUCHABILITY 315 


have a strong objection, and, should a Brahmin attempt to enter their 
quarters, they turn out in a body and slipper him, in former times, 
it is said, to death. Members of the other castes may come as far 
as the door, but they must not enter the house, for that would bring 
the Holiar bad luck. If, by chance, a person happens to get in, the 
owner takes care to tear the intruder’s cloth, tie up some salt in one 
corner of it, and turn him out. This is supposed to neutralise all the 
good luck which might have accrued to the tresspasser, and avert 
any evil which ought to have befallen the owner of the house. 

What is the explanation of this strange phenomenon? The expla- 
nation must of course fit in with the situation as it stood at the start, 
i.e. when the Untouchables were not Untouchables but were only 
Broken Men. We must ask why the Brahmins refused to officiate at 
the religious ceremonies of the Broken Men? Is it the case that the 
Brahmins refused to officiate? Or is it that the Broken Men refused 
to invite them? Why did the Brahmin regard Broken Men as impure? 
Why did the Broken Men regard the Brahmins as impure? What is 
the basis of this antipathy? 

This antipathy can be explained on one hypothesis. It is that the 
Broken Men were Buddhists. As such they did not revere the 
Brahmins, did not employ them as their priests and regarded them 
as impure. The Brahmin on the other hand disliked the Broken Men 
because they were Buddhists and preached against them contempt 
and hatred with the result that the Broken Men came to be regarded 
as Untouchables. 

We have no direct evidence that the Broken Men were Buddhists. 
No evidence is as a matter of fact necessary when the majority of 
Hindus were Buddhists. We may take it that they were. 

That there existed hatred and abhorrence against the Buddhists 
in the mind of the Hindus and that this feeling was created by the 
Brahmins is not without support. 

Nilkant in his Prayaschit Mayukha 1 quotes a verse from Manu 
which says 

“If a person touches a Buddhist or a flower of Pachupat, Lokayala, 

Nastika and Mahapataki, he shall purify himself by a bath.” 

The same doctrine is preached by Apararka in his Smriti . 2 Vradha 
Harit goes further and declares entry into the Buddhist Temple as 
sin requiring a purificatory bath for removing the impurity. 

1 Edited by Gharpure, p.95. 

2 Smriti Sammuchaya I. p. 118. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


How widespread had become this spirit of hatred and contempt 
against the followers of Buddha can be observed from the scenes 
depicted in Sanskrit dramas. The most striking illustration of this 
attitude towards the Buddhists is to be found in the Mricchakatika. 
In Act VII of that Drama the hero Charudatta and his friend Maitreya 
are shown waiting for Vasantasena in the park outside the city. She 
fails to turn up and Charudatta decides to leave the park. As they 
are leaving, they see the Buddhist monk by name Samvahaka. On 
seeing him, Charudatta says 

“Friend Maitreya, I am anxious to meet Vasantsena ... 

Come, let us go. (After walking a little) Ah ! here’s an inauspicious 
sight, a Buddhist monk coming towards us. (After a little reflection) well, 
let him come this way, we shall follow this other path. (Exit.) 

In Act VIII, the monk is in the Park of Sakara, the King’s brother- 
in-law, washing his clothes in a pool. Sakara accompanied by Vita, 
turns up and threatens to kill the monk. The following conversation 
between them is revealing : 


“Sakara- 

Stay, you wicked monk. 


Monk- 

Ah! Here’s the king’s brother-in-law! Because some monk has 
offended him, he now beats up any monk he happens to meet. 

Sakara- 

Stay, I will now break your head as one breaks a 
tavern. (Beats him). 

radish in a 

Vita- 

Friend, it is not proper to beat a monk who has 
saffron-robes, being disgusted with the world. 

put on the 

Monk- 

(Welcomes) Be pleased, lay brother. 


Sakara- 

Friend, see. He is abusing me. 


Vita- 

What does he say? 


Sakara- 

He calls me lay brother (upasaka). Am I a barber? 

Vita- 

Oh! He is really praising you as a devotee of the 

Buddha. 

Sakara- 

Why has he come here? 


Monk- 

To wash these clothes. 


Sakara- 

Ah! you wicked monk. Even I myself do not bathe in 
shall kill you with one stroke.” 

this pool; I 


After a lot of beating, the monk is allowed to go. Here is a Buddhist 
Monk in the midst of the Hindu crowd. He is shunned and avoided. 
The feeling of disgust against him is so great that the people even 
shun the road the monk is travelling. The feeling of repulsion is so 
intense that the entry of the Buddhist was enough to cause the exit 
of the Hindus. The Buddhist monk is on a par with the Brahmin. 
A Brahmin is immune from death-penalty. He is even free from 
corporal punishment But the Buddhist monk is beaten and assaulted 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-24 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


317 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : CONTEMPT FOR... UNTOUCHABILITY 317 


without remorse, without compunction as though there was nothing 
wrong in it. 

If we accept that the Broken Men were the followers of Buddhism 
and did not care to return to Brahmanism when it became triumphant 
over Buddhism as easily as other did, we have an explanation for 
both the questions. It explains why the Untouchables regard the 
Brahmins as inauspicious, do not employ them as their priest and 
do not even allow them to enter into their quarters. It also explains 
why the Broken Men came to be regarded as Untouchables. The 
Broken Men hated the Brahmins because the Brahmins were the 
enemies of Buddhism and the Brahmins imposed untouchability upon 
the Broken Men because they would not leave Buddhism. On this 
reasoning it is possible to conclude that one of the roots of untouch- 
ability lies in the hatred and contempt which the Brahmins created 
against those who were Buddhist. 

Can the hatred between Buddhism and Brahmanism be taken to 
be the sole cause why Broken Men became Untouchables? Obviously, 
it cannot be. The hatred and contempt preached by the Brahmins 
was directed against Buddhists in general and not against the Broken 
Men in particular. Since untouchability stuck to Broken Men only, 
it is obvious that there was some additional circumstance which has 
played its part in fastening untouchability upon the Broken Men. 
What that circumstance could have been? We must next direct our 
effort in the direction of ascertaining it. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-25 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


318 


CHAPTER X 

BEEF EATING AS THE ROOT OF 
UNTOUCHABILITY 

WE now take up test No. 10 referred to in the circular issued by 
the Census Commissioner and to which reference has already been 
made in the previous chapter. The test refers to beef-eating. 

The Census Returns show that the meat of the dead cow forms 
the-chief item of food consumed by communities which are generally 
classified as untouchable communities. No Hindu community, however 
low, will touch cow’s flesh. On the other hand, there is no community 
which is really an Untouchable community which has not something 
to do with the dead cow. Some eat her flesh, some remove the skin, 
some manufacture articles out of her skin and bones. 

From the survey of the Census Commissioner, it is well established 
that Untouchables eat beef. The question however is: Has beef-eating 
any relation to the origin of Untouchability? Or is it merely an 
incident in the economic life of the Untouchables? Can we say that 
the Broken Men came to be treated as Untouchables because they 
ate beef? There need be no hesitation in returning an affirmative 
answer to this question. No other answer is consistent with facts as 
we know them. 

In the first place, we have the fact that the Untouchables or the 
main communities which compose them eat the dead cow and those 
who eat the dead cow are tainted with untouchability and no others. 
The co-relation between untouchability and the use of the dead cow 
is so great and so close that the thesis that it is the root of 
untouchability seems to be incontrovertible. In the second place if 
there is anything that separates the Untouchables from the Hindus, 
it is beef-eating. Even a superficial view of the food taboos of the 
Hindus will show that there are two taboos regarding food which 
serve as dividing lines. There is one taboo against meat-eating. It 
divides Hindus into vegetarians and flesh eaters. There is another 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-25 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


319 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : BEEF EATING ... UNTOUCHABILITY 319 


taboo which is against beef eating. It divides Hindus into those who 
eat cow’s flesh and those who do not. From the point of view of 
untouchability the first dividing line is of no importance. But the 
second is. For it completely marks off the Touchables from the 
Untouchables. The Touchables whether they are vegetarians or flesh- 
eaters are united in their objection to eat cow’s flesh. As against them 
stand the Untouchables who eat cow’s flesh without compunction and 
as a matter of course and habit . 1 

In this context it is not far-fetched to suggest that those who have 
a nausea against beef-eating should treat those who eat beef as 
Untouchables. 

There is really no necessity to enter upon any speculation as to 
whether beef-eating was or was not the principal reason for the rise 
of Untouchability. This new theory receives support from the Hindu 
Shastras. The Veda Vyas Smriti contains the following verse which 
specifies the communities which are included in the category of 
Antyajas and the reasons why they were so included . 2 

L. 12-13 “ The Charmakars (Cobbler), the Bhatta (Soldier), the Bhilla, 

the Rajaka (washerman), the Puskara, the Nata (actor), the Vrata, the 

Meda, the Chandala, the Dasa, the Svapaka, and the Kolika- these are 

known as Antyajas as well as others who eat cow’s flesh.” 

Generally speaking the Smritikars never care to explain the why 
and the how of their dogmas. But this case is exception. For in this 
case, Veda Vyas does explain the cause of untouchability. The clause 
“as well as others who eat cow’s flesh” is very important. It shows 
that the Smritikars knew that the origin of untouchability is to be 
found in the eating of beef. The dictum of Veda Vyas must close the 
argument. It comes, so to say, straight from the horse’s mouth and 
what is important is that it is also rational for it accords with facts 
as we know them. 

The new approach in the search for the origin of Untouchability 
has brought to the surface two sources of the origin of Untouchability. 
One is the general atmosphere of scorn and contempt spread by the 
Brahmins against those who were Buddhists and the second is the 
habit of beef-eating kept on by the Broken Men. As has been said , 
the first circumstance could not be sufficient to account for stigma of 

1 The Untouchables have felt the force of the accusation levelled against them 
by the Hindus for eating beef. Instead of giving up the habit the Untouchables have 
invented a philosophy which justifies eating the beef of the dead cow. The gist of 
the philosophy is that eating the flesh of the dead cow is a better way of showing 
respect to the cow than throwing her carcass to the wind. 

2 Quoted in Kane’s History of Dharma Shastra-Vol.ll, Part 1 p. 71. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-25 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


320 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Untouchability attaching itself to the Broken Men. For the scorn and 
contempt for Buddhists spread by the Brahmins was too general and 
affected all Buddhists and not merely the Broken Men. The reason 
why Broken Men only became Untouchables was because in addition 
to being Buddhists they retained their habit of beef-eating which gave 
additional ground for offence to the Brahmins to carry their newfound 
love and reverence to the cow to its logical conclusion. We may 
therefore conclude that the Broken Men were exposed to scorn and 
contempt on the ground that they were Buddhists the main cause 
of their Untouchability was beef-eating. 

The theory of beef-eating as the cause of untouchability also gives 
rise to many questions. Critics are sure to ask: What is the cause 
of the nausea which the Hindus have against beef-eating? Were the 
Hindus always opposed to beef-eating? If not, why did they develop 
such a nausea against it? Were the Untouchables given to beef-eating 
from the very start? Why did they not give up beef-eating when it 
was abandoned by the Hindus? Were the Untouchables always 
Untouchables? If there was a time when the Untouchables were not 
Untouchables even though they ate beef why should beef-eating give 
rise to Untouchability at a later-stage? If the Hindus were eating 
beef, when did they give it up? If Untouchability is a reflex of the 
nausea of the Hindus against beef-eating, how long after the Hindus 
had given up beef-eating did Untouchability come into being? These 
questions must be answered. Without an answer to these questions, 
the theory will remain under cloud. It will be considered as plausible 
but may not be accepted as conclusive. Having put forth the theory, 
I am bound to answer these questions. I propose to take up the 
following heads :- 

(1) Did the Hindus never eat beef? 

(2) What led the Hindus to give up beef-eating? 

(3) What led the Brahmins to become vegetarians? 

(4) Why did beef-eating give rise to Untouchability? and 

(5) When was Untouchability born? 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


321 


THE 

PART V 

NEW THEORIES AND SOME QUESTIONS 

Chater XI. 

Did the Hindus never eat beef ? 

Chapter XII. 

Why did non-Brahmins give up beef-eating ? 

Chapter XIII. 

What made the Brahmins to become vegetarians ? 

Chapter XIV. 

Why should beef-eating make Broken Men 
Untouchables ? 


322 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


323 


CHAPTER XI 

DID THE HINDUS NEVER EAT BEEF ? 


TO the question whether the Hindus ever ate beef, every Touchable 
Hindu, whether he is a Brahmin or a non-Brahmin, will say ‘no, 
never’. In a certain sense, he is right. From times no Hindu has eaten 
beef. If this is all that the Touchable Hindu wants to convey by his 
answer there need be no quarrel over it. But when the learned 
Brahmins argue that the Hindus not only never ate beef but they 
always held the cow to be sacred and were always opposed to the 
killing of the cow, it is impossible to accept their view. 

What is the evidence in support of the construction that the Hindus 
never ate beef and were opposed to the killing of the cow? 

There are two series of references in the Rig Veda on which reliance 
is placed. In one of these, the cow is spoken of as Aghnya. They are 
Rig Veda 1.164, 27; IV. 1.6; V 82-8; VII. 69. 71; X.87. Aghnya means 
‘one who does not deserve to be killed’. From this, it is argued that 
this was a prohibition against the killing of the cow and that since 
the Vedas are the final authority in the matter of religion, it is 
concluded that the Aryans could not have killed the cows, much less 
could they have eaten beef. In another series of references the cow 
is spoken of as sacred. They are Rig Veda VI. 28. 1.8. and VIII, 101. 
15. In these verses the cow is addressed as Mother of Rudras, the 
Daughter of Vasus, the Sister of the Adityas and the Centre of Nectar. 
Another reference on the subject is in Rig Veda VIII. 101. 16 where 
the cow is called Devi (Goddess). 

Raliance is also placed on certain passages in the Brahmanas and 
Sutras. 

There are two passages in the Satapatha Brahmana which relate 
to animal sacrifice and beef-eating. One is at III. 1.2.21 and reads 
as follows :- 

“He (the Adhvaryu) then makes him enter the hall. Let him not eat (the flesh) of 
either the cow or the ox, for the cow and the ox doubtless support everything here on 
earth. The gods spake, ‘verily, the cow and the ox support everything 
here; come, let us bestow on the cow and the ox whatever vigour belonged to 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


other species (of animals); and therefore the cow and the ox eat most. Hence 
were one to eat (the flesh) of an ox or a cow, there would be, as it were, 
an eating of everything, or, as it were, a going to the end (or, to destruction)... 
Let him therefore not eat (the flesh) of the cow and the ox.” 

The other passage is at 1, 2, 3, 6. It speaks against animal sacrifice 
and on ethical grounds. 

A similar statement is contained in the Apastambha Dharma Sutra 
at 1, 5, 17, 29. Apastambha lays a general embargo on the eating 
of cow’s flesh. 

Such is the evidence in support of the contention that the Hindus 
never ate beef. What conclusion can be drawn from this evidence? 

So far as the evidence from the Rig Veda is concerned the 
conclusion is based on a misreading and misunderstanding of the 
texts. The adjective Aghnya applied to the cow in the Rig Veda means 
a cow that was yielding milk and therefore not fit for being killed. 
That the cow is venerated in the Rig Veda is of course true. But 
this regard and venerations of the cow are only to be expected from 
an agricultural community like the Indo-Aryans. This application of 
the utility of the cow did not prevent the Aryan from killing the cow 
for purposes of food. Indeed the cow was killed because the cow was 
regarded as sacred. As observed by Mr. Kane: 

“It was not that the cow was not sacred in Vedic times, it was because 
of her sacredness that it is ordained in the Vajasaneyi Samhita that beef 
should be eaten .” 1 

That the Aryans of the Rig Veda did kill cows for purposes of food 
and ate beef is abundantly clear from the Rig Veda itself. In Rig 
Veda (X. 86.14) Indra says:- “They cook for one 15 plus twenty oxen”. 
The Rig Veda (X.91.14) says that for Agni were sacrificed horses, 
bulls, oxen, barren cows and rams. From the Rig Veda (X.72.6) it 
appears that the cow was killed with a sword or axe. 

As to the testimony of the Satapatha Bramhana, can it be said 
to be conclusive? Obviously, it cannot be. For there are passages in 
the other Bramhanas which give a different opinion. 

To give only one instance. Among the Kamyashtis set forth in the 
Taittiriya Bramhana, not only the sacrifice of oxen and cows are laid 
down, but we are even told what kind and description of oxen and 
cows are to be offered to what deities. Thus, a dwarf ox is to be 
chosen for sacrifice to Vishnu; a drooping horned bull with a blaze 
on the forehead to Indra as the destroyer of Vritra; a black cow to 


1 Dharm Shaslra Vichar (Marathi) p, 180. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


325 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : DID THE HINDUS... BEEF ? 325 


Pushan; a red cow to Rudra; and so on. The Taittiriya Bramhana 
notes another sacrifice called Panchasaradiya-seva, the most impor- 
tant element of which was the immolation of seventeen five-year old 
humpless, dwraf-bulls, and as many dwarf heifers under three year- 
old. 

As against the statement of the Apastamba Dharma Sutra, the 
following points may be noted. 

First is the contrary statement contained in that Very Sutra. At 
14, 15, 29, the Sutra says :- 

“The cow and the bull are sacred and therefore should be eaten”. 

The second is the prescription of Madhuparka contained in the 
Grahya Sutras. Among the Aryans the etiquette for receiving impor- 
tant guests had become settled into custom and had become a 
ceremony. The most important offering was Madhuparka. A detailed 
descriptions regarding Madhuparka are to be found in the various 
Grahya Sutras. According to most of the Grahya Sutras there are 
six persons who have a right to be served with Madhuparka namely; 
(1) Ritwija or the Brahmin called to perform a sacrifice, (2) Acharya, 
the teacher, (3) The bridegroom (4) The King (5) The Snatak, the 
student who has just finished his studies at the Gurukul and (6) Any 
person who is dear to the host. Some add Atithi to this list. Except 
in the case of Ritvija, King and Acharya, Madhuparka is to be offered 
to the rest once in a year. To the Ritvija, King and Acharya it is 
to be offered each time they come. 

What was this Madhuparka made of ? There is divergence about 
the substances mixed in offering Madhuparka. Asv.gr and Ap.gr. 
(13.10) prescribe a mixture of honey and curds or clarified butter and 
curds. Others like Par.gr. 13 prescribe a mixture of three (curds, 
honey and butter). Ap.gr. (13. 11-12) states the view of some that those 
three may be mixed or five (those three with fried yava grain and 
barley). Hir.gr. I, 12, 10-12 give the option of mixing three of five 
(curds, honey, ghee, water and ground grain). The Kausika Sutra (92) 
speaks of nine kinds of mixtures, viz., Brahma (honey and curds). Aindra 
(of payasa), Saumya (curds and ghee), Pausna (ghee and mantha), 
Sarasvata (milk and ghee), Mausala (wine and ghee, this being used 
only in Sautramanai and Rajasuya sacrifices), Parivrajaka (sesame oil 
and oil cake). The Madhava gr.I.9.22 says that the Veda declares that 
the Madhuparka must not be without flesh and so it recommends 
that if the cow is let loose, goat’s meat or payasa (rice cooked in 
milk) may be offered; the Hir.gr. 1.13, 14 says that other meat should 
be offered; Baud.gr. (1.2,51-54) says that when the cow is let off, the 
flesh of a goat or ram may be offered or some forest flesh (of a deer, 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


326 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

etc.) may be offered, as there can be no Madhuparka without flesh 
or if one is unable to offer flesh one may cook ground grains. 

Thus the essential element in Madhuparka is flesh and particularly 
cow’s flesh. 

The killing of cow for the guest had grown to such an extent that 
the guest came to be called ‘Go-ghna’ which means the killer of the 
cow. To avoid this slaughter of the cows the Ashvalayana Grahya 
Sutra (1.24.25) suggests that the cow should be let loose when the 
guest comes so as to escape the rule of etiquette. 

Thirdly, reference may be made to the ritual relating to disposal 
of the dead to counter the testimony of the Apastamba Dharma Sutra. 
The Sutra says 1 

“1. He should then put the following (sacrificial) implements (on the 
dead body) 

2. Into the right hand the (spoon called) Guhu. 

3. Into the left the (other spoon called) Upabhrit. 

4. On his right side the wooden sacrificial sword called Sphya, on his 
left side the Agnihotrahavani (i.e., the laddie with which the 
Agnihotra oblations are sacrified). 

5. On his chest the (big sacrificial laddie called) Dhruva. On his head 
the dishes. On his teeth the pressing stones. 

6. On the two sides of his nose, the two smaller sacrificial laddies called 
Sruvas. 

7. Or, if there is only one (Sruva), breaking it (in two pieces). 

8. On his two ears the two Prasitraharanas (i.e, the vessels into which 
the portion of the sacrificial food belonging to the Brahmin) is put 

9. Or, if there is only one (Prasitraharana), breaking it (in two pieces). 

10. On his belly the (vessel called) Patri. 

11. And the cup into which the cut-off portion (of the sacrificial food) 
are put. 

12. On his secret parts the (staff called) Sarny. 

13. On his thighs two kindling woods. 

14. On his legs the mortar and the pestle. 

15. On his feet the two baskets. 

16. Or, if there is only one (basket), breaking it in two pieces. 

17. Those of the implements which have a hollow (into which liquids 
can be poured) are filled with sprinkled butter. 


1 Kane’s vol. II. Part I p. 545. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


327 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : DID THE HINDUS... BEEF ? 327 


18. The son (of the deceased person) should take the under and the 
upper mill-stone for himself. 

19. And the implements made of copper, iron and earthenware. 

20. Taking out the omentum of the she-animal he should cover therewith 
the head and the mouth (of the dead person) with the verse, ‘But 
on the armour (which will protect thee) against Agni, by that which 
comes from the cows.’ (Rig Veda. X.16.7). 

21. Taking out the kidneys of the animal he should lay them into the 
hands (of the dead body) with the verse, escape the two hounds, 
the sons of Sarma (Rig Veda X 14.10) the right kidney into the right 
hand and the left into the left hand. 

22. The heart of the animals he puts on the heart of the deceased. 

23. And two lumps of flour or rice according to some teachers. 

24. Only if there are no kidneys according to some teachers. 

25. Having distributed the whole (animal), limb by limb (placing its 
different limbs on the corresponding limbs of the deceased) and 
having covered it with its hide, he recites when the Pranita water 
is carried forward (the verse), ‘Agni do not overturn this cup,’ (Rig 
Veda, X.16.8). 

26. Bending his left knee he should sacrifice Yugya oblation into the 
Dakshina fire with the formulas ‘To Agni Svaha, to Kama Svaha, 
to the world Svaha, to Anumati Svaha’. 

27. A fifth (oblation) on the chest of the deceased with the formula ‘from 
this one verily thou hast been born. May he now be born out of 
thee. To the heaven worlds Svaha.’ ” 

From the above passage quoted from the Ashvalayan Grahya Sutra 
it is clear that among the ancient Indo-Aryans when a person died, 
an animal had to be killed and the parts of the animal were placed 
on the appropriate parts of the dead body before the dead body was 
burned. 

Such is the state of the evidence on the subject of cow-killing and 
beef-eating. Which part of it is to be accepted as true? The correct 
view is that the testimony of the Satapatha Brahmana and the 
Apastamba Dharma Sutra in so far as it supports the view that 
Hindus were against cow-killing and beef-eating, are merely exhorta- 
tions against the excesses of cow-killing and not prohibitions against 
cow-killing. Indeed the exhortations prove that cow-killing and eating 
of beef had become a common practice. That notwithstanding these 
exhortations cow-killing and beef-eating continued. That most often 
they fell on deaf ears is proved by the conduct of Yajnavalkya, the 
great Rishi of the Aryans. The first passage quoted above from the 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-26 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Satapatha Brahmana was really addressed to Yajnavalkya as an 
exhortation. How did Yajnavalkya respond? After listening to the 
exhortation this is what Yajnavalkya said 

“I, for one, eat it, provided that it is tender” 

That the Hindus at one time did kill cows and did eat beef is proved 
abundantly by the description of the Yajnas given in the Buddhist 
Sutras which relate to periods much later than the Vedas and the 
Brahmanas. The scale on which the slaughter of cows and animals 
took place was colossal. It is not possible to give a total of such 
slaughter on all accounts committed by the Brahmins in the name 
of religion. Some idea of the extent of this slaughter can however 
be had from references to it in the Buddhist literature. As an 
illustration reference may be made to the Kutadanta Sutta in which 
Buddha preached against the performance of animal sacrifices to 
Brahmin Kutadanta. Buddha, though speaking in a tone of sarcastic 
travesty, gives a good idea of the practices and rituals of the Vedic 
sacrifices when he said: 

“And further, 0 Brahmin, at that sacrifice neither were any oxen slain, 
neither goats, nor fowls, nor fatted pigs, nor were any kind of living creatures 
put to death. No trees were cut down to be used as posts, no Darbha grasses 
mown to stress around the sacrificial spot. And the slaves and messengers 
and workmen there employed were driven neither by rods nor fear, nor carried 
on their work weeping with tears upon their faces.” 

Kutadanta on the other hand in thanking Buddha for his conversion 
gives an idea of the magnitude of the slaughter of animals which 
took place at such sacrifices when he says 

“I, even I betake myself to the venerable Gotama as my guide, to the 
Doctrine and the Order. May the venerable One accept me as a disciple, as 
one who, from this day forth, as long as life endures, has taken him as his 
guide. And I myself, 0, Gotama, will have the seven hundred bulls, and the 
seven hundred steers, and the seven hundred heifers, and the seven hundred 
goats, and the seven hundred rams set free. To them I grant their life. Let 
them eat grass and drink fresh water and may cool breezes waft around them.” 

In the Samyuta Nikaya (111,1-9) we have another description of 
a Yajna performed by Pasenadi, king of Kosala. It is said that five 
hundred bulls, five hundred calves and many heifers, goats and rams 
were led to the pillar to be sacrificed. 

With this evidence no one can doubt that there was a time when 
Hindus —both Brahmins and non-Brahmins —ate not only flesh but 
also beef. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-27 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


329 


CHAPTER XII 

WHY DID NON-BRAHMINS GIVE UP 
BEEF-EATING? 


THE food habits of the different classes of Hindus have been as fixed 
and stratified as their cults. Just as Hindus can be classified on their 
basis of their cults so also they can be classified on the basis of their 
habits of food. On the basis of their cults, Hindus are either Saivites 
(followers of Siva) or Vaishnavites (followers of Vishnu). Similarly, 
Hindus are either Mansahari (those who eat flesh) or Shakahari 
(those who are vegetarians). 

For ordinary purposes the division of Hindus into two classes 
Mansahari and Shakahari may be enough. But it must be admitted 
that it is not exhaustive and does not take account of all the classes 
which exist in Hindu society. For an exhaustive classification, the 
class of Hindus called Mansahari shall have to be further divided 
into two sub-classes : (i) Those who eat flesh but do not eat cow’s 
flesh; and (ii) Those who eat flesh including cow’s flesh; In other 
words, on the basis of food taboos, Hindu society falls into three 
classes : (i) Those who are vegetarians; (ii) Those who eat flesh but 
do not eat cow’s flesh; and (iii) Those who eat flesh including cow’s 
flesh. Corresponding to this classification, we have in Hindu society 
three classes : (1) Brahmins; (2) Non-Brahmins; and (3) The Untouch- 
ables. This division though not in accord with the fourfold division 
of society called Chaturvarnya, yet it is in accord with facts as they 
exist. For, in the Brahmins 1 we have a class which is vegetarian, 
in the non-Brahmins the class which eats flesh but does not eat cow’s 
flesh and in the Untouchables a class which eats flesh including cow’s 
flesh. 

This threefold division is therefore substantial and is in accord with 
facts. Anyone who stops to turn over this classification in his mind 


1 The Brahmins of India fall into two divisions (1) Pancha Dravid and (2) Panch 
Gauda. The former are vegetarians, the latter are not. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-27 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


330 


330 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is bound to be struck by the position of the Non-Brahmins. One can 
quite understand vegetarianism. One can quite understand meat- 
eating. But it is difficult to understand why a person who is a flesh- 
eater should object to one kind of flesh namely cow’s flesh. This is 
an anomaly which call for explanation. Why did the Non-Brahmin 
give up beef-eating? For this purpose it is necessary to examine laws 
on the subject. The relevant legislation must be found either in the 
Law of Asoka or the Law of Manu. 

II 

To begin with Asoka. The edicts of Asoka which have reference 
to this matter are Rock Edict No. I and Pillar Edict Nos. II and 
V. Rock Edict No. I reads as follows :- 

“This pious Edict has been written by command of His Sacred and Gracious 
Majesty the King. Here (in the capital) no animal may be slaughtered for 
sacrifice, nor may the holiday feast be held, because His Sacred and Gracious 
Majesty, the king sees much offence in the holiday feasts, although in certain 
places holiday feasts are excellent in the sight of His Sacred and Gracious 
Majesty the king. 

“Formerly, in the kitchen of His Sacred and Gracious Majesty the King, 
each day many hundred thousands of living creatures were slaughtered to 
make curries. But now, when this pious edict is being written, only three 
living creatures are slaughtered (daily) for curry, to wit, two peacocks and 
one antelope: the antelope, however, not invariably. Even those three living 
creatures henceforth shall not be slaughtered.” 

Pillar Edict No. II was in the following terms : 

“Thus saith His Sacred and Gracious Majesty, the King 

“The Law of Piety is excellent. But wherein consists the Law of Piety? 

In these things, to wit, little piety, many good deeds, compassion, liberality, 
truthfulness and purity. 

The gift of spiritual insight I have given in manifold ways: whilst on two- 
footed and four-footed beings, on birds and the denizens of the waters, I have 
conferred various favours-even unto the boon of life; and many other good 
deeds have I done. 

For this purpose, have I caused this pious edict to be written, that men 
may walk after its teaching, and that it may long endure; and he who will 
follow its teaching will do well.” 

Pillar Edict V says : 

“Thus said His Sacred and Gracious Majesty, the king : 

When I had been consecrated twenty-six years the following species were 
declared exempt from slaughter, namely : 

Parrots, starlings adjutants, Brahmany ducks, geese, pandimukhas, gelatas, 
bats, queen-ants, female tortoises, boneless fish, vedaveyakas, gangapuputakas. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-27 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


331 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY DID NON-BRAHMINS... 331 


skate, (river) tortoise, porcupines, tree-squirrels, barasingha stag, Brahmany 
bulls, monkeys, rhinoceros, grey doves village pigeons, and all fourfooted animals 
which are not utilised or eaten. 

She-goats, ewes, cows, that is to say, those either with young or in milk, are 
exempt from slaughter as well as their off-spring up to six months of age. 

The caponing of cocks must not be done. 

Chaff must not be burned along with the living things in it. 

Forests must not be burned either for mischief or so as to destroy living 
creatures. 

The living must not be fed with the living. At each of the three seasonal full 
moons, and at the full moon of the month Tishya (December-January) for three 
days in each case, namely, the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the first fortnight, 
and the first day of the second fortnight, as well as on the first days throughout 
the year, fish is exempt from killing and may not be sold. 

“On the same days, in elephant-preserves or fish-ponds no other classes of 
animals may be destroyed. 

On the eighth, fourteenth and fifteenth days of each fortnight, as well as on the 
Tishya and Punarvasa days and festival days, the castration of bulls must not be 
performed, nor may he-goats, rams, boars and other animals liable to castration 
be castrated. 

On the Tishya and Punarvasa days, on the seasonal full moon days, and during 
the fortnights of the seasonal full moons the branding of horses and oxen must not 
be done. 

During the time up to the twenty- sixth anniversary of my consecration twenty - 
five jail deliveries have been effected.” 

So much for the legislation of Asoka. 

Ill 

Let us turn to Manu. His Laws contain the the following provisions 
regarding meat-eating 

“V.ll. Let him avoid all carnivorous birds and those living in villages, 
and one hoofed animals which are not specially permitted (to be 
eaten), and the Tithbha (Parra) Jacana. 

V.12. The sparrow, the Plava, the Hamsa, the Brahmani duck, the 
village-cock, the Sarasa crane, the Raggudal, the woodpecker, the 
parrot, and the starling. 

V. 13. Those which feed striking with their beaks, web-footed birds, the 
Koyashti, those which scratch with their toes, those which dive 
and live on fish, meat from a slaughter-house and dried meat. 

V. 14. The Baka and the Balaka crane, the raven, the Khangartaka 
(animals) that eat fish, village-pigs, and all kinds of fishes. 

V.15. He who eats the flesh of any (animals) is called the eater of the 
flesh of that (particular) creature, he who eats fish is an eater of 
every (kind of) flesh; let him therefore avoid fish. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-27 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


332 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


V.16. (But the fish called) Pathine and (that called) Rohita may be 
eaten, if used for offering to the gods or to the manes; (one 
may eat) likewise Ragivas, Simhatundas, and Sasalkas on all 
occasions. 

V. 17. Let him not eat solitary or unknown beasts and birds though 

they may fall under (the categories of) eatable creatures, not 
any five-toed (animals). 

V.18. The porcupine, the hedgehog, the iguana, the rhinoceros, the 
tortoise, and the hare they declare to be eatable; likewise those 
(domestic animals) that have teeth in one jaw excepting 
camels.” 


IV 

Here is survey of the legislation both by Asoka and by Manu on 
the slaughter of animals. We are of course principally concerned with 
the cow. Examining the legislation of Asoka the question is: Did he 
prohibit the killing of the cow? On this issue there seems to be a 
difference of opinion. Prof. Vincent Smith is of opinion that Asoka 
did not prohibit the killing of the cow. Commenting on the legislation 
of Asoka on the subject, Prof. Smith says : 1 

“It is noteworthy that Asoka’s rules do not forbid the slaughter of cow, which, 

apparently, continued to be lawful.” 

Prof. Radhakumud Mookerji joins issue with Prof. Smith and says 2 
that Asoka did prohibit the slaughter of the cow. Prof. Mookerji relies 
upon the reference in Pillar Edict V to the rule of exemption which 
was made applicable to all four-footed animals and argues that under 
this rule cow was exempted from killing. This is not a correct reading 
of the statement in the Edict. The Statement in the Edict is a 
qualified statement. It does not refer to all four-footed animals but 
only to four-footed animals, ‘ which are not utilised or eaten. A cow 
cannot be said to be a four-footed animal which was not utilized or 
eaten. Prof. Vincent Smith seems to be correct in saying that Asoka 
did not prohibit the slaughter of the cow. Prof. Mookerji tries to get 
out of the difficulty by saying that at the time of Asoka the cow was 
not eaten and therefore came within the prohibition. His statement 
is simply absurd for the cow was an animal which was very much 
eaten by all classes. 

It is quite unnecessary to resort as does Prof. Mookerji to a forced 
construction of the Edict and to make Asoka prohibit the slaughter 
of the cow as though it was his duty to do so. Asoka had no particular 

1. Smith,- Asoka, p. 58 

2. Mookerji, Asoka pp. 21, 181, 184 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-27 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


333 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY DID NON-BRAHMINS... 333 


interest in the cow and owed no special duty to protect her against 
killing. Asoka was interested in the sanctity of all life human as well 
as animal. He felt his duty to prohibit the taking of life where taking 
of life was not necessary. That is why he prohibited slaughtering 
animal for scrifice 1 which he regarded as unnecessary and of animals 
which are not utilized nor eaten which again would be wanton and 
unnecessary. That he did not prohibit the slaughter of the cow in 
specie may well be taken as a fact which for having regard to the 
Buddhist attitude in the matter cannot be used against Asoka as a 
ground for casting blame. 

Coming to Manu there is no doubt that he too did not prohibit 
the slaughter of the cow. On the other hand he made the eating of 
cow’s flesh on certain occasions obligatory. 

Why then did the non-Brahmins give up eating beef? There appears 
to be no apparent reason for this departure on their part. But there 
must be some reason behind it. The reason I like to suggest is that 
it was due to their desire to imitate the Brahmins that the non- 
Brahmins gave up beef-eating. This may be a novel theory but it is 
not an impossible theory. As the French author, Gabriel Tarde has 
explained that culture within a society spreads by imitation of the 
ways and manners of the superior classes by the inferior classes. This 
imitation is so regular in its flow that its working is as mechanical 
as the working of a natural law. Gabriel Tarde speaks of the laws 
of imitation. One of these laws is that the lower classes always 
imitate the higher classes. This is a matter of such common 
knowledge that hardly any individual can be found to question its 
validity. 

That the spread of the cow-worship among and cessation of beef- 
eating by the non-Brahmins has taken place by reason of the habit 
of the non-Brahmins to imitate the Brahmins who were undoubtedly 
their superiors is beyond dispute. Of course there was an extensive 
propaganda in favour of cow-worship by the Brahmins. The Gayatri 
Purana is a piece of this propaganda. But initially it is the result 
of the natural law of imitation. This, of course, raises another 
question: Why did the Brahmins give up beef-eating? 

• • 


3 See Rock Edict No. I 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


334 


CHAPTER XIII 

WHAT MADE THE BRAHMINS BECOME 
VEGETARIANS ? 


THE non-Brahmins have evidently undergone a revolution. From 
being beef-eaters to have become non-beef-eaters was indeed a 
revolution. But if the non-Brahmins underwent one revolution, the 
Brahmins had undergone two. They gave up beef-eating which was 
one revolution. To have given up meat-eating altogether and become 
vegetarians was another revolution. 

That this was a revolution is beyond question. For as has been 
shown in the previous chapters there was a time when the Brahmins 
were the greatest beef-eaters. Although the non-Brahmins did eat beef 
they could not have had it every day. The cow was a costly animal 
and the non-Brahmins could ill afford to slaughter it just for food. 
He only did it on special occasion when his religious duty or personal 
interest to propitiate a deity compelled him to do. But the case with 
the Brahmin was different. He was a priest. In a period overridden 
by ritualism there was hardly a day on which there was no cow 
sacrifice to which the Brahmin was not invited by some non-Brahmin. 
For the Brahmin every day was a beef-steak day. The Brahmins were 
therefore the greatest beef-eaters. The Yajna of the Brahmins was 
nothing but the killing of innocent animals carried on in the name 
of religion with pomp and ceremony with an attempt to enshroud it 
in mystery with a view to conceal their appetite for beef. Some idea 
of this mystery pomp and ceremony can be had from the directions 
contained in the Atreya Brahmana touching the killing of animals 
in a Yajna. 

The actual killing of the animal is preceded by certain initiatory 
Rites accompanied by incantations too long and too many to be 
detailed here. It is enough to give an idea of the main features of 
the Sacrifice. The sacrifice commences with the erection of the 
Sacrificial post called the Yupa to which the animal is tied before it 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


335 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 335 


is slaughtered. After setting out why the Yupa is necessary the Atreya 
Brahamana proceeds to state what it stands for. It says : 1 

“This Yupa is a weapon. Its point must have eight edges. For a weapon 
(or iron club) has eight edges. Whenever he strikes with it an enemy or 
adversary, he kills him. (This weapon serves) to put down him (every one) 
who is to be put down by him (the sacrificer). The Yupa is a weapon which 
stands erected (being ready) to slay an enemy. Thence an enemy (of the 
sacrificer) who might be present (at the sacrifice) comes of all ill after having 
seen the Yupa of such or such one.” 

The selection of the wood to be used for the Yupa is made to vary 
with the purposes which the sacrificer. wishes to achieve by the 
sacrifice. The Atreya Brahmana says : 

“He who desires heaven, ought to make his Yupa of Khadira wood. For 
the gods conquered the celestial world by means of a Yupa, made of Khadira 
wood. In the same way the sacrificer conquers the celestial world by means 
of a Yupa, made of Khadira wood.” 

“He who desires food and wishes to grow fat ought to make his Yupa of 
Bilva wood. For the Bilva tree bears fruits every year; it is the symbol of 
fertility; for it increases (every year) in size from the roots up to the branches, 
therefore it is a symbol of fatness. He who having such a knowledge makes 
his Yupa of Bilva wood, makes fat his children and cattle. 

“As regards the Yupa made of Bilva wood (it is further to be remarked), 
that they call ‘light’Bilva. He who has such a knowledge becomes a ‘light’ 
among his own people, the most distinguished among his own people. 

“He who desires beauty and sacred knowledge ought to make his Yupa 
of Palasa wood. For the Palasa is among the trees of beauty and sacred 
knowledge. He who having such a knowledge makes his Yupa of Palasa wood, 
becomes beautiful and acquires sacred knowledge. 

“As regards the Yupa made of Palasa wood (there is further to be 
remarked), that the Palasa is the womb of all trees. Thence they speak on 
account of the palasam (foliage) of this or that tree (i.e. they call the foliage 
of every tree palasam). He who has such a knowledge obtains (the gratification 
of) any desire, he might have regarding all trees (i.e. he obtains from all 
trees any thing he might wish for).” 

This is followed by the ceremony of anointing the sacrificial post . 2 

“The Adhvaryu says (to the Hotar): “We anoint the sacrificial post (Yupa); 
repeat the mantra (required)”. The Hotar then repeats the verse: “Amjanti 
tvam adhvare” (3, 8, 1) i.e.” The priests anoint thee, 0 tree! with celestial 
honey (butler); provide (us) with wealth if thou standest here erected, or if 
thou art lying on thy mother (earth).” The “celestial honey” is the melted 
butter (with which the priests anoint the Yupa). (The second half verse from) 
“provide us” &c. means: “ thou mayest stand or lie, provide us with wealth.” 

1. Atreya Brahmana II pp. 72-74. 

2. Atrcy Brahmana (Martin Haug) II pp. 74-78 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


336 


336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“(The Hotar then repeats :) “jato jayate sudinatve” &c. (3, 8, 5) i.e., “After 
having been born, he (the Yupa) is growing (to serve) in the prime of his 
life the sacrifice of mortal men. The wise are busy in decorating (him, the 
Yupa) with skill. He, as an eloquent messenger of the gods, lifts his voice 
(that it might be heard by the gods).’’ He (the Yupa) is called jata, i.e., bom, 
because he is born by this (by the recital of the first quarter of this verse). 
(By the word) vardhamana, i.e., growing, they make him (the Yupa) grow 
in this manner. (By the words:) punanti (i.e. to clean, decorate), they clean 
him in this manner. (By the words:) “he as an eloquent messenger, &c.” he 
announces the Yupa (the fact of his existence) to the gods. 

The Hotar then concludes (the ceremony of anointing the sacrificial 
post) with the verse “yuva suvasah parivitah” (3, 8, 4), i.e. “the youth 
decorated with ribands, has arrived; he is finer (than all trees) which 
ever grew; the wise priests raise him up under recital of well-framed 
thoughts of their mind.” The youth decorated with ribands, is the 
vital air (the soul), which is covered by the limbs of the body. (By 
the words;) “he is finer, “&c. he means that he (the Yupa) is becoming 
finer (more excellent, beautiful) by this (mantra).” 

The next ceremony is the carrying of fire round the sacrificial 
animal. The Atreya Brahmana gives the following directions on this 
point. It says 1 

“When the fire is carried round (the animal) the Adhvaryu says to the 
Hotar: ‘repeat (thy mantras)’. The Hotar then repeats this triplet of verses, 
addressed to Agni, and composed in the Gayatri metre: Agnir Hota no adhvare 
(4.15.1-3) i.e. (1) Agni, our priest, is carried round about like a horse, he 
who is among gods, the god of sacrifices, (2) Like a charioteer Agni passes 
thrice by the sacrifice; to the gods he carries the offering, (3) The master 
of food, the seer of Agni, went round the offering; he bestows riches on the 
sacrificer. 

“When the fire is carried round (the animal) then he makes him (Agni) 
prosper by means of his own deity and his own metre. ‘As a horse he is 
carried’ means: they carry him as if he were a horse, round about. Like a 
charioteer Agni passes thrice by the sacrifice means; he goes round the 
sacrifice like a charioteer (swiftly). He is called vajapati (master of food) 
because he is the master of (different kinds of) food. 

“The Advaryu says: give Hotar! the additional order for despatching 
offerings to the gods. 

“The Hotar then says : (to the slaughterers) : Ye divine slaughterers, 
commence (your work), as well as ye who are human! that is to say, he orders 
all the slaughterers among gods as well as among men (to commence). 

Bring hither the instruments for killing, ye who are ordering the sacrifice, 
in behalf of the two masters of the sacrifice. 


1 Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II - pp, 84-86 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


337 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 337 


“The animal is the offering, the sacrificer the master of the offering. Thus 
he (the Hotar) makes prosper the sacrificer by means of his (the sacrifcer’s) 
own offering. Thence they truly say: for whatever deity the animal is killed, 
that one is the master of the offering. If the animal is to be offered to one 
deity only, the priest should say : Medhapataye ‘to the master of the sacrifice 
(singular)’, if to two deities, then he should use the dual ‘to both masters 
of the offering’, and if to several deities, then he should use the plural, ‘to 
the masters of the offering’. This is the established custom. 

Bring ye for him fire! For the animal when carried (to the slaughter) saw 
death before it Not wishing to go to the gods, the gods said to it: Come we 
will bring thee to heaven ! The animal consented and said: One of you should 
walk before me. They consented. Agni then walked before it, and it followed 
after Agni. Thence they say, every animal belongs to Agni, for it followed 
after him. Thence they carry before the animal fire (Agni). 

Spread the (sacred) grass! the animal lives on herbs. He (the Hotar) thus 
provides the animal with its entire soul (the herbs being supposed to form 
part of it). 

After the ceremony of carrying fire round the animal comes the 
delivery of the animal to the priests for sacrifice. Who should offer 
the animal for sacrifice? On this point the direction of the Atreya 
Brahmana is 1 — 

“The mother, the father, the brother, sister, friend, and companions should 
give this (animal) up (for being slaughtered)! When these words are pronounced, 
they seize the animal which is (regarded as) entirely given up by its relations 
(parents, &c.)” 

On reading this direction one wonders why almost everybody is 
required to join in offering the animal for sacrifice. The reason is 
simple. There were altogether seventeen Brahmin priests who were 
entitled to take part in performing the sacrifice. Naturally enough 
they wanted the whole carcass to themselves . 2 Indeed they could not 
give enough to each of the seventeen priests unless they had the whole 
carcass to distribute. Legally the Brahmins could not claim the whole 
carcass unless everybody who could not claim any right over the 
animal had been divested of it. Hence the direction requiring even 
the companion of the sacrificer to take part in offering the animal. 

Then comes the ceremony of actually killing the animal. The Atreya 
Brahmana gives the details of the mode and manner of killing the 
animal. Its directions are 3 : 

1. Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II p. 86 

2. As a matter of fact the Brahmins took the whole carcass. Only one leg each 
was given to the sacrificer and his wife. 

3. Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II pp. 86-87 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“Turn its feet northwards! Make its eye to go to the sun, dismiss its breath 
to the wind, its life to the air, its hearing to the directions, its body to the 
earth. In this way he (the Hotar) places it (connects it) with these worlds. 

Take off the skin entire (without cutting it). Before operating the naval, tear 
out omentum. Stop its breathing within (by stopping its mouth). Thus he (the 
Hotar) puts its breath in the animals. 

Make of its breast a piece like an eagle, of its arms (two pieces like) two 
hatchets, of its forearms (two pieces like) two spikes, of its shoulders (two pieces 
like) two Kashyapas, its loins should be un-broken (entire); (make of) its thighs 
(two pieces like) two shields, of the two kneepans (two pieces like) two oleander 
leaves; take out its twenlysix ribs according to their order; preserve every limb 
of it in its integrity. Thus he benefits all its limbs.” 

There remain two ceremonies to complete the sacrificial killing of 
the animal. One is to absolve the Brahmin priests who played the 
butcher’s part. Theoretically they are guilty of murder for the animal 
is only a substitute for the sacrificer. To absolve them from the 
consequences of murder, the Hotar is directed by the Atreya Brahmana 
to observe the following injuction 1 : 

“Do not cut the entrails which resemble on owl (when taking out the 
omentum), nor should among your children, O slaughterers! or among their 
offspring any one be found who might cut them. By speaking these words 
he presents these entrails to the slaughterers among the gods as well as to 
those among men. 

The Hotar shall then say thrice : 0 Adhrigu (and ye others), kill (the 
animal), do it well; kill it, 0 Adhrigu. 

After the animal has been killed, (he should say thrice:) Far may it (the 
consequences of murder) be (from us). For Adhrigu among the gods is he 
who silences (the animal) and the Apapa (away, away!) is he who puts it 
down. By speaking those words he surrenders the animal to those who silence 
it (by stopping its mouth) and to those who butcher it. 

The Hotar then mutters (he makes, Japa); “0 slaughterers! may all good 
you might do abide by us! and all mischief you might do go elsewhere!” The 
Hotar Gives by (this) speech the order (for killing the animal), for Agni had 
given the order for killing (the animal) with the same words when he was 
the Hotar of the gods. 

By those words (the Japa mentioned) the Hotar removes (all evil 
consequences) from those who suffocate the animal and those who butter it, 
in all that they might transgress the rule by cutting one piece too soon, the 
other too late, or by cutting a too large, or a too small piece. The Hotar 
enjoying this happiness clears himself (from all guilt) and attains the full 
length of his life (and it serves the sacrificer) for obtaining his full life. He 
who has such a knowledge, attains the full length of his life.” 


1 Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II pp. 86-90 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


339 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 339 


The Atreya Bramhana next deals with the question of disposing 
of the parts of the dead animal. In this connection its direction is 1 — 

“Dig a ditch in the earth to hide its excrements. The excrements consist 
of vegetable food; for the earth is the place for the herbs. Thus the Hotar 
puts them (the excrements) finally in their proper places. Present the evil 
spirits with the blood! For the gods having deprived (once) the evil spirits 
of their share in the Haviryajnas (such as the Full and New Moon offerings) 
apportioned to them the husk and smallest grains, and after having them 
turned out of the great sacrifice (such as the Soma and animal sacrifices), 
presented to them the blood. Thence the Hotar pronounces the words : present 
the evil spirits with the blood! By giving them this share he deprives the 
evil spirits of any other share in the sacrifice. They say : one should not 
address the evil spirits in the sacrifice, and evil spirits whichever they might 
be (Rakshasa, Asuras, etc.): for the sacrifice is to be without (the) evil spirits 
(not to be disturbed by them). But others say: one should address them; for (he 
who deprives any one, “entitled to a share of this share, will be punished (by 
him whom he deprives); and if he himself does not suffer the penalty, then his 
son, and if his son be spared, then his grandson will suffer it, and thus he 
resents on him (the son or grandson) what he wanted to resent on you.” 

“However, if the Hotar addresses them, he should do so with a low voice. 
For both, the low voice and the evil spirits, are, as it were, hidden. If he 
addresses them with a loud voice, then such one speaks in the voice of the 
evil spirits, and is capable of producing Rakshasa sounds (a horrible, terrific 
voice). The voice in which the haughty man and the drunkard speak is that 
of the evil spirits (Rakshasas). He who has such a knowledge will neither 
himself become haughty nor will such a man be among his offspring.” 

Then follows the last and the concluding ceremony that of offering 
parts of the body of the animal to the gods. It is called the Manota. 
According to the Atreya Brahmana 2 — 

“The Adhvaryu says (to the Hotar): recite the verses appropriate to the offering 
of the parts of the sacrificial animal which are cut off for the Manota. He 
then repeats the hymn : Thou, 0 Agni, art the first Manota 3 (6.1)” 

There remains the question of sharing the flesh of the animal. On 
this issue the division was settled by the Atreya Brahmana in the 
following terms 4 : 

“Now follows the division of the different parts of the sacrificial animal (among 
the priests) . W e shall describe it. The two j awbones with the tongue are to be given 
to the Prastotar; the breast in the form of an eagle to the Udgatar; the throat with 
the palate to the Pratihartar; the lower part of the right loins to the Hotar: the left 
to the Brahma; the right thigh to the Maitravaruna; the left to the 
Brahmanachhamsi; the right side with the shoulder to the Adhvaryu; the 


1. Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) H p. 87 

2. Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II p. 93 

3. Manota means the deity to whom the offering is dedicated. 

1 Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II, pp. 441-42. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


340 


340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


left side to those who accompany the chants; the left shoulder to the 
Pratipashatar; the lower part of the right arm to the Neshtar; the lower part 
of the laft arm to the Potar; the upper of the right thigh to the Achhavaka; 
the left to the Agnidhara; the upper part of the right arm to the Atreya; 
the left to the Sadasya; the back bone and the urinal bladder to the Grihapati 
(sacrificcr); the right feet to the Grihapati who gives a feasting; the left feet 
to the wife of that Grihapati who gives a feasting; the upper lip is common 
to both (the Grihapati and his wife), which is to be divided by the Grihapati. 
They offer the tail of the animal to wives, but they should give it to a 
Brahmana; the fleshy processes (manikah) on the neck and three gristles 
(kikasah) to the Gravastut; three other gristles and one-half of the fleshy 
part on the back (vaikartta) to the Unnetar; the other half of the fleshy part 
on the neck and the left lobe (kloma) to the slaughterer, who should present 
it to a Brahmana, if he himself would not happen to be a Brahmana. The 
head is to be given to the Subrahmanya, the skin belongs to him (the 
Subrahmanya), who spoke, svah sutyam (tomorrow at the Soma sacrifice); that 
part of the sacrificial animal at a Soma sacrifice which belongs to Ila 
(sacrificial food) is common to all the priests; only for the Hotar it is optional. 

All these portions of the sacrificial animal amount to thirtysix single pieces, 
each of which represents the pada (foot) of a verse by which the sacrifice 
is carried up. The Brihati metre consists of thirtysix syllables; and the 
heavenly worlds are of the Brihati nature. In this way (by dividing the animal 
into thirtysix parts) they gain life (in this world) and the heavens, and having 
become established in both (this and that world) they walk there. 

To those who divide the sacrificial animal in the way mentioned, it becomes 
the guide to heaven. But those who make the division otherwise are like 
scoundrels and miscreants who kill an animal merely (for gratifying their 
lust after flesh). This division of the sacrificial animal was invented by the 
Rishi (Devabhaga, a son of Sruta). When he was departing from this life, 
he did not entrust (the secret to anyone). But a supernatural being 
communicated it to Cirija, the son of Babhru. Since his time men study it.” 

What is said by the Atreya Brahmana places two things beyond 
dispute. One is that the Brahmins monopolised the whole of the flesh 
of the sacrificial animal. Except for a paltry bit they did not even 
allow the sacrificer to share in it. The second is that the Brahmins 
themselves played the part of butchers in the slaughter of the animal. 
As a matter of principle the Brahmins should not eat the flesh of 
the animal killed at a sacrifice. The principle underlying Yajna is 
that man should offer himself as sacrifice to the gods. He offers an 
animal only to release himself from this obligation. From this it 
followed that the animal, being only a substitute for the man, eating the 
flesh of animal meant eating human flesh. This theory was very detri- 
mental to the interest of the Brahmins who had a complete monopoly 
of the flesh of the animal offered for sacrifice. The Atreya Brahmana 
which had seen in this theory the danger of the Brahmins being 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


341 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 341 


deprived of the flesh of sacrificial animal takes pains to explain away 
the theory by a simple negation. It says 1 : 

“The man who is intitiated (into the sacrificial mysteries) offers himself 
to all deities. Agni represents all deities and Soma represents all deities. 
When he (the sacrificer) offers the animal to Agni-Soma he releases himself 
(by being represented by the animal) from being offered to all deities. 

They say : “do not eat from the animal offered to Agni-Soma. Who eats 
from this animal, eats from human flesh; because the sacrificer releases 
himself (from being sacrificed) by means of the animal”. But this (precept) 
is not to be attended to.” 

Given these facts, no further evidence seems to be necessary to 
support the statement that the Brahmins were not merely beef-eaters 
but they were also butchers. 

Why then did the Brahmins change front? Let us deal with their 
change of front in two stages. First, why did they give up beef- 
eating? 

II 

As has already been shown cow-killing was not legally prohibited by 
Asoka. Even if it had been prohibited, a law made by the Buddhist 
Emperor could never have been accepted by the Brahmins as binding 
upon them. 

Did Manu prohibit beef-eating? If he did, then that would be 
binding on the Brahmins and would afford an adequate explanation 
of their change of front. Looking into the Manu Smriti one does find 
the following verses : 

“V; 46. He who docs not seek to cause the sufferings of bonds and 
death to living creatures, (but) desires the good of all (beings), 
obtains endless bliss. 

“V. 47. He who does not injure any (creature), attains without an effort 
what he thinks of, what he undertakes, and what he fixes his 
mind on. 

“V. 48. Meat can never be obtained without injury to living creatures, 
and injury to sentient beings is detrimental to (the attainment 
of) heavenly bliss; let him therefore shun (the use of) meat. 


1 Atreya Brahmana (Martin Haug) II p. 80 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 342 

342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


‘V. 49. Having well considered the (disgusting) origin of flesh and the 
(cruelty of) fettering and slaying corporeal beings, let him 


entirely abstain from eating flesh.” 

If these verses can be treated as containing positive injunctions 
they would be sufficient to explain why the Brahmins gave up meat- 
eating and became vegetarians. But it is impossible to treat these 
verses as positive injunctions, carrying the force of law. They are 
either exhortations or interpolations introduced after the Brahmins 
had become vegetarians in praise of the change. That the latter is 
the correct view is proved by the following verses which occur in the 
same chapter of the Manu Smriti. : 

“V. 28 : The Lord of creatures (Prajapati) created this whole (world to 


“V. 29. 

be) the sustenance of the vital spirit; both the immovable and 
the movable creation is the food of the vital spirit. 

What is destitute of motion is the food of those endowed with 
locomotion; (animals) without fangs (are the food) of those with 
fangs, those without hands of those who possess hands, and 
the timid of the bold. 

4 

CO 

o 

The eater who daily even devours those destined to be his food, 
commits no sin; for the creator himself created both the eaters 
and those who are to be eaten (for those special purposes). 

“V. 56. 

There is no sin in eating meat, in (drinking) spirituous liquor, 
and in carnal intercourse for that is the natural way of created 
beings, but abstention brings great rewards. 

“V. 27. 

One may eat meat when it has been sprinkled with water, 
while Mantras were recited, when Brahmanas desire (one’s 
doing it) when one is engaged (in the performance of a rite) 
according to the law, and when one’s life is in danger. 

“V. 31. 

‘The consumption of meat (is befitting) for scrifices,’ that is 
declared to be a rule made by the gods, but to persist (in using 
it) on other (occasions) is said to be a proceeding worthy of 
Rakshasas. 

“V. 32. 

He who eats meat, when he honours the gods and manes 
commits no sin, whether he has bought it, or himself has killed 
(the animal) or has received it as a present from others. 

“V. 42. 

A twice-born man who, knowing the true meaning of the Veda, 
slays an animal for these purposes, causes both himself and 
the animal to enter a most blessed state. 

“V. 39. 

Swayambhu (the self-existent) himself created animals for the 
sake of sacrifices; sacrifices (have been instituted) for the good 
of this whole (world); hence the slaughtering (of beasts) for 
sacrifice is not slaughtering (in the ordinary sense of the word). 

“V. 40. 

Herbs, trees, cattle, birds, and other animals that have been 
destroyed for sacrifices, receive (being reborn) higher exist- 


ences. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


343 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 343 


Manu goes further and makes eating of flesh compulsory. Note the 
following verse : 

“V. 35. But a man who, being duly engaged (to officiate or to. dine 
at a sacred rite), refuses to eat meat, becomes after death an 
animal during twentyone existences.” 

That Manu did not prohibit meat-eating is evident enough. That 
Manu Smriti did not prohibit cow-killing can also be proved from the 
Smriti itself. In the first place, the only references to cow in the Manu 
Smriti are to be found in the catalogue of rules which are made 
applicable by Manu to the Snataka. They are set dut below :- 

1. A Snataka should not eat food which a cow has smelt. 1 

2. A Snataka should not step over a rope to which a calf is tied. 2 

3. A Snataka should not urinate in a cowpan. 3 

4. A Snataka should not answer call of nature facing a cow. 4 

5. A Snataka should not keep his right arm uncovered when he 

enters a cowpan. 5 

6. A Snataka should not interrupt a cow which is sucking her calf, 

nor tell anybody of it 6 

7. A Snataka should not ride on the back of the cow. 7 

8. A Snataka should not offend the cow. 8 

9. A Snataka who is impure must not touch a cow with his hand. 9 

From these references it will be seen that Manu did not regard 
the cow as a sacred animal. On the other hand, he regarded it as 
an impure animal whose touch caused ceremonial pollution. 

There are verses in Manu which show that he did not prohibit the 
eating of beef. In this connection, reference may be made to Chapter 
III. 3. It says :- 

“He (Snataka) who is famous (for the strict performance of) his duties 

and has received his heritage, the Veda from his father, shall be honoured, 

sitting on couch and adorned with a garland with the present of a cow 

(the honey-mixture).” 

The question is why should Manu recommend the gift of a cow 
to a Snataka? Obviously, to enable him to perform Madhuparka. If 
that is so, it follows that Manu knew that Brahmins did eat beef 
and he had no objection to it. 

1 Manu, 209 4 Manu, 48 7 Manu, 70 

2 Ibid, 38 5 Ibid, 58 8 Ibid, 162 

3 Ibid, 45 6 Ibid, 59 9 Ibid, 142 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


344 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Another reference would be to Manu’s discussion of the animals 
whose meat is eatable and those whose meat is not. In Chapter 
V. 18. he says 

“The porcupine, the hedgehog, the iguana, the rhinoceros, the tortoise, 

and the hare they declare to be eatable, likewise those (domestic animals) 

that have teeth in one jaw only, excepting camels.” 

In this verse Manu gives general permission to eat the flesh of 
all domestic animals that have teeth in one jaw only. To this rule 
Manu makes one exception, namely, the camel. In this class of 
domestic animals — those that have teeth in one jaw only — falls not 
only the camel but also the cow. It is noteworthy that Manu does 
not make an exception in the case of the cow. This means that Manu 
had no objection to the eating of the cow’s flesh. 

Manu did not make the killing of the cow an offence. Manu divides 
sins into two classes (i) mortal sins and (ii) minor sins. Among the 
mortal sins Manu includes : 

“XI. 55. Killing a Brahmana, drinking (the spirituous liquor called 
Sura) stealing the (gold of Brahmana) a adultery with a Guru’s 
wife, and associating with such offenders.” 

Among minor sins Manu includes : 

“XI. 60. Killing the cow, sacrificing for those unworthy to sacrifice, 
adultery, setting oneself, casting off one’s teacher, mother, 
father or son, giving up the (daily) study of the Veda and 
neglecting the (sacred domestic) fire.” 

From this it will be clear that according to Manu cow-killing was 
only a minor sin. It was reprehensible only if the cow was killed 
without good and sufficient reason. Even if it was otherwise, it was 
not heinous or inexplicable. The same was the attitude of Yajnavalkya 1 . 

All this proves that for generations the Brahmins had been eating 
beef. Why did they give up beef-eating? Why did they, as an extreme 
step, give up meat eating altogether and become vegetarians? It is 
two revolutions rolled into one. As has been shown it has not been 
done as a result of the preachings of Manu, their Divine Law-maker. 
The revolution has taken place in spite of Manu and contrary to his 
directions. What made the Brahmins take this step? Was philosophy 
responsible for it? Or was it dictated by strategy? 

Two explanations are offered. One explanation is that this deification 
of the cow was a manifestation of the Advaita philosophy 


1 Yaj. III. 227 and III 234. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


345 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 345 


that one supreme entity pervaded the whole universe, that on that 
account all life human as well as animal was sacred. This explanation 
is obviously unsatisfactory. In the first place, it does not fit in with 
facts. The Vedanta Sutra which proclaims the doctrine of oneness of 
life does not prohibit the killing of animals for sacrificial purposes 
as is evident from II. 1.28. In the second place, if the transformation 
was due to the desire to realize the ideal of Advaita then there is 
no reason why it should have stopped with the cow. It should have 
extended to all other animals. 

Another explanation 1 more ingenious than the first, is that this 
transformation in the life of the Brahmin was due to the rise of the 
doctrine of the Transmigration of the Soul. Even this explanation does 
not fit in with facts. The Brahadaranyaka Upanishad upholds the 
doctrine of transmigration (vi.2) and yet recommends that if a man 
desires to have a learned son born to him he should prepare a mass 
of the flesh of the bull or ox or of other flesh with rice and ghee. 
Again, how is it that this doctrine which is propounded in the 
Upanishads did not have any effect on the Brahmins upto the time 
of the Manu Smriti, a period of at least 400 years. Obviously, this 
explanation is no explanation. Thirdly, if Brahmins became vegetarians 
by reason of the doctrine of transmigration of the soul how is it, it 
did not make the non-Brahmins take to vegetarianism? 

To my mind, it was strategy which made the Brahmins give up 
beef-eating and start worshipping the cow. The clue to the worship 
of the cow is to be found in the struggle between Buddhism and 
Brahmanism and the means adopted by Brahmanism to establish its 
supremacy over Buddhism. The strife between Buddhism and Brah- 
manism is a crucial fact in Indian history. Without the realisation 
of this fact, it is impossible to explain some of the features of 
Hinduism. Unfortunately students of Indian history have entirely 
missed the importance of this strife. They knew there was Brahman- 
ism. But they seem to be entirely unaware of the struggle for 
supremacy in which these creeds were engaged and that their struggle 
which extended for 400 years has left some indeliable marks on 
religion, society and politics of India. 

This is not the place for describing the full story of the struggle. 
All one can do is to mention a few salient points. Buddhism was at 
one time the religion of the majority of the people of India. It 
continued to be the religion of the masses for hundreds of years. It 
attacked Brahmanism on all sides as no religion had done before. 


1 Kane’s Dharma Shastra II. Part II. P 776 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


346 


346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Brahmanism was on the wane and if not on the wane, it was certainly 
on the defensive. As a result of the. spread of Buddhism, the 
Brahmins had lost all power and prestige at the Royal Court and 
among the people. They were smarting under the defeat they had 
suffered at the hands of Buddhism and were making all possible 
efforts to regain their power and prestige. Buddhism had made so 
deep an impression on the minds of the masses and had taken such 
a hold of them that it was absolutely impossible for the Brahmins 
to fight the Buddhists except by accepting their ways and means and 
practising the Buddhist creed in its extreme form. After the death 
of Buddha his followers started setting up the images of the Buddha 
and building stupas. The Brahmins followed it. They, in their turn, 
built temples and installed in them images of Shiva, Vishnu and Ram 
and Krishna etc., — all with the object of drawing away the crowd that 
was attracted by the image worship of Buddha. That is how temples 
and images which had no place in Brahmanism came into Hinduism. 
The Buddhists rejected the Brahmanic religion which consisted of 
Yajna and animal sacrifice, particularly of the cow. The objection to 
the sacrifice of the cow had taken a strong hold of the minds of the 
masses especially as they were an agricultural population and the 
cow was a very useful animal. The Brahmins in all probability had 
come to be hated as the killer of cows in the same way as the guest 
had come to be hated as Gognha, the killer of the cow by the 
householder, because whenever he came a cow had to be killed in 
his honour. That being the case, the Brahmins could do nothing to 
improve their position against the Buddhists except by giving up the 
Yajna as a form of worship and the sacrifice of the cow. 

That the object of the Brahmins in giving up beef-eating was to 
snatch away from the Buddhist Bhikshus the supremacy they had 
acquired is evidenced by the adoption of vegetarianism by Brahmins. 
Why did the Brahmins become vegetarian? The answer is that without 
becoming vegetarian the Brahmins could not have recovered the 
ground they had lost to their rival namely Buddhism. In this 
connection it must be remembered that there was one aspect in which 
Brahmanism suffered in public esteem as compared to Buddhism. 
That was the practice of animal sacrifice which was the essence of 
Brahmanism and to which Buddhism was deadly opposed. That in 
an agricultural population there should be respect for Buddhism 
and revulsion against Brahmanism which involved slaughter of 
animals including cows and bullocks is only natural. What could the 
Brahmins do to recover the lost ground? To go one better than the 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


347 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 347 


Buddhist Bhikshus not only to give up meat-eating but to become 
vegetarians — which they did. That this was the object of the 
Brahmins in becoming vegetarians can be proved in various ways. 

If the Brahmins had acted from conviction that animal sacrifice 
was bad, all that was necessary for them to do was to give up killing 
animals for sacrifice. It was unnecessary for them to be vegetarians. 
That they did go in for vegetarianism makes it obvious that their 
motive was far-reaching. Secondly, it was unnecessary for them to 
become vegetarians. For the Buddhist Bhikshus were not vegetarians. 
This statement might surprise many people owing to the popular 
belief that the connection between Ahimsa and Buddhism was 
immediate and essential. It is generally believed that the Buddhist 
Bhikshus eschewed animal food. This is an error. The fact is that 
the Buddhist Bhikshus were permitted to eat three kinds of flesh 
that were deemed pure. Later on they were extended to five classes. 
Yuan Chwang, the Chinese traveller was aware of this and spoke 
of the pure kinds of flesh as San-Ching. The origin of this practice 
among the Bhikshus is explained by Mr. Thomas Walters. According 
to the story told by him 1 — 

“In the time of Buddha there was in Vaisali a wealthy general named 
Siha who was a convert to Buddhism. He became a liberal supporter of the 
Brethren and kept them constantly supplied with good flesh-food. When it 
was noticed abroad that the Bhikshus were in the habit of eating such food 
specially provided for them, the Tirthikas made the practice a matter of angry 
reproach. Then the abstemious ascetic Brethren, learning this, reported the 
circumstances to the Master, who thereupon called the Brethren together. 
When they assembled, he announced to them the law that they were not 
to eat the flesh of any animal which they had seen put to death for them, 
or about which they had been told that it had been slain for them. But he 
permitted to the Brethern as ‘pure’ (that is, lawful) food the flesh of animals 
the slaughter of which had not been seen by the Bhikshus, not heard of by 
them, and not suspected by them to have been on their account. In the Pali 
and Ssu-fen Vinaya it was after a breakfast given by Siha to the Buddha 
and some of the Brethren, for which the carcass of a large ox was procured 
that the Nirgranthas reviled the Bhikshus and Buddha instituted this new 
rule declaring fish and flesh ‘pure’ in the three conditions. The animal food 
now permitted to the Bhikshus came to be known as the ‘three pures’ or ‘three 
pure kinds of flesh’, and it was tersely described as ‘unseen, unheard, unsus- 
pected’, or as the Chinese translations sometimes have it ‘not seen, not heard 
nor suspected to be on my account’. Then two more kinds of animal food 
were declared “lawful for the Brethren viz., the flesh of animals which had 
died a natural death, and that of animals which had been killed by a bird 
of prey or other savage creature. So there came to be five classes or 


1 Yuan Chwang (1904) Vol. I. p. 55 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


descriptions of flesh which the professed Buddhist was at liberty to use as 
food. Then the ‘unseen, unheard, unsuspected’ came to be treated as one class, 
and this together with the ‘natural death’ and ‘bird killed’ made a san-ching.” 

As the Buddhist Bhikshus did eat meat the Brahmins had no reason 
to give it up. Why then did the Brahmins give up meat-eating and 
become vegetarians? It was because they did not want to put 
themselves merely on the same footing in the eyes of the public as 
the Buddhist Bhikshus. 

The giving up of the Yajna system and abandonment of the sacrifice 
of the cow could have had only a limited effect. At the most it would 
have put the Brahmins on the same footing as the Buddhists. The 
same would have been the case if they had followed the rules observed 
by the Buddhist Bhikshus in the matter of meat-eating. It could not 
have given the Brahmins the means of achieving supremacy over the 
Buddhists which was their ambition. They wanted to oust the 
Buddhists from the place of honour and respect which they had 
acquired in the minds of the masses by their opposition to the killing 
of the cow for sacrificial purposes. To achieve their purpose the 
Brahmins had to adopt the usual tactics of a wreckless adventurer. 
It is to beat extremism by extremism. It is the strategy which all 
rightists use to overcome the leftists. The only way to beat the 
Buddhists was to go a step further and be vegetarians. 

There is another reason which can be relied upon to support the 
thesis that the Brahmins started cow-worship, gave up beef-eating 
and became vegetarians in order to vanquish Buddhism. It is the date 
when cow-killing became a mortal sin. It is well-known that cow- 
killing was not made an offence by Asoka. Many people expect him 
to have come forward to prohibit the killing of the cow. Prof. Vincent 
Smith regards it as surprising. But there is nothing surprising in 
it. 

Buddhism was against animal sacrifice in general. It had no 
particular affection for the cow. Asoka had therefore no particular 
reason to make a law to save the cow. What is more astonishing 
is the fact that cow-killing was made a Mahapataka, a mortal sin 
or a capital offence by the Gupta Kings who were champions of 
Hinduism which recognised and sanctioned the killing of the cow for 
sacrificial purposes. As pointed out by Mr. D. R. Bhandarkar 1 — 

“We have got the incontrovertible evidence of inscriptions to show that early 
in the 5th century A. D. killing a cow was looked upon as an offence of the 


1 Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Culture (1940) pp. 78-79. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-28 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


349 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHAT MADE... VEGETARIANS ? 349 


deepest turpitude, turpitude as deep as that involved in murdering a 
Brahman. We have thus a copper-plate inscription dated 465 A.D. and 
referring itself to the reign of Skandagupta of the Imperial Gupta dynasty. 

It registers a grant and ends with a verse saying : ‘Whosoever will transgress 
this grant that has been assigned (shall become as guilty as) the slayer of 
a cow, the slayer of a spiritual preceptor (or) the slayer of a Brahman. A 
still earlier record placing go-hatya on the same footing as brahma hatya 
is that of Chandragupta II, grandfather of Skandagupta just mentioned. It 
bears the Gupta date 93, which is equivalent to 412 A.D. It is engraved on 
the railing which surrounds the celebrated Buddhist stupa at Sanchi, in 
Central India. This also speaks of a benefaction made by an officer of 

Chandragupta and ends as follows: “Whosoever shall interfere with this 

arrangement .. he shall become invested with (the guilt of) the slaughter of 
a cow or of a Brahman, and with (the guilt of) the five anantarya.” Here 
the object of this statement is to threaten the resumer of the grant, be he 
a Brahminist or a Buddhist, with the sins regarded as mortal by each 
community. The anantaryas arc the five mahapatakas according to Buddhist 
theology. They arc: matricide, patricide, killing an Arhat, shedding the blood 
of a Buddha, and causing a split among the priesthood. The mahapatakas 
with which a Brahminist is here threatened are only two : viz., the killing 
of a cow and the murdering of a Brahman. The latter is obviously a 
mahapataka as it is mentioned as such in all the Smritis, but the former 
has been specified only an upapalaka by Apastamba, Manu, Yajnavalkya and 
so forth. But the very fact that it is here associated with brahma-hatya and 
both have been put on a par with the anantaryas of the Buddhists shows 
that in the beginning of the fifth century A.D., it was raised to the category 
of mahapatakas. Thus go-hatya must have come to be considered a mahapataka 
at least one century earlier, i.e., about the commencement of the fourth 
century A.D.” 

The question is why should a Hindu king have come forward to 
make a law against cow-killing, that is to say, against the Laws of 
Manu? The answer is that the Brahmins had to suspend or abrogate 
a requirement of their Vedic religion in order to overcome the 
supremacy of the Buddhist Bhikshus. If the analysis is correct then 
it is obvious that the worship of the cow is the result of the struggle 
between Buddhism and Brahminism. It was a means adopted by the 
Brahmins to regain their lost position. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


350 


CHAPTER XIV 

WHY SHOULD BEEF-EATING MAKE 
BROKEN MEN UNTOUCHABLES? 


THE stoppage of beef-eating by the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins 
and the continued use thereof by the Broken Men had produced a 
situation which was different from the old. This difference lay in the 
face that while in the old situation everybody ate beef, in the new 
situation one section did not and another did. The difference was a 
glaring difference. Everybody could see it. It divided society as 
nothing else did before. All the same, this difference need not have 
given rise to such extreme division of society as is marked by 
Untouchability. It could have remained a social difference. There are 
many cases where different sections of the community differ in their 
foods. What one likes the other dislikes and yet this difference does 
not create a bar between the two. 

There must therefore be some special reason why in India the 
difference between the Settled Community and the Broken Men in 
the matter of beef-eating created a bar between the two. What can 
that be? The answer is that if beef-eating had remained a secular 
affair — a mere matter of individual taste-such a bar between those 
who ate beef and those who did not would not have arisen. 
Unfortunately beef-eating, instead of being treated as a purely secular 
matter, was made a matter of religion. This happened because the 
Brahmins made the cow a sacred animal. This made beef-eating a 
sacrilege. The Broken Men being guilty of sacrilege necessarily 
became beyond the pale of society. 

The answer may not be quite clear to those who have no idea of 
the scope and function of religion in the life of the society. They may 
ask: Why should religion make such a difference? It will be clear 
if the following points regarding the scope and function of religion 
are borne in mind. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


351 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY SHOULD BEEF-EATING... 351 


To begin with the definition 1 of religion. There is one universal 
feature which characterises all religions. This feature lies in religion 
being a unified system of beliefs and practices which (1) relate to 
sacred things and (2) which unite into one single community all those 
who adhere to them. To put it slightly differently, there are two 
elements in every religion. One is that religion is inseparable from 
sacred things. The other is that religion is a collective thing 
inseparable from society. 

The first element in religion presupposes a classification of all 
things, real and ideal, which are the subject-matter of man’s thought, 
into two distinct classes which are generally designated by two 
distinct terms the sacred and the profane, popularly spoken of as 
secular. 

This defines the scope of religion. For understanding the function 
-of religion the following points regarding things sacred should be 
noted : 

The first thing to note is that things sacred are not merely higher 
than or superior in dignity and status to those that are profane. They 
are just different. The sacred and the profane do not belong to the 
same class. There is a complete dichotomy between the two. As Prof. 
Durkhiem observes 2 : — 

“The traditional opposition of good and bad is nothing beside this; for 
the good and the bad are only iwo opposed species of the same class, 
namely, morals, just as sickness and health are two different aspects of 
the same order of facts, life, while the sacred and the profane have always 
and everywhere been conceived by the human mind as two distinct classes, 
as two worlds between which there is nothing in common.” 

The curious may want to know what has led men to see in this 
world this dichotomy between the sacred and the profane. We must 
however refuse to enter into this discussion as it is unnecessary for 
the immediate purpose we have in mind. 3 

Confining ourselves to the issue the next thing to note is that the 
circle of sacred objects is not fixed. Its extent varies infinitely from 
religion to religion. Gods and spirits are not the only sacred things. 
A rock, a tree, an animal, a spring, a pebble, a piece of wood, a house, 
in a word anything can be sacred. 

1 This definiton of religion it by Prof. E’nvile Durkhiem. See his The Elementary 
Forms of the Religious Life’ p. 47. For the discussion that follows I have drawn 
upon the same authority. 

2 Prof. Durkhiem’s The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life p.38 

3 The curious may refer to page 317 of the above book. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Things sacred are always associated with interdictions otherwise 
called taboos. To quote Prof. Durkhiem 1 again : 

“Sacred things are those which the interdictions protect and isolate; 

profane things, those to which these interdictions are applied and which 

must remain at a distance from the first.” 

Religious interdicts take multiple forms. Most important of these 
is the interdiction on contact. The interdiction on contact rests upon 
the principle that the profane should never touch the sacred. Contact 
may be established in a variety of ways other than touch. A look 
is a means of contact. That is why the sight of sacred things is 
forbidden to the profane in certain cases. For instance, women are 
not allowed to see certain things which are regarded as sacred. The 
word (i.e., the breath which forms part of man and which spreads 
outside him) is another means of contact. That is why the profane 
is forbidden to address the sacred things or to utter them. For 
instance, the Veda must be uttered only by the Brahmin and not 
by the Shudra. An exceptionally intimate contact is the one resulting 
from the absorption of food. Hence comes the interdiction against 
eating the sacred animals or vegetables. 

The interdictions relating to the sacred are not open to discussion. 
They are beyond discussion and must be accepted without question. 
The sacred is ‘untouchable’ in the sense that it is beyond the pale 
of debate. All that one can do is to respect and obey. 

Lastly the interdictions relating to the sacred are binding on all. 
They are not maxims. They are injunctions. They are obligatory but 
not in the ordinary sense of the word. They partake of the nature 
of a categorical imperative. Their breach is more than a crime. It 
is a sacrilege. 

The above summary should be enough for an understanding of the 
scope and function of religion. It is unnecessary to enlarge upon the 
subject further. The analysis of the working of the laws of the sacred 
which is the core of religion should enable any one to see that my 
answer to the question why beef-eating should make the Broken Men 
-untouchables is the correct one. All that is necessary to reach the 
answer I have proposed is to read the analysis of the working of the 
laws of the sacred with the cow as the sacred object. It will be found 
that Untouchability is the result of the breach of the interdiction 
against the eating of the sacred animal, namely, the cow. 

1 The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life p 41, Interdictions which come 
from religion must be distinguished from those which proceed from magic to a 
discussion of this subject see Ibid. p. 300. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


353 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY SHOULD BEEF-EATING... 353 


As has been said, the Brahmins made the cow a sacred animal. 
They did not stop to make a difference between a living cow and 
a dead cow. The cow was sacred, living or dead. Beef-eating was not 
merely a crime. If it was only a crime it would have involved nothing 
more than punishment. Beef-eating was made a sacrilege. Anyone who 
treated the cow as profane was guilty of sin and unfit for association. 
The Broken Men who continued to eat beef became guilty of sacrilege. 

Once the cow became sacred and the Broken Men continued to eat 
beef, there was no other fate left for the Broken Men except to be 
treated unfit for association, i.e., as Untouchables. 

Before closing the subject it may be desirable to dispose of possible 
objections to the thesis. Two such objections to the thesis appear 
obvious. One is what evidence is there that the Broken Men did eat 
the flesh of the dead cow. The second is why did they not give up 
beef-eating when the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins abandoned it. 
These questions have an important bearing upon the theory of the 
origin of untouchability advanced in this book and must therefore 
be dealt with. 

The first question is relevant as well as crucial. If the Broken Men 
were eating beef from the very beginning, then obviously the theory 
cannot stand. For, if they were eating beef from the very beginning 
and nonetheless were not treated as Untouchables, to say that the 
Broken Men became Untouchables because of beef-eating would be 
illogical if not senseless. The second question is relevant, if not 
crucial. If the Brahmins gave up beef-eating and the non-Brahmins 
imitated them why did the Broken Men not do the same? If the law 
made the killing of the cow a capital sin because the cow became 
a sacred animal to the Brahmins and non-Brahmins, why were the 
Broken Men not stopped from eating beef? If they had been stopped 
from eating beef there would have been no Untouchability. 

The answer to the first question is that even during the period 
when beef-eating was common to both, the Settled Tribesmen and 
the Broken Men, a system had grown up whereby the Settled 
Community ate fresh beef, while the Broken Men ate the flesh of the 
dead cow. We have no positive evidence to show that members of the 
Settled Community never ate the flesh of the dead cow. But we have 
negative evidence which shows that the dead cow had become an 
exclusive possession and perquisite of the Broken Men. The evidence 
consists of facts which relate to the Mahars of the Maharashtra to 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


354 


354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


whom reference has already been made. As has already been pointed 
out, the Mahars of the Maharashtra claim the right to take the dead 
animal. This right they claim against every Hindu in the village. This 
means that no Hindu can eat the flesh of his own animal when it 
dies. He has to surrender it to the Mahar. This is merely another 
way of stating that when eating beef was a common practice the 
Mahars ate dead beef and the Hindus ate fresh beef. The only 
questions that arise are : Whether what is true of the present is true 
of the ancient past? Can this fact which is true of the Maharashtra 
be taken as typical of the arrangement between the Settled Tribes 
and the Broken Men throughout India? 

In this connection reference may be made to the tradition current 
among the Mahars according to which they claim that they were given 
52 rights against the Hindu villagers by the Muslim King of Bedar. 
Assuming that they were given by the King of Bedar, the King 
obviously did not create them for the first time. They must have been 
in existence from the ancient past. What the King did was merely 
to confirm them. This means that the practice of the Broken Men 
eating dead meat and the Settled Tribes eating fresh meat must have 
grown in the ancient past. That such an arrangement should grow 
up is certainly most natural. The Settled Community was a wealthy 
community with agriculture and cattle as means of livelihood. The 
Broken Men were a community of paupers with no means of livelihood 
and entirely dependent upon the Settled Community. The principal 
item of food for both was beef. It was possible for the Settled 
Community to kill an animal for food because it was possessed of 
cattle. The Broken Men could not for they had none. Would it be 
unnatural in these circumstances for the Settled Community to have 
agreed to give to the Broken Men its dead animals as part of their 
wages of watch and ward? Surely not. It can therefore be taken for 
granted that in the ancient past when both the Settled Community 
and Broken Men did eat beef the former ate fresh beef and the latter 
of the dead cow and that this system represented a universal state 
of affairs throughout India and was not confined to the Maharashtra 
alone. 

This disposes of the first objection. To turn to the second 
objection. The law made by the Gupta Emperors was intended to 
prevent those who killed cows. It did not apply to the Broken Men. 
For they did not kill the cow. They only ate the dead cow. Their 
conduct did not contravene the law against cow-killing. The practice 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


355 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHY SHOULD BEEF-EATING... 355 


of eating the flesh of the dead cow therefore was allowed to continue. 
Nor did their conduct contravene the doctrine of Ahimsa assuming 
that it has anything to do with the abandonment of beef-eating by 
the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins. Killing the cow was Himsa. But 
eating the dead cow was not. The Broken Men had therefore no cause 
for feeling qualms of conscience in continuing to eat the dead cow. 
Neither the law nor the doctrine of Himsa could interdict what they 
were doing, for what they were doing was neither contrary to law 
nor to the doctrine. 

As to why they did not imitate the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins 
the answer is two fold. In the first place, imitation was too costly. 
They could not afford it. The flesh of the dead cow was their principal 
sustenance. Without it they would starve. In the second place, 
carrying the dead cow had become an obligaton 1 though originally 
it was a privilege. As they could not escape carrying the dead cow 
they did not mind using the flesh as food in the manner in which 
they were doing previously. 

The objections therefore do not invalidate the thesis in any way. 

• • 


1 Owing to the reform movement among the Mahars the position has become 
just the reverse. The Mahars refuse to take the dead animal while the Hindu 
villagers force them to take it. 


356 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-29 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


357 


PART VI 

UNTOUCHABILITY AND THE DATE OF ITS BIRTH 


Chapter XV. The Impure and The Untouchables. 

Chapter XVI. When did Broken Men become Untouchables ? 


358 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk 


S.K. — 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


359 


CHAPTER XV 

THE IMPURE AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 

I 

WHEN did Untouchability come into existence? The orthodox Hindus 
insist that it is very ancient in its origin. In support of their 
contention reliance is placed on the fact that the observance of 
Untouchability is enjoined not merely by the Smritis which are of 
a later date but it is also enjoined by the Dharma Sutras which are 
much earlier and which, according to certain authors, date some 
centuries before B.C. 

In a study devoted to exploring the origin of Untouchability the 
question one must begin with is : Is Untouchability as old as is 
suggested to be? 

For an answer to this question one has to examine the Dharma 
Sutras in order to ascertain what they mean when they refer to 
Untouchability and to the Untouchables. Do they mean by Untouch- 
ability what we understand by it to-day? Do the class, to which they 
refer, Untouchables in the sense in which we use the term Untouch- 
ables to-day? 

To begin with the first question. An examination of the Dharma 
Sutras no doubt shows that they speak of a class whom they call 
Asprashya. There is also no doubt that the term Asprashya does mean 
Untouchables. The question however remains whether the Asprashya 
of the Dharma Sutras are the same as the Asprashya of modern India. 
This question becomes important when it is realized that the 
Dharma., Sutras also use a variety of other terms such as Antya, 
Antyaja, Antyavasin and Bahya. These terms are also used by the 
later Smritis. It might be well to have some idea of the use of these 
terms by the different Sutras and Smritis. The following table is 
intended to serve that purpose : — 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



I. 

Asprashya 

Dharma Sutra 

Smriti 

1. Vishnu V. 104. 

1. Katyayana verses 433, 783. 


II. Antya 


Dharma Sutras 

Smriti 

1. Vasishta. (16-30) 

1 . 

Manu IV. 79; VIII. 68. 

2. Apastambha (III. I) 

2. 

Yajnavalkya I. 148. 197. 


3. 

Atri 25. 


4. 

Likhita 92. 


III. Bahya 


Dharma Sutras 

Smriti 

1. Apastambha 1.2.39.18 

1. Manu 28. 

2. Vishnu 16. 14 

2. Narada I. 155. 


IV. Antyavasin 


Dharma Sutras 


Smriti 

1. Gautama XXXI; XXIII 32 

1 . 

Manu IV. 79; X.39 

2. Vasishta XVIII. 3 

2. 

Shanti Parvan of the 
Mahabharata 141; 29-32 


3. 

Madhyamangiras (quoted 
in Mitakshara on Yaj. 
3-280 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


361 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : THE IMPURE.. UNTOUCHABLES 361 


V. Antyaja 


Dharma Sutra 


Smriti 

1. Vishnu 36.7 

1 . 

Manu IV. 61; VIII. 279 


2. 

Yajnavalkya 12.73 


3. 

Brihadyama Smriti (quoted 
by Mitakshara on Yajna- 
valkya III. 260) 


4. 

Atri. 199 


5. 

Veda Vyas 1. 12. 13. 


II 

The next question is whether the classes indicated by the terms 
Antya, Antyaja, Antyavasin and Bahya are the same as those 
indicated by the term Asprashya which etymologically means an 
Untouchable. In other words are they only different names for the 
same class of people? 

It is an unfortunate fact that the Dharma Sutras do not enable 
us to answer this question. The term Asprashya occurs in two places 
(once in one Sutra and twice in one Smriti). But not one gives an 
enumeration of the classes included in it. The same is the case with 
the term Antya. Although the word Antya occurs in six places (in 
two Sutras and four Smritis) not one enumerates who they are. 
Similarly, the word Bahya occurs in four places (in two Sutras and 
two Smritis), but none of them mentions what communities are 
included under this term. The only exception is with regard to the 
terms Antyavasin and Antyajas. Here again no Dharma Sutra 
enumerates them. But there is an enumeration of them in the Smritis. 
The enumeration of the Antyavasin occurs in the Smriti known as 
Madhyamangiras and that of the Antyajas in the Atri Smriti and 
Veda Vyas Smriti. Who they are, will be apparent from the following 
table : — 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


ANTYAVASIN 

ANTYAJA 

Madhyamangiras 

Atri 

Veda Vyas 

1. Chandala. 

1. Nata 

1. 

Chandala. 

2. Shvapaka. 

2. Meda. 

2. 

Shvapaka. 

3. Kshatta. 

3. Bhilla. 

3. 

Nata. 

4. Suta. 

4. Raj aka. 

4. 

Meda. 

5. Vaidehika. 

5. Charmakar. 

5. 

Bhilla. 

6. Magadha. 

6. Buruda. 

6. 

Rajaka. 

7. Ayogava. 

7. Kayavarta. 

7. 

Charmakar. 



8. 

Virat. 



9. 

Dasa. 



10. 

Bhatt. 



11. 

Kolika. 



12. 

Pushkar. 


From this table it is quite clear that there is neither precision nor 
agreement with regard to the use of the terms Antyavasin and 
Antyaja. For instance Chandala and Shvapaka fall in both the 
categories Antyavasin and Antyaja according to Madhyamangiras and 
Veda Vyas. But when one compares Madhyamangiras with Atri they 
fall in different categories. The same is true with regard to the term 
Antyaja. For example while (1) Chandala and (2) Shvapaka are 
Antyajas according to Veda Vyas, according to Atri they are not. 
Again according to Atri (1) Buruda and (2) Kayavarta are Antyajas 
while according to Veda Vyas they are not. Again (1) Virat (2) Dasa 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


363 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : THE IMPURE.. UNTOUCHABLES 363 


(3) Bhatt (4) Kolika and (5) Pushkar are Antyaja according to Veda 
Vyas but according to Atri they are not. 

To sum up the position reached so far : neither the Dharma Sutras 
nor the Smritis help us to ascertain who were included in the category 
of Asprashya. Equally useless are the Dharma Sutras and the Smritis 
to enable us to ascertain whether the classes spoken of as Antyavasin, 
Antyaja and Bahya were the same as Asprashya. Is there any other 
way of ascertaining whether any of these formed into the category 
of Asprashya or Untouchables? It would be better to collect together 
whatever information is available about each of these classes. 

What about the Bahyas? Who are they? What are they? Are they 
Untouchables? They are mentioned by Manu. To understand their 
position, it is necessary to refer to Manu’s scheme of social classi- 
fication. Manu divides the people into various categories. He first 1 
makes a broad division between (1) Vaidikas and (2) Dasyus. He then 
proceeds to divide the Vaidikas into four sub-divisions: (1) Those 
inside Chaturvarnya (2) Those outside Chaturvarnya (3) Vratya and 
(4) Patitas or outcastes. 

Whether a person was inside Chaturvarnya or outside, was a 
question to be determined by the Varna of the parents. If he was 
born of the parents of the same Varnas, he was inside the 
Chaturvarnya. If, on the other hand, he was born of parents of 
different Varnas i.e., he was the progeny of mixed marriages or what 
Manu calls Varna Samkara, then he was outside the Chaturvarnya. 
Those outside Chaturvarnya are further sub-divided by Manu into 
two classes. (1) Anulomas and (2) Pratilomas. Anulamas 2 were those 
whose fathers were of a higher Varna and mothers of a lower Varna. 
Pratilomas, on the other hand, were those whose fathers were of a 
lower Varna and the mothers of a higher Varna. Though both the 
Anulomas and Pratilomas were alike for the reason that they were 
outside the Chaturvarnya. Manu proceeds to make a distinction 
between them. The Anulomas, he calls Varna Bahya or shortly 
Bahyas, while Pratilomas he calls Hinas. The Hinas are lower than 
the Bahyas. But neither the Bahyas nor the Hinas does Manu regard 
as Untouchables. 


1. See Manu 1, 45 

2 Ibid 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


364 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Antya as a class is mentioned in Manu IV. 79. Manu however does 
not enumerate them. Medhatithi in his commentary suggests that 
Antya means Mlecha, such as Meda, etc. Buhler translates Antya as 
a low-caste man. 

There is thus nothing to indicate that the Antyas were Untouch- 
ables. In all probability, it is the name given to those people who 
were living in the outskirts or end (Anta) of the village. The reason 
why they came to be regarded as low is to be found in the story 
narrated in the Brahadaranyaka Upanishad (1.3) to which reference 
is made by Mr. Kane. 1 The story is that- 

“Gods and Asuras had a strike and the gods thought that they might 
rise superior to the Asuras by the Udgithana. In this occurs the passage 
‘this devata (Prana) throwing aside the sin that was death to these devatas 
(vak, etc.) sent it to ends of these devatas there; therefore one should not 
go to the people outside the Aryan pale nor to disam anta (the ends of 
the quarters) thinking, otherwise I may fall in with papmani i.e., death.” 

The meaning of Antya turns on the connotation of the phrase ‘disam 
Anta’ which occurs in the passage quoted above. If the phrase ‘ends 
of the quarters’ can be translated as meaning the end of the periphery 
of the village, without its being called a far-fetched translation, we 
have here an explanation of what Antya originally meant. It does 
not suggest that the Antyas were Untouchables. It only meant that 
they were living on the outskirts of the village. 

As to the Antyajas, what we know about them is enough to refute 
the view that they were Untouchables. Attention may be drawn to 
the following facts 2 : 

In the Shanti Parvan (109.9) of the Mahabharat there is a reference 
to Antyajas who are spoken of as Soldiers in the Army. According 
to Sarasvativiiasa, Pitamaha speaks of the seven cases of Rajakas 
included in the term Antyaja as Prakritis. That Prakritis mean trade 
guilds such as of washermen and others is quite clear from the 
Sangamner Plate of Bhillama II dated Saka 922 which records the 
grant of a village to eighteen Prakritis. Viramitrodaya says that 
Srenis mean the eighteen castes such as the Rajaka, etc., which are 
collectively called Antyajas. In view of these facts how could the 
Antyajas be said to have been regarded as the Untouchables? 

Coming to the Antyavasin, who were they? Were they Untouch- 
ables? The term Antyavasin has been used in two different 

1. Kane— History of Dharma Shastra II. Part I. p. 167. 

2. Kane— History of Dharma Shastra. Vol. II. part I. p. 70 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


365 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : THE IMPURE.. UNTOUCHABLES 365 


senses. In one sense it was applied to a Brahmachari living in the 
house of the Guru during his term of studentship. A Brahmachari 
was referred to as Antyavasin. 1 It probably meant one who was served 
last. Whatever the reason for calling a Brahmachari Antyavasin it 
is beyond dispute that the word in that connection could not connote 
Untouchability. How could it when only Brahmins, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas could become Brahmacharis. In another sense they refer 
to a body of people. But even in this sense it is doubtful if it means 
Untouchables. 

According to Vas.Dh. Sutra (18.3) they are the offspring of a Sudra 
father and Vaishya mother. But according to Manu (V.39) they are 
the offspring of a Chandala father and a Nishad mother. As to the 
class to which they belong, the Mitakshara says they are a sub-group 
of the Antyajas which means that the Antyavasin were not different 
from the Antyajas. What is therefore true of the Antyajas may also 
be taken as true of the Antyavasin. 


Ill 

Stopping here to take stock of the situation as it emerges from such 
information as we have regarding the social condition of the people 
called Antyavasin, Antya, Antyaja, as is available from ancient 
literature, obviously it is not open to say that these classes were 
Untouchables in the modern sense of the term. However, for the 
satisfaction of those who may still have some doubt, the matter may 
be further examined from another point of view. Granting that they 
were described as Asprashya we may proceed to inquire as to what 
was the connotation of the term in the days of the Dharma Sutras. 

For this purpose we must ascertain the rules of atonement 
prescribed by the Shastras. From the study of these rules we will 
be able to see whether the term Asprashya had the same connotation 
in the times of the Dharma Sutras as it has now. 

Let us take the case of the Chandalas as an illustration of the 
class called Asprashya. In the first place, it should be remembered 
that the word Chandala does not denote one single homogenous class 
of people. It is one word for many classes of people, all different from 
one another. There are altogether five different classes of Chandalas 
who are referred to in the Shastras. They are (i) the offspring of 


1. Amarkosh II Kanda Brahmabarga Verse II. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a Shudra father and a Brahmin mother, 1 (ii) the offspring of an 
unmarried woman 2 (iii) the offspring of union with a sagotra woman 3 
(iv) the offspring of a person who after becoming an ascetic turns 
back to the householder’s life 4 and (v) the offspring of a barber father 
and a Brahmin mother 5 . 

It is difficult to say which Chandala calls for purification. We shall 
assume that purification is necessary in the case of all the Chandalas. 
What is the rule of purification prescribed by the Shastras? 

Gautama in his Dharma Sutra (Chapter XIV, Verse 30) also refers 
to it in the following terms : — 

“On touching an outcaste, a Chandala, a woman impure on account of 
her confinement, a woman in her courses, or a corpse and on touching 
persons who have touched them, he shall purify himself by bathing dressed 
in his clothes.” 

Below is the text of the rule given by the Vasishta Dharma Sutra 
(Chapter IV. Verse 37) : — 

“When he has touched a sacrificial post, a pyre, a burial ground, a 
menstruating or a lately confined woman, impure men or Chandalas and 
so forth, he shall bathe, submerging both his body and his head.” 

Baudhayana agrees with Vasishta for he too in his Dharma Sutra 
(Prasna 1, Adhyaya 5, Khanda 6, Verse 5) says : — 

“On touching a tree standing on a sacred spot, a funeral pyre, a 
sacrificial post, a Chandala or a person who sells the Veda, a Brahmin 
shall bathe dressed in his clothes.” 

The following are the rules contained in Manu : — 

V. 85 : When he (the Brahmin) has touched a Chandala, a 
menstruating woman, an outcaste, a woman in childbed, 
a corpse, or one who has touched a (corpse), he becomes 
pure by bathing. 

V. 131 : Manu has declared that the flesh of an animal killed by 
dogs is pure, likewise (that) of a (beast) slain by 
carnivorous (animals) or by men of low caste (Dasya) 
such as Chandalas. 

V. 143 : He who, while carrying anything in any manner, is 

touched by an impure (person or thing), shall become 
pure, if he performs an ablution, without pulling down 
that object. 

1. According to all Dharma Sutras and Smritis including Manu Smriti. 

2& 3 According to Veda Vyas Smriti (1. 910) 

4. According to Yama quoted in Parasura Madhavya. 

5. Anusasan Parva (29-17). He is also called Matanga. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


367 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : THE IMPURE.. UNTOUCHABLES 367 


From these texts drawn from the Dharma Sutras as well as Manu, 
the following points are clear : — 

(1) That the pollution by the touch of the Chandala was observed 
by the Brahmin only. 

(2) That the pollution was probably observed on ceremonial 
occasions only. 


IV 

If these conclusions are right then this is a case of Impurity as 
distinguished from Untouchability. The distinction between the Impure 
and the Untouchable is very clear. The Untouchable pollutes all while 
the Impure pollutes only the Brahmin. The touch of the Impure causes 
pollution only on a ceremonial occasion. The touch of the Untouchable 
causes pollution at all times. 

There is another argument to which so far no reference has been 
made which completely disproves the theory that the communities 
mentioned in the Dharma Sutras were Untouchables. That argument 
emerges out of a comparison of the list of communities given in the 
Order-in-Council (which is reproduced in Chapter II) with the list 
given in this chapter prepared from the Smritis. What does the 
comparison show? As anyone can see, it shows : — 

Firstly : The maximum number of communities mentioned in the 
Smritis is only 12, while the number of communities mentioned in 
the Order-in-Council comes to 429. 

Secondly : There are communities which find a place in the Order- 
in-Council but which do not find a place in the Smritis. 1 Out of the 
total of 429 there are nearly 427 which are unknown to the Smritis. 

Thirdly : There are communities mentioned in the Smritis which 
do not find a place in the Order-in-Council at all. 

Fourthly : There is only one community which finds a place in both. 
It is the Charmakar community. 2 

Those who do not admit that the Impure are different from the 
Untouchables do not seem to be aware of these facts. But they will 
have to reckon with them. These facts are so significant and so telling 
that they cannot but force the conclusion that the two are different. 


1. Out of the 429 communities mentioned in the Order-in-Council, there are only 
3 which are to be found in the list given by the Smritis. 

2. There are also two other communities mentioned in both lists (1) Nata and 
(2) Rajaka. But according to the Order-in-Council they are Untouchables in some 
parts of the country only. The Chamar is Untouchable throughout India. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


368 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Take the first fact. It raises a very important question. 

If the two lists refer to one and the same class of people, why 
do they differ and differ so widely? How is it that the communities 
mentioned in the Shastras do not appear in the list given in the 
Order-in-Council? Contrarywise, how is it that the communities 
mentioned in the Order-in-Council are not to be found in the list given 
by the Shastras? This is the first difficulty we have to face. 

On the assumption that they refer to the same class of people, the 
question, assumes a serious character. If they refer to the same class 
of people then obviously Untouchability which was originally confined 
to 12 communities came to be extended to 429 communities! What 
has led to this vast extension of the Empire of Untouchability? If 
these 429 communities belong to the same class as the 12 mentioned 
by the Shastras why none of the Shastras mention them? It cannot 
be that none of the 429 communities were not in existence at the 
time when the Shastras were written. If all of them were not in 
existence at least some of them must have been. Why even such as 
did exist find no mention? 

On the footing that both the lists belong to the same class of people, 
it is difficult to give any satisfactory answer to these questions. If, 
on the other hand, it is assumed that these lists refer to two different 
classes of people, all these questions disappear. The two lists are 
different because the list contained in the Shastras is a list of the 
Impure and the list contained in the Order-in-Council is a list of the 
Untouchables. This is the reason why the two lists differ. The 
divergence in the two lists merely emphasizes what has been urged 
on other grounds, namely, that the classes mentioned in Shastras 
are only Impure and it is a mistake to confound them with the 
Untouchables of the present day. 

Now turn to the second. If the Impure are the same as the 
Untouchables, why is it as many as 427 out of 429 should be unknown 
to the Smritis? As communities, they must have been in existence 
at the time of the Smritis. If they are Untouchables now, they must 
have been Untouchables then. Why then did the Smritis fail to 
mention them? 

What about the third? If the Impure and the Untouchables are one 
and the same, why those communities which find a place in the 
Smritis do not find a place in the list given in the Order-in-Council? 
There are only two answers to this question. One is that though 
Untouchables at one time, they ceased to be Untouchables 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-30 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


369 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : THE IMPURE.. UNTOUCHABLES 369 


subsequently. The other is that the two lists contain names of 
communities who fall in altogether different categories. The first 
answer is untenable. For, Untouchability is permanent. Time cannot 
erase it or cleanse it. The only possible conclusion is the second. 

Take the fourth. Why should Chamar alone find a place in the lists? 
The answer is not that the two lists include the same class of people. 
If it was the true answer, then not only the Chamar but all others 
included in the list given by the Smritis should appear in both the 
lists. But they do not. The true answer is that the two lists contain 
two different classes of people. The reason why some of those in the 
list of the Impure appear in the list of the Untouchables is that the 
Impure at one time became Untouchables. That the Chamar appears 
in both is far from being evidence to support the view that there 
is ho difference between the Impure and the Untouchables. It proves 
that the Chamar who was at one time an Impure, subsequently 
became an Untouchable and had therefore to be included in both the 
lists. Of the twelve communities mentioned in the Smritis as Impure 
communities, only the Chamar should have been degraded to the 
status of an Untouchable is not difficult to explain. What has made 
the difference between the Chamar and the other impure communities 
is the fact of beef-eating. It is only those among the Impure who 
were eating beef that became Untouchables, when the cow became 
sacred and beef-eating became a sin. The Chamar is the only beef- 
eating community. That is why it alone appears in both the lists. 
The answer to the question relating to the Chamars is decisive on 
two points. It is conclusive on the point that the Impure are different 
from the Untouchables. It is also decisive on the point that it is beef- 
eating which is the root of Untouchability and which divides the 
Impure and the Untouchables. 

The conclusion that Untouchability is not the same as Impurity 
has an important bearing on the determination of the date of birth 
of Untouchability. Without it any attempt at fixing the date would 
be missing the mark. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


370 


CHAPTER XVI 

WHEN DID BROKEN MEN BECOME 
UNTOUCHABLES? 


THE foregoing researches and discussions have proved that there was 
a time when the village in India consisted of a Settled Community 
and Broken Men and that though both lived apart, the former inside 
the village and the latter outside it, there was no bar to social 
intercourse between the members of the Settled Community and the 
Broken Men. When the cow became sacred and beef-eating became 
taboo, society became divided into two — the Settled Community 
became a touchable community and Broken Men became an untouch- 
able community. When did the Broken Men come to be regarded as 
Untouchables? That is the last question that remains to be consid- 
ered. There are obvious difficulties in the way of fixing a precise date 
for the birth of Untouchability. Untouchability is an aspect of social 
psychology. It is a sort of social nausea of one group against another 
group. Being an outgrowth of social psychology which must have 
taken some time to acquire form and shape, nobody can venture to 
fix a precise date to a phenomenon which probably began as a cloud 
no bigger than man’s hand and grew till it took its final all-pervading 
shape as we know it today. When could the seed of Untouchability 
be said to have been sown? If it is not possible to fix an exact date, 
is it possible to fix an approximate date? 

An exact date is not possible. But it is possible to give an 
approximate date. For this the first thing to do is to begin by fixing 
the upper time-limit at which Untouchability did not exist and the 
lower time-limit at which it had come into operation. 

To begin with the question of fixing the upper limit the first thing 
to note is that those who are called Antyajas are mentioned in the 
Vedas. But they were not only not regarded as Untouchables but they 
were not even regarded as Impure. The following extract from Kane 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


371 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHEN DID BROKEN MEN... 371 


may be quoted in support of this conclusion. Says Kane 1 

“In the early Vedic literature several of the names of castes that are spoken 
of in the Smritis as Antyajas occur. We have Carmanna (a tanner of hides) 
in the Rig Veda (VIII.8,38) the Chandala and Paulkasa occur in Vaj. S., the 
Vepa or Vapta (barber) even in the Rig., the Vidalakara or Bidalakar 
(corresponding to the Buruda of the Smritis) occurs in the Vaj.S. and the 
Tai.Br.Vasahpalpuli (washer woman) corresponding to the Rajakas of the 
Smritis in Vaj.S. But there is no indication in these passages whether they, 
even if they formed castes, were at all Untouchables.” 

Thus in Vedic times there was no Untouchability. As to the period 
of the Dharma Sutras, we have seen that there was Impurity but 
there was no Untouchability. 

Was there Untouchability in the time of Manu? This question 
cannot be answered offhand. There is a passage 2 in which he says 
that there are only four varnas and that there is no fifth varna. The 
passage is enigmatical. It is difficult to make out what it means. Quite 
obviously the statement by Manu is an attempt by him to settle a 
controversy that must have been going on at the time he wrote. Quite 
obviously the controversy was about the status of a certain class in 
relation to the system of Chaturvarnya. Equally obvious is the point 
which was the centre of the controversy. To put briefly, the point 
was whether this class was to be deemed to be included within the 
Chaturvarnya or whether it was to be a fifth varna quite distinct 
from The original four varnas. All this is quite clear. What is, 
however, not clear is the class to which it refers. This is because 
Manu makes no specific mention of the class involved in the 
controversy. 

The verse is also enigmatical because of the ambiguity in the 
decision given by Manu. Manu’s decision is that there is no fifth 
Varna. As a general proposition it has a meaning which everybody 
can understand. But what does this decision mean in the concrete 
application to the class whose status was the subject-matter of 
controversy. Obviously it is capable of two interpretations. It may 
mean that as according to the scheme of Chaturvarna there is no 
fifth varna the class in question must be deemed to belong to one 
of the four recognized varnas. But it may also mean that as in the 
original Varna System there is no provision for a fifth varna the class 
in question must be deemed to be outside the Varna System 
altogether. 

The traditional interpretation adopted by the orthodox Hindu is that 
the statement in Manu refers to the Untouchables, that it was the 

1. Dharma Shastra Vol II. Part I. p. 165 

2. Manu X. 4 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Untouchables whose status was in controversy and that it was then- 
status which is the subject-matter of Manu’s decision. This interpre- 
tation is so firmly established that it has given rise to a division 
of Hindus into two classes called by different names, Savarnas or 
Hindus (those included in the Chaturvarna) and Avarnas or Untouch- 
ables (those excluded from the Chaturvarna). The .question is, is this 
view correct? To whom does the text refer? Does it refer to the 
Untouchables? A discussion of this question may appear to be out 
of place and remote from the question under consideration. But it 
is not so. For if the text does refer to the Untouchables then it follows 
that Untouchability did exist in the time of Manu — a conclusion 
which touches the very heart of the question under consideration. 
The matter must, therefore, be thrashed out. 

I am sure this interpretation is wrong. I hold that the passage 
does not refer to the Untouchables at all. Manu does not say which 
was the fifth class whose status was in controversy and about whose 
status he has given a decision in this passage. Was it the class of 
Untouchables or was it some other class? In support of my conclusion 
that the passage does not refer to Untouchables at all I rely on two 
circumstances. In the first place, there was no Untouchability in the 
time of Manu. There was only Impurity. Even the Chandala for whom 
Manu has nothing but contempt is only an impure person. That being 
so, this passage cannot possibly have any ‘reference to Untouchables. 
In the second place, there is evidence to support the view that this 
passage has reference to slaves and not to Untouchables. This view 
is based on the language of the passage quoted from the Narada 
Smriti in the chapter on the Occupational Theory of Untouchability. 
It will be noticed that the Narada Smritis peaks of the slaves as 
the fifth class. If the expression fifth class in the Narada Smriti refers 
to slaves, I see no reason why the expression fifth class in Manu 
Smriti should not be taken to have reference to slaves. If this 
reasoning is correct, it cuts at the very root of the contention that 
Untouchability existed in the time of Manu and that Manu was not 
prepared to include them as part of the Varna System. For the 
reasons stated, the passage does not refer to Untouchability and there 
is, therefore, no reason to conclude that there was Untouchability 
in the time of Manu. 

Thus we can be sure of fixing the upper limit for the date of the 
birth of Untouchability. We can definitely say that Manu Smriti did 
not enjoin Untouchability. There, however, remains one important 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


373 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHEN DID BROKEN MEN... 373 


question. What is the date of Manu Smriti? Without an answer to 
this question it would not be possible for the average to relate the 
existence or non-existence of Untouchability to any particular point 
in time. There is no unanimity among savants regarding the date 
of Manu Smriti. Some regard it as very ancient and some regard it 
as very recent. After taking all facts into consideration Prof. Buhler 
has fixed a date which appears to strike the truth. According to 
Buhler, Manu Smriti in the shape in which it exists now, came into 
existence in the Second Century A.D. 1 In assigning so recent a date 
to the Manu Smriti Prof. Buhler is not quite alone. Mr. Daphtary 
has also come to the same conclusion. According to him Manu Smriti 
came into being after the year 185 B.C. and not before. The reason 
given by Mr. Daphtary is that Manu Smriti has a close connection 
with the murder of the Buddhist Emperor Brihadratha of the Maurya 
dynasty by his Brahmin Commander-in-Chief Pushyamitra Sunga and 
as even that took place in 185 B.C., he concludes that Manu Smriti 
must have been written after 185 B.C. To give support to so important 
a conclusion it is necessary to establish a nexus between the murder 
of Brihadratha Maurya by Pushyamitra and the writing of Manu 
Smriti by strong and convincing evidence. Mr. Daphatry has 
unfortunately omitted to do so. Consequently his conclusion appears 
to hang in the air. The establishment of such a nexus is absolutely 
essential. Fortunately there is no want of evidence for the purpose. 

The murder of Brihadratha Maurya by Pushyamitra has unfortu- 
nately passed unnoticed. At any rate it has not received the attention 
it deserves. It is treated by historians as an ordinary incident between 
two individuals as though its origin lay in some personal quarrel 
between the two. Having regard to its consequences it was an epoch — 
making event. Its significance cannot be measured by treating it as 
a change of dynasty-the Sungas succeeding the Mauryas. It was a 
political revolution as great as the French Revolution, if not greater. 
It was a revolution — a bloody revolution-engineered by the Brahmins 
to overthrow the rule of the Buddhist Kings. That, is what the murder 
of Brihadratha by Pushyamitra means. 

This triumphant Brahmanism was in need of many things. It of 
course needed to make Chaturvarna the law of the land the validity 
of which, was denied by the Buddhists. It needed to make animal 
sacrifice, which was abolished by the Buddhists, legal. But it needed 


1. Buhler-Laws of Manu (S.B.E.) Vol. XXV. Int. CXN. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


more than this. Brahmanism in bringing about this revolution against 
the rule of the Buddhist Kings had transgressed two rules of the 
customary law of the land which were accepted by all as sacrosanct 
and inviolable. The first rule made it a sin for a Brahmin even to 
touch a weapon. The second made the King’s person sacred and 
regicide a sin. Triumphant Brahmanism wanted a sacred text, 
infallible in its authority, to justify their transgressions. A striking 
feature of the Manu Smriti is that it not only makes Chaturvarna 
the law of the land, it not only makes animal sacrifice legal but it 
goes to state when a Brahmin could justifiably resort to arms and 
when he could justifiably kill the King. In this the Manu Smriti has 
done what no prior Smriti has done. It is a complete departure. It 
is a new thesis. Why should the Manu Smriti do this? The only answer 
is, it had to strengthen the revolutionary deeds committed by 
Pushyamitra by propounding philosophic justification. This intercon- 
nection between Pushyamitra and the new thesis propounded by 
Manu shows that the Manu Smriti came into being some time after 
185 B.C., a date not far removed from the date assigned by Prof. 
Buhler. Having got the date of the Manu Smriti we can say that 
in the Second Century A.D., there was no Untouchability. 

Now to turn to the possibility of determining the lower limit to 
the birth of Untouchability. For this we must go to the Chinese 
travellers who are known to have visited India and placed on record 
what they saw of the modes and manners of the Indian people. Of 
these Chinese travellers Fah-Hian has something very interesting to 
say. He came to India in 400 A.D. In the course of his observations 
occurs the following passage 1 : — 

“Southward from this (Mathura) is the so-called middle-country 
(Madhyadesa). The climate of this country is warm and equable, without frost 
or snow. The people are very well off, without poll-tax or official restrictions. 
Only those who till the royal lands return a portion of profit of the land. 

If they desire to go, they go; if they like to stop they stop. The kings 
govern without corporal punishment; criminals arc fined, according to 
circumstances, lightly or heavily. Even in cases of repeated rebellion they 
only cut off the right hand. The King’s personal attendants, who guard him 
on the right and left, have fixed salaries. Throughout the country the people 
kill no living thing nor drink wine, nor do they eat garlic or onion, 
with the exception of Chandalas only. The Chandalas are named ‘evil 
men’ and dwell apart from others; if they enter a town or market, they 
sound a piece of wood in order to separate themselves; then, men knowing 
they are, avoid coming in contact with them. In this country they 


1. Buddhist Records in Western India by Beal. Introduction p. xxxviii. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


375 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHEN DID BROKEN MEN... 375 


do not keep swine nor fowls, and do not deal in cattle; they have no shambles 
or wine shops in their market-places. In selling they use cowrie shells. The 
Chandalas only hunt and sell flesh.” 

Can this passage be taken as evidence of the prevalence of 
Untouchability at the time of Fah-Hian? Certain parts of his 
description of the treatment given to the Chandalas do seem to lend 
support to the conclusion, that is, a case of Untouchability. 

There is, however, one difficulty in the way of accepting this 
conclusion. The difficulty arises because the facts relate to the 
Chandalas. The Chandala is not a good case to determine the 
existence or non-existence of Untouchability. The Brahmins have 
regarded the Chandalas as their hereditary enemies and are prone 
to attribute to them abominable conduct; hurl at them low epithets 
and manufacture towards them a mode of behaviour which is utterly 
artificial to suit their venom against them. Whatever, therefore, is 
said against the Chandalas must be taken with considerable reser- 
vations. 

This argument is not based on mere speculation. Those who doubt 
its cogency may consider the evidence of Bana’s Kadambari for a 
different description of the treatment accorded to the Chandalas. 

The story of Kadambari is a very complex one and we are really 
not concerned with it. It is enough for our purpose to note that the 
story is told to King Shudraka by a parrot named Vaishampayana 
who was the pet of a Chandala girl. The following passages from the 
Kadambari are important for our purpose. It is better to begin with 
Bana’s description of a Chandala settlement. It is in the following 
terms’ : — 

“I beheld the barbarian settlement, a very market-place of evil deeds. 

It was surrounded on all sides by boys engaged in the chase, unleashing 
their hounds, teaching their falcons, mending snares, carrying weapons, 
and fishing, horrible in their attire, like demoniacs. Here and there the 
entrance to their dwellings, hidden by thick bamboo forests, was to be 
inferred, from the rising of smoke of orpiment. On all sides the enclosures 
were made with skulls; (627) the dust-heaps on the roads were filled with 
bones; the yards of the huts were miry with blood, fat, and meat chopped 
up. The life there consisted of hunting; the food, of flesh; the ointment, 
of fat; the garments, of coarse silk; the couches, of dried skins; the 
household attendants, of dogs; the animals for riding, of cows; the men’s 
employment, of wine and women; the oblation to the gods, of blood; the 
sacrifice, of cattle. The place was the image of all hells.” 


1 Kadambari (Ridding’s Translation) p. 204. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


It is from such a settlement that the Chandala girl starts with 
her parrot to the palace of King Shudraka. King Shudraka is sitting 
in the Hall of Audience with his Chieftains. A portress enters the 
Hall and makes the following announcement 1 : — 

“Sire, there stands at the gate a Chandala maiden from the South, a royal 
glory of the race of that Tricamku who climbed the sky, but fell from it at 
the order of wrathful Indra. She bears a parrot in a cage, and bids me thus 
hail your majesty: “Sire, thou, like the ocean, art alone worthy to receive 
the treasures of whole earth. In the thought that this bird is a marvel and 
the treasure of the whole earth, I bring it to lay at thy feet, and desire to 
behold thee. Thou, 0 king, hast heard her message, and must decide!” so 
saying, she ended her speech. The king, whose curiosity was aroused, looked 
at the chiefs around him, and with the words ‘Why not? Bid her enter’ gave 
his permission. 

Then the portress, immediately on the king’s order ushered in the 
Candala maiden. And she entered.” 

The King and the Chieftains did not at first take notice of her. 
To attract attention she struck a bamboo on the mosaic floor to arouse 
the King. Bana then proceeds to describe her personal appearance . 2 

“Then the king, with the words, ‘Look yonder’ to his suite, gazed steadily upon 
the Candala maiden, as she was pointed out by the portress; Before her went a 
man, whose hair was hoary with age, whose eyes were the colour of the red lotus, 
whose joints, despite the loss of youth, were firm from incessant labour, whose 
form, though that of Matanga, was not to be despised, and who wore the white 
raiment meet for a court. Behind her went a Candala boy, with locks falling on 
either shoulder, bearing a cage, the bars of which, though of gold, shone like 
emerald from the reflection of the parrot’s plumage. She herself seemed by the 
darkness of her hue to imitate Krishna when he guilefully assumed a woman’s 
attire to take away the amrita seized by the demons. She was, as it were, a doll 
of sapphire walking alone; and over the blue garment, which reached to her ankle, 
there fell a veil of red silk, like evening sunshine falling on blue lotuses. The circle 
of her cheek was whitened by the ear-ring that hung from one ear, like the face of 
night inlaid with the rays of the rising moon; she had a tawny tilaka of gorocana, 
as if it were a third eye, like Parvati in mountaineer’s attire, after the fashion of 
the garb of Civa. 

She was like Cri. darkened by the sapphire glory of Narayana reflected on the 
robe on her breast; or like Rati, stained by smoke which rose as Madana was burnt 
by the fire of wrathful Civa; or like Yamuna, fleeing in fear of being drawn along 
by the ploughshare of wild Balarama; or, from the rich lac that turned her lotus 
feet into budding shoots, like Durga, with her feet crimsoned by the blood of the 
Asura Mahisha she had just trampled upon. 

Her nails were rosy from the pink glow of her fingers; the mosaic pavement 
seemed too hard for her touch, and she came forward, placing her feet like tender 
twigs upon the ground. 


1. Kadambari (Ridding’s Translation) p. 6. 

2. Ibid pp. 8-10. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


377 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHEN DID BROKEN MEN... 377 


The rays of her anklets, rising in flame-colour, seemed to encircle her as 
with the arms of Agni, as though,, by his love for her beauty, he would purify 
the strain of her birth, and so set the Creator at naught. 

Her girdle was like the stars wreathed on the brow of the elephant of 
Love; and her necklace was a rope of large bright pearls, like the stream 
of Ganga just tinged by Yamuna. 

Like autumn, she opened her lotus eyes; like the rainy season, she had 
cloudy tresses; like the circle of the Malaya Hills, she was wreathed with 
sandal; like the zodiac, she was decked with starry gems; like Cri, she had 
the fairness of a lotus in her hand; like a swoon, she entranced the heart; 
like a forest, she was endowed with living beauty; like the child of a goddess, 
she was claimed by no tribe; like sleep, she charmed the eyes; as a lotus- 
pool in a wood is troubled by elephants, so was she dimmed by her Matanga 
birth; like spirit, she might not be touched; like a letter, she gladdened the 
eyes alone; like the blossoms of spring she lacked the jati flower; her slender 
waist, like the line of Love’s bow, could be spanned by the hands; with her 
curly hair, she was like the Lakshmi of the Yaksha king in Alaka. She had 
but reached the flower of her youth, and was beautiful exceedingly. And the 
king was amazed; and the thought arose in his mind, ‘Ill-placed was the labour 
of the Creator in producing this beauty! For if she has been created as though 
in mockery of her Candala form, such that all the world’s wealth of loveliness 
is laughed to scorn by her own, why was she born in a race with which none 
can mate? Surely by thought alone did Prajapati create her, fearing the 
penalties of contact with the Matanga race, else whence this unsullied 
radiance, a grace that belongs not to limbs sullied by touch? Moreover, though 
fair in form, by the basenness of her birth, whereby she, like a Lakshmi 
of the lower world, is a perpetual reproach to the gods, she, lovely as she 
is, causes fear in Brahma, the maker of so strange a union.’ While the king 
was thus thinking the maiden, garlanded with flowers, that fell over her ears, 
bowed herself before him with a confidence beyond her years. And when she 
had made her reverence and stepped on to the mosaic floor, her attendant, 
taking the parrot, which had just entered the cage, advanced a few steps, 
and, showing it to the King, said: ‘Sire, this parrot, by name Vaicampayana, 
knows the meaning of all the castras, is expert in the practice of royal policy, 
skilled in tales, history, and Puranas, and acquinted with songs and with 
musical intervals. He recites, and himself composes graceful and incomparable 
modern romances, love-stories, plays, and poems, and the like; he is versed 
in witticisms and is an unrivalled disciple of the vina, flute, and drum. He 
is skilled in displaying the different movements of dancing, dextrous in 
painting, very bold in play, ready in resources to calm a maiden angered 
in a lover’s quarrel, and familiar with the characteristics of elephants, horses, 
men, and women. He is the gem of the whole earth; and in the thought that 
treasures belong to thee, as pearls to the ocean, the daughter of my lord 
has brought him hither to thy feet, 0 king! Let him be accepted as thine.’ 

On reading this description of a Chandala girl many questions 
arise. Firstly, how different it is from the description given by 
FaHian? Secondly Bana is a Vatsyayana Brahmin. This Vatsyayana 
Brahmin, after giving a description of the Chandala Settlement, finds 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


no compunction in using such eloquent and gorgeous language to 
describe the Chandala girl. Is this description compatible with the 
sentiments of utter scorn and contempt associated with Untouchability? 
If the Chandalas were Untouchables how could an Untouchable girl 
enter the King’s palace? How could an Untouchable be described in 
the superb terms used by Bana? Far from being degraded, the 
Chandalas of Bana’s period had Ruling Families among them. For 
Bana speaks of the Chandala girl as a Chandala princess 1 Bana wrote 
some time about 600 A.D., and by 600 A.D. the Chandalas had not 
come to be regarded as Untouchables. It is, therefore, quite possible 
that the conditions described by Fa-Hian, though bordering on 
Untouchability, may not be taken as amounting to Untouchability. 
It may only be extreme form of impurity practised by the Brahmins 
who are always in the habit of indulging in overdoing their part in 
sacerdotalism. This becomes more than plausible if we remember that 
when Fa-Hian came to India it was the reign of the Gupta Kings. 
The Gupta Kings were patrons of Brahmanism. It was a period of 
the triumph and revival of Brahmanism. It is quite possible that what 
Fa-Hian describes is not Untouchability but an extremity to which 
the Brahmins were prepared to carry the ceremonial impurity which 
had become attached to some community, particularly to the Chandalas. 

The next Chinese traveller who came into India was Yuan Chwang. 
He came to India in 629 A.D. He stayed in India for 16 years and 
has left most accurate records of journeys up and down the country 
and of the manners and customs of the people. In the course of his 
description of general characters of the cities and buildings of India, 
he says 2 : — 

“As to their inhabited towns and cities the quadrangular walls of the cities 
(or according to one text, of the various regions) are broad and high, while 
the thoroughfares arc narrow tortuous passages. The shops are on the 
highways and booths, or (inns) line the roads. Butchers, fishermen, public 
performers, executioners, and scavengers have their habitations marked by 
a distinguishing sign. They are forced to live outside the city and they sneak 
along on the left when going about in the hamlets.” 

The above passage is too short and too brief for founding a definite 
conclusion thereon. There is, however, one point about it which is 
worthy of note. Fa-Hian’s description refers to the Chandalas only 
while the description given by Yuan Chwang applies to communities 


1. Kadambari (Ridding’s Translation) p. 204. 

2. Wallers-Yuan Chwang Vol.I.p. 147. 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


379 


THE UNTOUCHABLES : WHEN DID BROKEN MEN... 379 


other than the Chandalas. This is a point of great importance. No 
such argument can be levelled against the acceptance of a description 
since it applies to communities other than the Chandalas. It is, 
therefore, just possible that when Yuan Chwang came to India, 
Untouchability had emerged. 

On the basis of what has been said above we can conclude that 
while Untouchability did not exist in 200 A.D., it had emerged by 
600 A.D. 

These are the two limits, upper and lower, for determining the birth 
of Untouchability. Can we fix an approximate date for the birth of 
Untouchability? I think we can, if we take beef-eating, which is the 
root of Untouchability, as the point to start from. Taking the ban 
on beef-eating as a point to reconnoitre from, it follows that the date 
of the birth of Untouchability must be intimately connected with the 
ban on cow-killing and on eating beef. If we can answer when cow- 
killing became an offence and beef-eating became a sin, we can fix 
an approximate date for the birth of Untouchability. 

When did cow-killing become an offence? 

We know that Manu did not prohibit the eating of beef nor did 
he make cow-killing an offence. When did it become an offence? As 
has been shown by Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar, cow killing was made a 
capital offence by the Gupta kings some time in the 4th Century A.D. 

We can, therefore, say with some confidence that Untouchability 
was born some time about 400 A.D. It is born out of the struggle 
for supremacy between Buddhism and Brahmanism which has so 
completely moulded the history of India and the study of which is 
so woefully neglected by students of Indian history. 


• •• 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-31 


380 


Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-11-2013 


BLANK 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-32 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


381 


INDEX 


Abbe Dubois : 314 

Aghnya, definition and meaning : 323 
Annals of Rajasthan : 297 f.n. 
Antyaja : 278-79 

—communities included in the term 
: 319, 361-64 

Antyas : 360-61 Antyavasin : 361-63 
Aparaka: 313 

Ashvalayana-Orahya Sutra : 326-27 
Asoka, edicts : 330-32, 341 
Asuras, language of: 299 
Atreya Brahmana, directions on the 
animal sacrifice in Yajna : 334-341 

Balakrishna Nair : 297 
Bahyas : 360,363 
Bana: 375.377-78 
Bhandarkar, D. R. : 348 
Beef-eating and untouchability : 318- 
20, 379 

Brahmins and Beef-eating : 328, 349 
Brahma : 299 
Broken Men 

-problem of : 274-75 
-among settled tribes : 276-78 
-evolution into untouchables : 315- 
20, 350 

Brihadratha : 373-74 
Buhler : 373 

Caldwell : 299 

Chandalas : 365-66, 372. 374-75, 376-79 
Chaturvarna : 306, 363, 373-74 
Cow-killing : 325-28. 347-49 

Damila and Damilla : 300 
Dasas : 292 
Dasyus : 299 


Defilement 

-causes of: 249, 251, 253, 254-55 
Notional and physical 257-58 
Dom : 301 f.n. 

Dravidians: 296 

Egypt: 253 

Fah-Hian: 374 
Fuidhirs : 282-83 

Ghurye : 301 
Goethe 

on historian’s duty Pref. : 242-43 
Gorky. Pref. : 244 
Gotra and Kula : 303, 304 
Greeks 

conception of causes of impurity : 253 

Hebrews : 255 
Hemingsway : 314 
Hereditary Untouchables 
-schedule of: 259-65 
Hinas : 363 
Holiar: 314 

Kadambari : 375 

—description of Chandala settlement 
and Chandala girl: 375-77 
Kane 

—history of Dharmasastra: 319 f.n. 
324, 345 f.n. 

Kaopoia 

—purificatory ceremony of Greeks : 254 
Kielhom: 298 
Kirate 

—origin and application : 297 

Lichavis : 297 
Lustractio pagi : 254 


D:\AMBEDKAR\VOL-07\VOL7-32 Mk S.K.— 27-09-2013X10-1 1-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mahapataka 

—Gupta inscriptions on evolution into 
: 349, 

—moral sin : 348 

Mahars : 260, 279-80, 301, 304, 354, 355 
Madhuparka 

—use and composition of : 325-26 
Manu 

—on Chandalas : 271-72, 366 
— Smriti-date of : 373, recognition of 
pollution : 256, 315, 331-32, 

340-42, 363, 366 
Mansahari : 329 
Mlecha : 299 
Mukerjee, R. K. : 332 
Mricehakatika 

—scenes depicting hatred of Buddhists 
by Hindus : 316 
Muir : 299 
Mundas : 250 

Narada Smriti : 305, 306 
Nagas : 292-98 
Newars : 297 

New Zealand, untouchability in : 253 

Oldham, C. F. 

—on Dravidians : 296, 298 
Orders-in-Council 

—Schedule of hereditary untouchables 
in India attached to the Government 
of India Act of 1935 : 259-65 
Paisachi, language and countries : 299 
Panchagavya : 258 
Panchasaradiya Seva 

—a kind of sacrifice : 325 
Pollution : 251-53, 255 

—territorial and communal : 258 
Prayaschit Mayukha : 315 
Pushyamitra Sunga : 373 

Rama Tarkavagisa : 299 
Rice, Mr. Stanley : 289-90 
Risley : 304 

Roman, notion of pollution : 254 

Saivitcs : 329 
Salindra : 297 
Sarya : 297 


Scavenging, among Aryans : 306 
Scheduled Castes, Government of India 
List. 

—Madras : 259 
—Bombay : 260 
—Bengal : 260-61 
-U. P. : 260-61 
—Punjab : 261 
—Bihar : 262 
-C. P. & Berar 262-264 
—Assam : 264 
-Orissa : 264-65 
Savamas : 372 

Segregation, period and range : 252 
Shakahari : 329 

Slavery, among Aryans : 305-307, 306 
f.n. 

Smith Vincent : 332, 348 
Societies.- 

— Untouchability in primitive : 247- 
55, 266-67 

—Evolution of: 275-76 

Tamil castes, according to nasal index : 
302 

Takhya, identification of : 297 
Thurston, 

order of castes : 302 
Todas : 251 
Tarde, Gabriel : 333 
Totem 

—Equivalent to Gotra in prim, 
societies : 303 

Tribes, nomadic and settled : 274-75 

Untouchability 

—occupational theory : 372 
—racial theory : 291-304 

Vaishnavites : 329 
Vedanta Sutra : 345 
Vedavyasa Smriti : 319 
Vegetarianism and Brahmins : 334, 349 

Walters Thomas : 347 

Yajnavalkya: 328 

Yuan Chwang : 347, 378 

Yupa, its descriptions : 335 

• • 


