z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


1 



Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 


(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd 


MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


2 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


3 


Governing Class and the Servile Class 

Nobody will have any quarrel with the abstract 
principle that nothing should be done whereby the best 
shall be superseded by one who is only better and the 
better by one who is merely good and the good by one 
who is bad 

But Man is not a mere machine. He is a human 
being with feelings of sympathy for some and antipathy 
for others. This is even true of the ‘best’ man. He too is 
charged with the feelings of class sympathies and class 
antipathies. Having regard to these considerations the 
‘best’ man from the governing class may well turn out to 
be the worst from the point of view of the servile classes. 
The difference between the governing classes and the 
servile classes in the matter of their attitudes towards 
each other is the same as the attitude a person of one 
nation has for that of another nation. 


- Dr. Ambedkar 

in ‘What Congress.... etc.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


5 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Vol. 9 


Edited 

by 

Vasant Moon 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


6 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 9 


First Editionby Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : 26 January, 1991 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 

Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : ? 3000/- 


Publisher: 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, 
Bombay-400032 

for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, 
Haryana 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


7 




Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumar i Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when 
these were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on 
the base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumar i Selja) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


8 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


9 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee, Maharashtra State 



(editorial board 

) 

1 . 

Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh 
Minister for Education 


President 

2. 

Shri Ranjit Deshmukh 
Education Minister for State 


Vice-President 

3. 

Shri R. S. Gavai 


Vice-President 

4. 

Shri Dadasaheb Rupawate 


Executive President 

5. 

Shri N. M. Kamble 


Member 

6. 

Shri Ramdas Athavale 


Member 

7. 

Shri B. C. Kamble 


Member 

8. 

Dr. P. T. Borale 


Member 

9. 

Shri Ghanshyam Talvatkar 


Member 

10. 

Shri Shankarrao Kharat 


Member 

11. 

Shrimati Shantabai Dani 


Member 

12. 

Shri Waman Nimbalkar 


Member 

13. 

Shri Prakash Ambedkar 


Member 

14. 

Shri R. R. Bhole 


Member 

15. 

Shri S. S. Rege 


Member 

16. 

Dr. Bhalchandra Phadke 


Member 

17. 

Shri Daya Pawar 


Member 

18. 

Shri Laxman Mane 


Member 

19. 

Prof. N. D. Patil 


Member 

20. 

Prof. Moreshwar Vanamali 


Member 

21. 

Prof. Janardan Waghmare 


Member 

22. 

Barrister P. G. Patil 


Member 

23. 

Dr. M. P. Mangudkar 


Member 

24. 

Prof. G. P. Pradhan 


Member 

25. 

Shri B. M. Ambhaikar 


Member 

26. 

Prof. J. C. Chandurkar 


Member 

27. 

Prof. Ashok Godghate 


Member 

28. 

Shri T. S. Shringare 


Member 

29. 

Shri T. M. Kamble 


Member 

30. 

Secretary, Education Department 


Member 

31. 

Director of Education 


Member Secretary 

32. 

Shri V. W. Moon, 0. S. D. 


Member 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd 


MK SJ 10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


10 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


11 


PREFACE 

The Ninth Volume of the speeches and writings of 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar consists of reprints of “What Congress 
and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables?” and “Mr. Gandhi 
and the Emancipation of the Untouchables”. Both these works 
now have only academic interest. They highlight the areas 
of difference of opinion between Dr. Ambedkar and Gandhiji. 

The difference could be described as two sides of the 
same coin. Both recognised and identified the problem of 
the Untouchables but differed in their methods of solving it. 
Dr. Ambedkar stressed the role of law and Constitutional 
safeguards in protecting the interests of the Scheduled Castes. 
Gandhiji treated the problem as the moral stigma to be removed 
by acts of atonements. 

The Poona Pact signed on September 24, 1932, recognised 
the social reality and solemnly affirmed that amongst Hindus 
no one was to be regarded as an Untouchable by reason of 
his birth. It also recognised the need for certain statutory 
safeguards. Later events confirmed the need for moral reforms 
and legal standards. 

The Constitution framed after Independence accepted the 
principle of reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. There is still the picturesque survival of 
reservation by nomination of a representative of the Anglo- 
Indian community. There are also adequate constitutional 
safeguards for linguistic and religious minorities. 

The Constitution is designed to promote the welfare of all 
sections of citizens constituting the pluralistic Indian society. 
It is a synthesis of the rational view of Dr. Ambedkar and the 
moral outlook of Gandhiji. Both Dr. Ambedkar and Gandhiji 
have, thus, contributed to the evolution of the modern Indian 
polity. Both were agents of change. For Dr. Ambedkar, 
constitutional and legal safeguards for protection of the 
interests of the Scheduled Castes were necessary. Reliance 
on change of heart was not enough. He agreed that law itself 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


ii 

must embody minimum moral contents. Thus, law and 
morality had to go hand in hand. There is in fact a remarkable 
compromise and combination of law and morality in the Indian 
Constitution. 

The point of view Dr. Ambedkar emphasised in “What 
Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables ?” marks 
him out as a creative reformer. His was a creative personality. 
As Jacob Bronowski points out in his “Origins of knowledge 
and Imagination”, “creative personality is always one that 
looks on the world as fit for change, and on himself as an 
instrument of change. Otherwise, what are you creating for? 
If the world is perfectly allright the way it is, you have no 
place in it. The creative personality thinks of the world as a 
canvas for change and of himself as a divine agent of change.” 

A social reformer has to point out faults in the social 
structure. If he does not speak out, he would not be a social 
reformer. Creativity also involves an element of controversy 
arising out of the conflict between the frenzy of a mathematical 
insight and the decorum of an equation. 

The ceaseless efforts of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar to rouse Indian 
Society from its deep slumber of prejudice were directed to 
the creation of new norms within the environment. They 
were designed to change the environment to create scope for 
development of the sanctity of the human personality. 

The writings and speeches of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar are 
replete with illustrations of the need for reconciling the claims 
of the society with the liberty of the individual. It is in this 
context, that the chapter on fundamental rights in the Indian 
Constitution has to be viewed. When asked what was the most 
important Article in the Indian Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar 
is reported to have referred to Article 32, which provides for 
remedies for enforcement of fundamental rights through the 
Supreme Court. Growth of public interest litigation and the 
increasing number of Writ Petitions filed in High Courts and 
in the Supreme Court have emphasised the role of law in 
social change for redesigning the environment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013 


iii 


iii 

The last 40 years have witnessed the gradual growth of 
values of equality and justice. The individual has a larger area of 
freedom and the autonomy of the individual has been enlarged. 
This is reflected in the development of entrepreneurship and 
growing pace of industrialisation. Sad to say, there has been 
abuse of freedom and insecurity in some areas. However, the 
values of equality and justice and democratic aspirations have 
become part of life in the subcontinent. 

The Government is being made increasingly aware of its 
responsibilities in the welfare state by exposure to the electoral 
processes and to the Courts under the Constitution. The poverty 
alleviation programmes, slum upgradation schemes, expansion 
of education, the role of the Press, discussions on autonomy for 
the Radio and Television, all these testify to the values now 
rooted in the social environment and political ethos. 

The India of 1947 and the India of 1991 are two different 
entities. The technologies of freedom have no doubt influenced 
the course of events. What, however, stands to the credit of 
Dr. Ambedkar and Gandhiji is that they realised the role of 
values in life and legal norms to reshape society into a nation 
by integrating different groups, communities and cultures. 
The role of values in social enquiry is seldom appreciated. 
To select proper values as legal norms is a task that calls for 
deep understanding of human nature, and the vision of the 
future. 

“A value premise should not be chosen arbitrarily,” 
says G. Myrdel in his “Value in Social Theory”, “it must 
be relevant and significant in relation to the society in 
which we live. It has, therefore, to be ascertained by an 
examination of which people actually desire. People’s 
desires are to some extent regularly founded on erroneous 
beliefs about facts and casual relations. To that extent 
a corrected value premise corresponding to which people 
would desire, if their knowledge about the world around 
them were more perfect can be construed and has 
relevance.” 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.mdd MK SJ 10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


iv 


iv 

“The wishes of human beings are relatively stable 
from age to age in so far as heredity or the physiological 
foundations are concerned. They acquire different 
experiences, however, because of the different social 
conditions in which men live. New inventions start changes 
in the behaviour of mankind. They are new stimuli to 
which human beings respond.” 

Dr. Ambedkar had the courage to differ from Gandhiji and 
Gandhiji showed the willingness to understand Dr. Ambedkar’s 
point of view and to stress the need to remove inequality as 
the basis of social organisation. The great debate between 
Dr. Ambedkar and Gandhiji is a landmark in the constitutional 
history of India. It reveals how ideas change lives. Indeed, 
ideas rule the world and ideals shape the future. One may 
quote the words of Roscoe Pound : 

“What is an ‘ideal’ as I am using the term in connection 
with the theories of nature of Law? The term comes from 
a Greek word meaning basically something one sees. 
Applied to action, it is a mental picture of what one is 
doing or why, to which end or purpose, he is doing it.” 

The ideal of justice in social organisation is the theme 
of these works which point out the inadequacies of moral 
sentiment as guides to social action. Moral sentiments to be 
effective need social and legal sanctions for enforcement. As 
documents of historical importance, it is hoped that research 
scholars and lay readers will find them useful to know that 
law without idealism is mechanical and morality without legal 
sanction is a beautiful but ineffctual angel, “beating in the void 
his luminous wings in vain,” to borrow the words of Matthew 
Arnold on the poetry of Shelley. 



(Sharad Pawar) 

Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 



WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI 
HAVE DONE TO 
THE UNTOUCHABLES 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd 


MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


vi 


BLANK 



B. R. AMBEDKAR 


(wares 

Rave A 

tRe UntowRaRles 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE 
DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


ffie&tcatton 

(11) And Naomi said. Turn again, my daughters ; why will ye go 
with me?... (12) .. .go your way... (14) And they lifted up their voice, and 
wept again, and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law; but Ruth clave unto 
her. (15) And she said, Behold thy sister-in-law is gone back unto her 
people, and unto her gods ; return thou after thy sister-in-law. (16) And 
Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave them ; or to return from following 
after thee ; for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, 
I will lodge ; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God. 
(17) Where thou diest, will I die, and there will be buried; the LORD do 
so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.” 

I know how, when we used to read the Bible together, you would be 
affected by the sweetness and pathos of this passage. While you will be 
glad to read it again you will, I am sure, ask me what made me recall 
it in this connection. I wonder if you remember the occasion when we fell 
into discussion about the value of Ruth’s statement “Thy people shall be 
my people, and thy God my God.” I have a clear memory of it and can 
well recall our difference of opinion. You maintained that its value lay 
in giving expression to the true sentiments appropriate to a perfect wife. I 
put forth the view that the passage had a sociological value and its true 
interpretation was the one given by Prof. Smith, namely, that it helped 
to distinguish modern society from ancient society. Ruth’s statement “Thy 
people shall be my people and thy God my God” defined ancient society 
by its most dominant characteristic namely that it was a society of man 
plus God while modern society is a society of men only (pray remember 
that in men I include women also). My view was not then acceptable to 
you. But you were interested enough to urge me to write a book on this 
theme. I promised to do so. For as an oriental I belong to a society which 
is still ancient and in which God is a much more important member 
than man is. The part of the conversation which is important to me at 
this stage is the promise I then made to dedicate the book to you if I 
succeeded in writing one. Prof. Smith’s interpretation had opened a new 
vista before me and I had every hope of carrying out my intention. The 
chances of developing the theme in a book form are now very remote. As 
you know, I am drawn in the vortex of politics which leaves no time for 
literary pursuits. I do not know when I shall be out of it. The feeling of 
failure to fulfil my promise has haunted me ever since the war started. 
Equally distressing was the fear that you might pass away as a war 
casualty and not be there to receive it if I were to have time to complete 
it. But the unexpected has happened. There you are, out of the throes of 
death. Here is a book ready awaiting dedication. This happy conjunction 
of two such events has suggested to me the idea that rather than postpone 
it indefinitely I might redeem my word, by dedicating this book which I 
have succeeded in bringing to completion. Though different in theme it 
is not an unworthy substitute. Will you accept it ? 

B. R. A. 


To, 


F. 


In Thy Presence is the Fulness of Joy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


XI 


WHAT 

CONGRESS AND GANDHI 
HAVE DONE 
TO 

THE UNTOUCHABLES 


BY 

B. R. AMBEDKAR 


“It may be your interest to be our 
masters, but how can it be ours to be 
your slaves ?" — Thucydides. 


[Reprint of the Edition of 1945 
by the Government of Maharashtra] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xii 


Thacker & Co’s Editions 
First Edition June 1945 
Second Edition 1946 

Government of Maharashtra’s 
First Edition January 1991 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK SJ 10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 xiii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Preface .... i 

Chapter I. -A strange Event 

Congress Takes Cognizance of the Untouchables .. 1 

Chapter II.-A Shabby Show 

Congress Abandons Its Plan .... 19 

Chapter III.-A Mean Deal 

Congress Refuses to Part with Power .... 40 

Chapter IV.-An Abject Surrender 

Congress Bets an Inglorious Retreat .. .. 103 

Chapter V.-A Political Charity 

Congress Plan to Kill by Kindness .. .. 126 

Chapter VI. -A False Claim 

Does Congress Represent All ? .. .. 146 

Chapter VII.-A False Charge 

Are Untouchables Tools of the British ? .. .. 166 

Chapter VIII.-The Keal Issue 

What the Untouchables Want .. .. 181 

Chapter IX.-A Plea to the Foreigners 

Let not Tyranny Have Freedom to Enslave .. .. 199 

Chapter X.-What do the Untouchables Say? 

Beware of Mr. Gandhi! .. .. 239 

Chapter XI.-Gandhism 

The Doom of the Untouchables .. .. 274 

Appendices .. .. 298 

Index .. .. 384 

Note on the Annexure (added by the Editor) .. .. 437 

Chapter IX (from the second edition of 1946) .. .. 439 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xiv 


Appendices 

Page 


I. Correspondence between Swami Shradhnand and Pandit 
Motilal Nehru, Secretary of the Indian National Congress 
over the former’s resignation from the Congress Committee, 
appointed in 1922 to draw up a Scheme for the Uplift of the 
Untouchables .. 298 

II. Supplementary Memorandum submitted to the Second 
Session of the Round Table Conference on behalf of the 
Untouchables in 1931. .. .. 304 

III. The Minorities Pact submitted to the Minorities Committee 

of the Round Table Conference in 1931. .. 307 

IV. Statement on Mr. Gandhi’s Threat to Fast Unto Death 

against the Prime Minister’s Award granting Separate 
Electorates to the Untouchables. .. .. 311 

V. Temple Entry in Travancore State .. .. 317 

VI. Pronouncements by or on behalf of His Majesty’s Government 
relating to the position of the Untouchables in any Scheme 
for the Constitution of India .. .. .. 323 

VII. Montagu-Chelmsford Report and the Simon Commssion on 

the injustice caused by weightage to Muslims .. 332 

VIII. Cripps Proposals of 1942 .. .. .. 334 

IX. Objections to Cripps Proposals. .. .. 336 

X. Correspondence between Lord Wavell and Mr. Gandhi in 

July 1944 .. .. .. 343 

XI. Resolutions passed by the Working Committee of the All- 
India Scheduled Castes Federation at its Meeting held in 
Madras on 23rd September 1944. .. 346 

XII. Population by Minorities in British India. .. 354 

XIII. Population by Minorities in Indian States. .. 355 

XIV. Particulars of Scheduled Castes Constituencies in regard to 

seats and voting strength Province by Province. 356 

XV. Particulars regarding elections to seats reserved for 

Scheduled Castes Province by Province. .. 366 

XVI. The Wavell Plan. .. .. .. 376 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xv 


PREFACE 

“In 1892, there took place in England a new election 
to Parliament, in which the Conservatives headed by Lord 
Salisbury lost and the Liberals headed by Mr. Gladstone 
won. The remarkable thing about this election was that 
notwithstanding the defeat of his party at the polls, Lord 
Salisbury — contrary to Parliamentary convention — refused to 
surrender his office to the leader of the Liberal Party. When 
Parliament assembled, the Queen delivered the usual gracious 
speech from the throne containing the legislative programme 
of Lord Salisbury’s Government and the usual address to Her 
Majesty was moved from the Government side. Lord Salisbury’s 
Government was an illegitimate Government. It was a challenge 
to the fundamental principle of the British Constitution, which 
recognised Parliamentary Majority as the only title deed for 
a Party’s right to form a Government. The Liberals took up 
the challenge and tabled an amendment to the address. The 
amendment sought to condemn Lord Salisbury’s Government 
for its insistence on continuing in office, notwithstanding the 
fact that it had no majority behind it. The task of moving the 
amendment was entrusted to the late Lord (then Mr.) Asquith. 
In his speech in support of the amendment, Mr. Asquith used 
the now famous phrase — “Causa finita est: Roma locuta est.” 
(Rome has spoken and the dispute must end). The phrase was 
originally used by St. Augustine but in a different context. 
It was used in the course of a religious controversy and 
had come to be used as a foundation for Papal Sovereignty. 
Mr. Asquith used it as a political maxim embodying the basic 
principle of Parliamentary Democracy. Today it is accepted 
as the fundamental principle on which Popular Government 
rests, namely, the Right of a Political Majority to Rule. It told 
instantaneously against Salisbury’s Government and must tell 
against all parties who fail at the polls wherever Parliamentary 
Democracy is in operation. 

I was reminded of this maxim when the results of the 
Elections to the Provincial Legislatures in India, which took 
place in February 1937 under the Government of India Act, 
1935, were announced. Congressmen did not actually say 
“Causafinita est: India locuta est.” But so far as the parties, 
which had opposed the Congress in the Elections, were con- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xvi 


ii 


cerned, that is what the results of the Elections seemed to, 
proclaim. Having led the Untouchables against the Congress, 
for full five years in the Round Table Conference and in the 
Joint Parliamentary Committee, I could not pretend to be 
unaffected by the results of the Elections. To me the question 
was : Had the Untouchables gone over to the Congress ? Such 
a thing was to me unimaginable. For, I could not believe that 
the Untouchables — apart from a few agents of the Congress 
who are always tempted by the Congress gold to play the part 
of the traitor — could think of going over to the Congress en 
masse forgetting how Mr. Gandhi and the Congress opposed, 
inch by inch up to the very last moment, every one of their 
demands for political safeguards. I had therefore decided to 
study the Returns of the election that took place in 1937. 

While I was convinced that such a study was of great 
necessity from the point of view of the Untouchables, the work 
proceeded at a snail’s pace. This was due to three causes. The 
work had to be kept aside for some time to give precedence to 
other literary projects, the urgency of which demanded a degree 
of priority which it was not possible to refuse. Secondly, the Blue 
Book on the Election Results of 1937, which was submitted to 
Parliament soon after the elections had taken place and which 
is the primary source for figures regarding the elections, proved 
inadequate and insufficient for my purpose. It does not give 
separately figures showing how the Scheduled Castes electors 
voted and how many votes the Scheduled Caste candidates got. 
It gives figures showing how electors in different constituencies 
voted, without making any distinction between Hindu voters 
and the Scheduled Castes voters. Circular letters had therefore 
to be issued to the various Provincial Governments requesting 
them to send me the figures showing distribution of voting 
by Scheduled Caste electors and the number of votes secured 
by each Scheduled Caste candidate. This inevitably delayed 
the work. Thirdly, the examination of these election returns 
proved a very laborious task as the statistical tables given in 
the Appendices to this book will show. 

The work thus lingered on. I regret very much this delay. 
For I know how much mischief has been done by the Congress 
during the interval. The Congress has advertised the election 
results to bolster up its claim to represent the Untouchables. 
The main point in the advertisement is that out of 151 seats 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


XVII 


iii 


assigned to the Scheduled Castes the Independent Labour 
Party which was organized by me got only 12 seats and the 
rest of the seats were captured by the Congress. This mess 
is served out from the Congress kitchen as conclusive proof 
to show that the Congress represents the Untouchables. This 
false propaganda seems to have gone home in some quarters. 
Even a man like Mr. H. N. Brailsford has reproduced in his 
‘Subject India’ this absurd Congress version, without any 
attempt at verification and with apparent acceptance of its 
truth. I am sure that the results of the elections as set out in 
this book will hit the nail squarely on the head of this false 
propaganda. For, the Congress version of the results of the 
election is an utter perversion. As a matter of fact the results 
of 1937 Election conclusively disprove the Congress claim to 
represent the Untouchables. Far from supporting the Congress 
version the results of the Election show : (1) that out of 151 the 
Congress got only 73 seats; (2) that the Untouchables in almost 
every constituency fought against the Congress by putting up 
their own candidates; (3) that the majority of 73 seats won by 
the Congress were won with the help of Hindu votes and they 
do not therefore in any way represent the Scheduled Castes; 
and (4) that of 151 seats those won by the Congress in, the 
real sense i.e., with the majority of votes of the Scheduled 
Castes, were only 38. As to the Independent Labour Party it 
was started in 1937 just a few months before the elections. 
It functioned only in the Province of Bombay. There was no 
time to organize branches in other Provinces. Elections on the 
ticket of the Independent Labour Party were fought only in the 
Province of Bombay and there the Independent Labour Party 
far from being a failure obtained an astonishing degree of 
success. Out of the 15 seats assigned to the Scheduled Castes 
in Bombay Presidency it captured 13 and in addition it won 
2 general seats. I am therefore glad that at long last I have 
succeeded in completing the work which proves beyond the 
shadow of doubt that the story that the Congress captured 
all the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and that the 
Independent Labour Party was a failure, is a wicked lie. I 
trust that the book will prove interesting and instructive for 
all those who are interested in the subject and who desire to 
know the truth. 

Before closing this preface, I wish to express my gratitude 
to those from whom I have received assistance in one form or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xviii 


iv 


another. I am grateful to the Provincial Governments for the 
troubles they have taken in responding to my circular and 
sending me additional facts and figures which I had called 
for. My thanks are also due to Mr. Karan Singh Kane, B.A., 
M.L.A., at one time, Parliamentary Secretary in the U. P. 
Congress Government, for the help he has rendered in the 
most laborious task of preparing the tables.” 

The reader who reads the above preface and compares it 
with the table of contents will at once find that the book deals 
with topics which lie far outside its boundary. The curious may 
like to know how the foregoing part of the preface is related to 
the table of contents. The explanation lies in the fact that the 
book in its present final form is quite different from what it 
was in its original form. In its original form it covered in very 
brief compass matter now dealt with on a vastly bigger scale in 
Chapters IV, V, VI, VII and IX and the statistical appendices. 
The foregoing part of the preface belonged to the book in its 
original form. That is why I have put it in inverted commas. 
The curious may also like to know why the final form of the 
book came to be so different from the original. The explanation 
is quite simple. The proofs of the book in its original form were 
seen by a friend and coworker. He was dissatisfied with the 
scope of the book and insisted that it is not enough to deal 
with election results to expose the Congress claim to represent 
the Untouchables. I must do more. I must expose the efforts 
of the Congress and Mr. Gandhi to improve the lot of the 
Untouchables for the information of the Untouchables and also 
of the foreigners whom the Congress had deluded into accepting 
its side by misrepresentation of facts. Besides the difficulties 
arising out of the fact that the book was already in proof form, 
this was a tall order and appeared to be beyond me having 
regard to other claims on my time. He would not, however, 
give way and I had therefore to accept his plan. The original 
work which would have been about 75 pages in print had to 
be completely recast and enlarged. The book in the present 
form is a complete transformation. It records the deeds of 
the Congress and Mr. Gandhi from 1917 to date in so far as 
they touch the problem of the Untouchables. Much is written 
about the Congress, far more about Mr. Gandhi. But no one 
has so far told the story of what they have done about the 
Untouchables. Everyone knows that Mr. Gandhi values more 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


XIX 


V 


his reputation as the saviour of the Untouchables than his 
reputation as the champion of Swaraj or as the protagonist 
of Ahimsa. At the Round Table Conference he claimed to be 
the sole champion of the Untouchables and was not even 
prepared to share the honour with anyone else. I remember 
what a scene he created when his claim was contested. 
Mr. Gandhi does not merely claim for himself the championship 
of the Untouchables. He claims similar championship for the 
Congress. The Congress, he says, is fully pledged to redress 
the wrongs done to the Untouchables and argues that any 
attempt to give political safeguards to the Untouchables is 
unnecessary and harmful. It is therefore a great pity that no 
detailed study of these claims by Mr. Gandhi and the Congress 
has been undertaken so far. 

With the Hindus who have been blind devotees of 
Mr. Gandhi this study, although it is the first of its kind, 
will not find favour: indeed it is sure to provoke their wrath. 
How can it be otherwise when the conclusion arrived at is 
“Beware of Mr. Gandhi” ? Looking at it from a wider point of 
view, there is no reason for the Hindus to be enraged about 
it. The Untouchables are not the only community in India 
which thinks of Mr. Gandhi in these terms. The same view 
of Mr. Gandhi is entertained by the Muslims, the Sikhs and 
the Indian Christians. As a matter of fact, the Hindus should 
cogitate over the question and ask : why no community trusts 
Mr. Gandhi although he has been saying that he is the friend 
of the Muslims, Sikhs and the Scheduled Castes and what is 
the reason for this distrust ? In my judgment, there cannot be 
a greater tragedy for a leader to be distrusted by everybody 
as Mr. Gandhi is today. I am however certain that this is 
not how the Hindus will react. As usual, they will denounce 
the book and call me names. But as the proverb says: “The 
caravan must pass on, though the dogs bark.” In the same 
way, I must do my duty, no matter what my adversaries may 
have to say. For as Voltaire observed: Who writes the history 
of his own time must expect to be attacked for everything he 
has said, and for everything he has not said: but these little 
drawbacks should not discourage a man who loves truth and 
liberty, expects nothing, fears nothing, asks nothing and limits 
his ambition to the cultivation of letters.” 

The book has become bulky. It may be said that it suffers 
by reason of over-elaboration and even by repetition. I am 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-01.indd MK 


SJ 


10-1-2013/YS-13-11-2013 


xx 


vi 


aware of this. But I have written the book especially for the 
Untouchables and for the foreigners. On behalf of neither could 
I presume knowledge of the relevant facts. For the particular 
audience I have in view, it is necessary for me to state both 
facts as well as arguments and pay no regard to the artistic 
sense or the fastidious taste of a cultivated and informed class 
of readers. 

As it is my intention to make the book a complete 
compendium of information regarding the movement of the 
Untouchables for political safeguards, I have added several 
appendices other than those of statistical character. They 
contain relevant documents both official and non-official which 
have a bearing upon the movement. Those who are interested 
in the problem of the Untouchables will, I believe, be glad 
to have this information ready at hand. The general reader 
may complain that the material in the Appendices is much 
too much. Here again, I must state that the Untouchables are 
not likely to get the information which to the general reader 
may be easily accessible. The test adopted is the need of the 
Untouchables and not of the general reader. 

One last word. The reader will find that I have used 
quite promiscuously in the course of this book a variety of 
nomenclature such as Depressed Classes, Scheduled Castes, 
Harijans and Servile Classes to designate the Untouchables. I 
am aware that this is likely to cause confusion especially for 
those who are not familiar with conditions in India. Nothing 
could have pleased me better than to have used one uniform 
nomenclature. The fault is not altogether mine. All these names 
have been used officially and unofficially at one time or other 
for the Untouchables. The term under the Government of 
India Act is ‘Scheduled Castes.’ But that came into use after 
1935. Before that they were called ‘Harijans” by Mr. Gandhi 
and ‘Depressed Classes’ by Government. In a flowing situation 
like that it is not possible to fix upon one name, which may 
be correct designation at one stage and incorrect at another. 
The reader will overcome all difficulties if he will remember 
that these terms are synonyms and represent the same class. 

I am grateful to Professor Manohar Chitnis for the 
preparation of the Index and to Mr. S. C. Joshi for help in 
correcting the proofs. 

B. R. Ambedkar. 


24th June 1945. 
22, Prithviraj Road, 
New Delhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


1 


CHAPTER I 

A STRANGE EVENT 

I 

In the annual session of the Indian National Congress held at 
Calcutta in the year 1917 a strange event took place. In that 
session the Congress passed the following resolution : — 

“This Congress urges upon the people of India the 
necessity, justice and righteousness of removing all 
disabilities imposed by custom upon the Depressed Classes, 
the disabilities being of a most vexatious and oppressive 
character, subjecting those classes to considerable hardship 
and inconvenience.” 

The President of the session was Mrs. Annie Besant. The 
resolution was moved by Mr. G. A. Natesan of Madras and was 
supported by Mr. Bhulabhai Desai from Bombay, by Mr. Rama 
Iyer from Malabar and by Mr. Asaf Ali from Delhi. In moving 
the resolution, Mr. Natesan said : — 

“Ladies and Gentlemen, — This question has been receiving 
great attention for years in other platforms ; but in view of 
the unique character of this Congress, the Subjects Committee 
thought it necessary, after having framed a scheme of self- 
government for India, that we should complete that by asking 
us to prepare ourselves for the task of self-government. The 
first great duty is to see that all inequalities and injustices 
are removed. You will see that this resolution specially asks 
you to remove disabilities of a most vexatious and oppressive 
character. Without injuring your religious feelings, without 
giving up all that is best in your religious tradition, I think 
the Congress has a right to ask of you and of me and of others 
elsewhere that such absurd restrictions as the non-admission 
of these people to schools should be removed. The Congress 
has also a claim upon all human beings to see that in some 
portions of the country where these people are refused even the 
use of common well, these restrictions should disappear... In 
attempting to elevate ourselves and in trying to remove these 
galling restrictions we are but elevating Indian manhood; 
and when Responsible Self-Government is to be given to us 
we shall be in a position to say that Indians of all classes, 
of all creeds, have the fullest rights, the commonest social 
rights, have free access to all schools, to all institutions so 
that Indian manhood may develop in all its truest, best and 
noblest traditions.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


2 


2 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Bhulabhai Desai in supporting the resolution pointed 

out that : — 

“The disabilities under which some of our brethren suffer 
are a great blow to the equality and brotherhood of man that 
we preach. From the great height of the resolution that you 
have passed this morning, with what face will we approach 
the British Democracy or any other power if we are unable 
to uplift our own brethren ? They will say ‘What lies in your 
own power, the obliteration of the social degradation of a 
section of your own people, you have been unable to do !’ 

We can do it by self-help and by self-help alone and in this 
matter we need not approach any other power but ourselves. 
That proves the necessity of the great forward step that this 
Congress has taken in allowing this resolution to be moved 
before you.... The existence of this great bane is an insult 
to the name of Hinduism. Therefore, both on the ground of 
necessity and on the ground of justice, as well as on the 
ground of righteousness, for the truth that you cherish, how 
can you deny them what this resolution demands, when the 
justice lies in your own hands ? And if you fail to do that, 
with what justice, with what face, will you demand Self- 
Government ?” 

Mr. Rama Iyer said: — 

“This... resolution calls for social freedom by which we 
shall shatter the shackles that bind the lower classes. They 
are the foot of the nation and if you and I would climb 
the hill of Home Rule, we must first shatter the shackles 
on our feet and then and then only will Home Rule come 
to us... You cannot be political democrats and at the same 
time social autocrats. Remember that a man, a social slave, 
cannot be politically a free man. We all have come here to 
see the vision of United India, not only politically united but 
united all along the line... Therefore, let those of us, who are 
Brahmins, who belong to the higher castes, go to our villages 
and shatter the shackles of the low castes, people who are 
struggling against our own men — the social bureaucrats of 
our own land.” 

Mr. Asaf Ali observed that : — 

“The problem of the Depressed Classes was one of the 
most difficult of all. They had been crying shame upon 
the arbitrary and autocratic action of the bureaucratic 
bunglers, but now it was the turn of the Depressed 
Classes — the Untouchables — to cover them, Indians, with 
shame. There were many millions of these victims of 
misfortune who had been plying their degraded trades in 
utter muteness for thousands of years, never emerging 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


3 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 3 

A STRANGE EVENT 

from the abyss of degradation into which the cruel and 
utterly unjustified customs of the country had hurled them. 
Whether it was the spring-time of hope, or the summer of 
realisation to others, to these unfortunate creatures it was 
always the winter of black despair. It seemed a cruel irony 
of fate that those who were vociferously clamouring for the 
attainment or preservation of human rights themselves were 
so little mindful of the legitimate rights of others under 
them. Was it just or fair that a mute section of humanity 
should be left to suffer the very wrongs for whose redress 
others were shedding their blood in the battlefield ? Why, 
even the ‘untouchables,’ in spite of all that cruel custom had 
subjected them to, were human beings and children of the 
soil, in whose veins coursed the self-same ‘red-blood’ as in the 
veins of those who arrogated superiority to themselves. The 
Depressed Classes were entitled to the same privileges as their 
betters in worldly circumstances and could not be debarred 
from the birthright of man. It was a standing reproach to 
the Indians that they had any Depressed Classes at all, and 
it was for the extinction of this reproach that they prayed.” 

Many people would wonder why I describe the passing of the 
Resolution by the Congress moved and supported in such eloquent 
terms, as a strange event. But those who know the antecedents 
will admit that it is not an improper description. It was strange 
for many reasons. 

In the first place, the President of the Session was the late 
Mrs. Annie Besant. She was a well-known public figure and had 
many things for which she will be remembered by the future 
historian of India. She was the founder of the Theosophical Society 
which has its Home at Adyar. Mrs. Annie Besant was well-known 
for rearing up Mr. Krishnamurti, the son of a Brahmin retired 
Registrar for a future Massiah. Mrs. Annie Besant was known 
as the founder of the Home Rule League. There may be other 
things for which friends of Mrs. Annie Besant may claim for her 
a place of honour. But I don’t know, that she was ever a friend 
of the Untouchables. So far as I know she felt great antipathy 
towards the Untouchables. Expressing her opinion on the question 
whether the children of the Untouchables should or should not be 
admitted to the common school, Mrs. Annie Besant in an article 
headed ‘The Uplift of the Depressed Classes’ which appeared in 
the Indian Review for February 1909 said : — 

“In every nation we find, as the basis of the social, Pyramid, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


4 


4 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a large class of people, ignorant, degraded, unclean in 
language and habits, people, who perform many tasks which 
are necessary for Society, but who are despised and neglected 
by the very Society to whose needs they minister. In England, 
this class is called the ‘submerged tenth,’ forming, as it does, 
one-tenth of the total population. It is ever on the verge of 
starvation, and the least extra pressure sends it over the 
edge. It suffers chronically from under-nutrition, and is a 
prey to the diseases which spring therefrom. It is prolific, like 
ail creatures in whom the nervous system is of a low type, 
but its children die off rapidly, ill-nourished, rickety, often 
malformed. Its better type consists of unskilled labourers, who 
perform the roughest work, scavengers, sweepers, navvies, 
casual dock-labourers, costermongers ; and into it, forming its 
worse type, drift all the wastrels of Society, the drunkards, 
the loafers, the coarsely dissolute, the tramps, the vagabonds, 
the clumsily criminal, the ruffians. The first type is, as a 
rule, honest and industrious; the second ought to be under 
continued control, and forced to labour sufficiently to earn 
its bread. In India, this class forms one-sixth of the total 
population, and goes by the generic name of the ‘Depressed 
Classes.’ It springs from the aboriginal inhabitants of the 
country, conquered and enslaved by the Aryan invaders,... 
It is drunken and utterly indifferent to cleanliness, whether 
of food, person or dwelling; but marriage is accompanied 
with some slight formality, children are kindly treated, and 
there is very little brutality, violence or criminality. Criminal 
communities, such as hereditary thieves, live apart, and do 
not mingle with the scavengers, sweepers, husbandmen and 
the followers of other simple crafts who make up the huge 
bulk of the depressed. They are gentle, docile, as a rule 
industrious, pathetically submissive, merry enough when not 
in actual want, with a bright though generally very limited 
intelligence ; of truth and the civic virtues they are for the 
most part utterly devoid — how should they be anything 
else ? — but they are affectionate, grateful for the slightest 
kindness, and with much ‘natural religion.’ In fact, they offer 
good material for simple and useful though humble civic life,... 

“What can be done for them by those who feel the barbarity 
of the treatment meted out to them, by those who feel that 
the Indians who demand freedoms should show respect to 
others, and give to others a share of the consideration they 
claim for themselves ? 

“Here, as everywhere, education is the lever by which we 
may hope to raise them, but a difficulty arises at the outset, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


5 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 5 

A STRANGE EVENT 

for one class of the community, moved by a noble feeling of 
compassion and benevolence, but not adding thereto a careful 
and detailed consideration of the conditions, demands, for the 
children of the pariah community admission to the schools 
frequented by the sons of the higher classes, and charges with 
lack of brotherhood those who are not in favour of this policy. 

It becomes, therefore, necessary to ask whether brotherhood 
is to mean levelling down, and whether it is usual in family 
to treat the elder children and the babies in exactly the 
same way. It is a zeal not according to knowledge — and 
not according to nature — which would substitute equality for 
brotherhood, and demand from the cultured and refined that 
they should forfeit the hardly won fruits of the education 
of generations, in order to create an artificial equality, as 
disastrous to the progress of the future as it would be useless 
for the improvement of the present. The children of the 
depressed classes need, first of all, to be taught cleanliness, 
outside decency of behaviour, and the earliest rudiments of 
education, religion and morality. Their bodies, at present, 
are ill-odorous and foul with the liquor and strong-smelling 
food out of which for generations they have been built up ; 
it will need some generations of purer food and living to 
make their bodies fit to sit in the close neighbourhood of a 
school-room with children who have received bodies from an 
ancestry trained in habits of exquisite personal cleanliness, 
and fed on pure food-stuffs. We have to raise the Depressed 
Classes to a similar level of physical purity, not to drag down 
the clean to the level of the dirty, and until this is done, 
close association is undesirable. We are not blaming these 
children, nor their parents, for being what they are ; we 
are stating a mere palpable fact. The first daily lesson in a 
school for these children should be a bath, and the putting 
on of a clean cloth ; and the second should be a meal of clean 
wholesome food ; those primary needs cannot be supplied in 
a school intended for children who take their daily bath in 
the early morning and who come to school well-fed. 

“Another difficulty that faces teachers of these children 
are the contagious diseases that are bred from first ; to take 
one example, eye-disease, wholly due to neglect, is one of the 
most common and ‘catching’ complaints among them. In our 
Panchama schools in Madras, the teachers are ever on the 
alert to detect and check this, and the children’s eyes are 
daily washed and disease is thus prevented. But is it to be 
expected that fathers and mothers, whose daily care protects 
their children from such dirty diseases should deliberately 
expose them at school to this infection ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Nor are the manner and habits of these forlorn little 
ones desirable things to be imitated by gently-nurtured 
children. Good manners, for instance, are the result of 
continual and rigid self-control, and of consideration for the 
comfort and convenience of others ; children learn manners 
chiefly by imitation from well-bred parents and teachers 
and, secondarily, by suitable precept and reproof. If, at the 
school, they are to be made to associate with children not 
thus trained, they will quickly fall into the ways which they 
see around them. For, until good habits are rendered fixed 
by long practice, it is far easier to be slipshod than accurate, 
to be careless than careful. Ought the children of families in 
which good manners and courtesy are hereditary, to be robbed 
of their heritage, a robbery that enriches no one, but drags 
the whole nation down ? Gentle speech, well-modulated voice, 
pleasant ways, these are the valuable results of long culture, 
and to let them be swamped out is no true brotherhood.... 

“In England, it has never been regarded as desirable to 
educate boys or girls of all classes side by side, and such 
grotesque equalising of the unequal would be scouted. Eton 
and Harrow are admittedly the schools for the higher classes ; 
Rubgy and Winchester are also schools for gentlemen’s sons, 
though somewhat less aristocratic. Then come a number of 
schools, frequented chiefly by sons of the provincial middle 
class. Then the Board Schools, where the sons of artisans 
and the general manual labour classes are taught ; and below 
all these, for the waifs and strays, are the ‘ragged schools,’ 
the name of which indicates the type of their scholars, and 
the numerous charitable institutions. A man in England who 
proposed that ragged school-children should be admitted to 
Eton and Harrow would not be argued with, but laughed 
at. Here, when a similar proposition is made in the name 
of brotherhood, people seem ashamed to point out frankly 
its absurdity, and they do not realise that the proposal is 
merely a violent reaction against the cruel wrongs which 
have been inflicted on the Depressed Classes, the outcry 
of an awakened conscience, which has not yet had time 
to call right reason to guide its emotions. It is sometimes 
said that Government schools pay no attention to social 
differences ; therein they show that they are essentially 
‘foreign’ in their spirit. They would not deal so with the 
sons of their own people, though they may be careless of 
the sons of Indians, and lump them all together, clean and 
dirty alike. It is very easy to see the differences of ‘tone’ in 
the youths when only the sons of the cultured classes are 
admitted to a school, and it is to the interest of the Indians 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


7 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 7 

A STRANGE EVENT 

that they should send their sons where they are guarded 
from coarse influences as Englishmen guard their own sons 
in England.” 

•k -k -k 

The second reason why one is justified in describing the 
passing of this resolution as a strange event lies in the fact that 
it was entirely opposed to the declared policy of the Congress. In 
these days when the “Constructive Programme” of the Congress 
is hawked from every street and at all times when the Congress 
is resting after an active campaign of non-co-operation and civil 
disobedience, this statement may well cause surprise to present 
day Congressmen and their friends. The following extracts from 
the addresses of the Presidents who presided at the Annual 
Sessions of the Congress will suffice to bring home the fact that 
the Congress policy was to give no place to questions of Social 
Reform in the aims and objects of the Congress. 

To begin with, Mr. Dadabhai Naoroji who presided at the 
Second Session of the Indian National Congress held in Calcutta 
in the year 1886. In this presidential address he referred to the 
Congress attitude towards Social Reform and said : — 

“It has been asserted that this Congress ought to take 
up questions of social reform (Cheers and cries of ‘Yes, Yes’) 
and our failure to do this has been urged as a reproach 
against us. Certainly no member of this National Congress 
is more alive to the necessity of social reform than I am ; 
but, Gentlemen, for everything there are proper times, proper 
circumstances, proper parties and proper places (Cheers); 
we are met together as a political body to represent to our 
rulers our political aspirations, not to discuss social reforms, 
and if you blame us for ignoring these, you should equally 
blame the House of Commons for not discussing the abstruser 
problems of mathematics or metaphysics. But, besides this, 
there are here Hindus of every caste, amongst whom, even 
in the same province, customs and social arrangements differ 
widely — there are Mahomedans and Christians of various 
denominations, Parsis, Sikhs, Brahmos and what not — men 
indeed of each and of all those numerous classes which 
constitute in the aggregate the people of India. (Loud Cheers). 
How can this gathering of all classes discuss the social 
reforms needed in each individual class ?... Only the members 
of that class can effectively deal with the reforms therein 
needed. A National Congress must confine itself to questions 
in which the entire nation has a direct participation, and it 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

must leave the adjustment of social reforms and other class 
questions to Class Congresses....” 

The subject was again referred to by the Hon. Mr. Budruddin 
Tyabji who presided over the Third Annual Session of the Congress 
held in 1887. Mr. Tyabji observed : — 

“...It has been urged — solemnly urged — as an objection 
against our proceedings — that this Congress does not 
discuss the question of Social Reforms... I must confess 
that the objection seems to me strange, seeing that this 
Congress is composed of the representatives, not of any one 
class or community, not of one part of India, but of all the 
different parts, and of all the different classes, and of all 
the different communities of India. Whereas any question of 
Social Reform must of necessity affect some particular part 
or some particular community of India only and, therefore, 
Gentlemen, it seems to me, that although we, Mussalmans, 
have our own social problems to solve, just as our Hindu and 
Parsi friends have theirs, yet these questions can be best 
dealt with by the leaders of the particular communities to 
which they relate (Applause). I, therefore, think, Gentlemen, 
that the only wise and, indeed, the only possible course we 
can adopt is to confine our discussions to such questions as 
affect the whole of India at large, and to abstain from the 
discussion of questions that affect a particular part or a 
particular community only.” 

The third occasion when the subject was referred to was in 
1892, when Mr. W.C. Bannerjee in his Presidential address to the 
Eighth Session of the Congress gave expression to the following 
sentiments : — 

“Some of our critics have been busy in telling us, thinking 
they knew our affairs better than we know them ourselves, 
that we ought not to meddle with political matters, but 
leaving politics aside devote ourselves to social subjects 
and so improve the social system of our country ; I am one 
of those who have very little faith in the public discussion 
of social matters ; those are things which I think, ought 
to be left to the individuals of a community who belong to 
the same social organisation to do what they can for its 
improvement. We know how excited people become when 
social subjects are discussed in public. Not long ago we 
had an instance of this when what was called the Age of 
Consent Bill was introduced into the Viceregal Legislative 
Council. I do not propose to say one word as to the merits 
of the controversy that arose over that measure, but I 
allude to it to illustrate how apt the public mind is to get 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


9 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 9 

A STRANGE EVENT 

agitated over these social matters if they are discussed in a 
hostile and unfriendly spirit in public... I may point out that 
we do not all understand in the same sense what is meant 
by social reform. Some of us are anxious that our daughters 
should have the same education as our sons, that they should 
go to Universities, that they should adopt learned professions ; 
others who are more timid would be content with seeing 
that their children are not given in marriage when very 
young, and that child widows should not remain widows all 
the days of their lives. Others more timid still would allow 
social problems to solve themselves. ..the Congress commenced 
and has since remained, and will, I sincerely trust, always 
remain as a purely political organization devoting its energies 
to political matters and political matters only. I am afraid 
that those whether belonging to our own country or to any 
other country, who find fault with us for not making social 
subjects a part of our work, cherish a secret wish that we 
might all be set by the ears, as we are all set by the ears by 
the Age of Consent Bill, and that thus we might come to an 
ignominious end. They mean us no good, and when we find 
critics of that description talking of the Congress as only fit 
to discuss social problems, I think the wider the berth we 
give them, the better...” 

“I, for one, have no patience with those who say we shall 
not be fit for political reform until we reform our social 
system. I fail to see any connection between the two. Let me 
take, for instance, one of the political reforms which we have 
been suggesting year after year viz., the separation of judicial 
from executive functions in the same officer. What possible 
connection can there be between this, which is a purely 
political reform and social reform ? In the same way, take 
the Permanent Settlement which we have been advocating, 
the amendment of the law relating to forests and other such 
measures ; — and I ask again, what have these to do with 
social reform ? Are we not fit for them because our widows 
remain unmarried and our girls are given in marriage earlier 
than in other countries ? because our wives and daughters do 
not drive about with us visiting our friends ? because we do 
not send our daughters to Oxford or Cambridge ? (Cheers.)” 

The last occasion when a Congress President is found to 
refer to this subject was in 1895 when the Congress Session 
was held in Poona and was presided over by Mr. Surrendranath 
Bannerjee. Touching upon the subject, in his presidential address, 
Mr. Bannerjee said : — 

“We cannot afford to have a schism in our camp. Already 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


10 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

they tell us that it is a Hindu Congress, although the 
presence of our Mahomedan friends completely contradicts 
the statement. Let it not be said that this is the Congress 
of one social party rather than that of another. It is the 
Congress of United India, of Hindus and Mahomedans, of 
Christians, of Parsis and of Sikhs, of those who would reform 
their social customs and those who would not. Here we stand 
upon a common platform — here we have all agreed to bury 
our social and religious differences and recognise the one 
common fact that being subjects of the same Sovereign and 
living under the same Government and the same political 
institutions, we have common rights and common grievances. 
And we have called forth this Congress into existence with 
a view to safeguard and extend our rights and redress our 
grievances. What should we say of a Faculty of Doctors who 
fell out, because though in perfect accord as to the principles 
of their science, they could not agree as to the age at which 
they should marry their daughters, or whether they should 
remarry their widowed daughters or not... Ours is a political 
and not a social movement ; and it cannot be made a matter 
of complaint against us that we are not a social organization 
any more than it can be urged against any of my lawyer 
friends that they are not doctors. Even in regard to political 
matters, such is our respect for the opinions of minorities, 
that so far back as 1887, I think it was at the instance of 
Mr. Badruddin Tyabji, who once was our President and 
whose elevation to the Bench of the Bombay High Court is 
a matter of national congratulation, a resolution was passed 
to the effect that where there is practical unanimity among a 
class, though in a minority in the Congress, that a question 
should not be discussed, it should forthwith be abandoned.” 

“There is special danger to which an organization such 
as ours, is exposed and which must be guarded against,... 
the danger of there being developed from within the seeds 
of dissension and dispute.” 

II 

There are two questions about these statements which need 
explanation. First is to know what the Social Reform party was to 
which the Presidents refer. The second is why Mr. Surrendranath 
Bannerjee’s address to the Congress in 1895 was the last occasion 
when a Congress President found it necessary to refer to the 
relation of the Congress to the problem of Social Reform and 
why no president after 1895 thought it necessary to dwell on it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


11 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : H 

A STRANGE EVENT 

To understand the first question it is necessary to note that 
when the Indian National Congress was founded at Bombay in 

1885, it was felt by the leaders of the movement that the National 
movement should not be exclusively political but that side by side 
with the consideration of political questions, questions affecting 
Indian social economy should also be discussed and that the best 
endeavours of all should be put forth for vitalizing Hindu Society 
by removing all social evils and social wrongs. With this view, 
Dewan Bahadur R. Raghunath Rao and Mr. Justice (then Rao 
Bahadur) M. G. Ranade delivered addresses on Social Reform on 
the occasion of the meeting of the First Congress at Bombay. In 

1886, at Calcutta, nothing further was done. Discussion, however, 
was going on among the leaders of the Congress movement and 
other leaders of educated Indian thought whether the Congress 
as such should concern itself with social questions or whether a 
separate body should be set up for the discussion of social questions. 
It was at last resolved after mature deliberation by, among 
others, Dewan Bahadur R. Raghunath Rao, Mr. Mahadeo Govind 
Ranade, Mr. Narendra Nath Sen and Mr. Janakinath Ghosal, 
that a separate organization called the Indian National Social 
Conference, should be started for the consideration of subjects 
relating to Indian social economy. Madras had the honour of being 
the birth-place of the Conference, for, the First Indian National 
Social Conference was held at Madras in December 1887, with 
no less a man than the late Rajah Sir T. Madhavrao, K.C.S.I., 
the premier Indian statesman of his time, as the President. The 
work done at this First Conference, however, was not much. 
Among other important resolutions members then present 
recognized the necessity of holding annual National Conferences 
in different parts of India for considering and adopting measures 
necessary for the improvement of the status of our society, and 
of our social usages ; and taking steps to organize and establish 
Provincial Sub-Committees of the Conferences. It was agreed that 
among social subjects which the Conference might take up, those 
relating to the disabilities attendant on distant sea-voyages, the 
ruinous expenses of marriage, the limitations of age below which 
marriages should not take place, the remarriages of youthful 
widows, the evils of the re-marriages of old men with young 
girls, the forms and evidences of marriages and inter-marriages 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

between sub-divisions of the same caste should form the subjects 
for discussion and determination. 

As to sanctions it was thought there should be different Sub- 
Committees appointed for dealing with different social questions. 
The Sub-Committees were to be left to evolve certain fundamental 
principles and penalties for breach of these principles, to be 
carried out and enforced as regards the members of Social Reform 
Party who might agree to be bound by such penalties, (1) by the 
Sub-Committees themselves, or (2) through their spiritual heads, 
whenever it was possible to do so, or (3) through Civil Courts, 
or failing all (4) by application to Government for enabling the 
Committees to enforce the rules in respect of their own pledged 
members. 

While the Social Reform Party had formed a separate 
organization of its own to discuss the many social evils which 
festered Hindu Society, they were not satisfied with the Congress 
attitude of completely dissociating itself from questions of social 
reform. Some of them were anxious to make it an issue whether 
Social Reform should not precede Political Reform and press for a 
decision. In this they had many friends to support them. Among 
them was to be found the Government of India. Sir Aukland 
Colvin, a member of the Viceroy’s Executive Council, very clearly 
and very emphatically stated that Indians ought to turn their 
attention to Social Reform in preference to endeavours they were 
making “to teach the British what their duties were in regard to 
the Government of India.” 

The reference to Social Reform in the addresses of the Congress 
Presidents referred to above can now be easily understood. They 
are a reply to the criticism by the Social Reform Party against 
the Congress dissociating itself from the problem of removing 
social evils. 

Turning to the second question as to why no Congress 
President has referred to the question of Social Reform in 
his presidential address after 1895, the answer is that before 
1895 there were two schools among Congressmen on the 
issue of social reform versus political reform. The viewpoint 
of one school was that expressed by Mr. Dadabhoy Naoroji, 
Mr. Budruddin Tyabji and Mr. Surrendranath Bannerjee. The 
viewpoint of the other school was that expressed by Mr. W. C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


13 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 13 

A STRANGE EVENT 

Banerjee. The former did recognize the need of social reform but 
thought that the Congress Session was not the proper platform 
for it. The latter denied that there was need for social reform 
and challenged the view that there cannot be political reform 
without social reform. Though the two schools within the Congress 
were fundamentally opposed to each other, they had not upto 
1895 developed a spirit of antagonism and intolerance towards 
each other. The former school was in a dominant position and 
the result was that the Indian National Congress and the Social 
Conference functioned as two parallel organizations each devoting 
itself to its own particular aims and objects. So great was the 
spirit of co-operation and good will between the two that the 
annual sessions of the National Congress and Social Conference 
were held in immediate succession in the same pandal and a 
large majority of those who came to attend the Congress Session 
also attended the Social Conference. The Social Conference was, 
however, an eyesore to the Congressmen who belonged to the 
Anti-social Reform Section. This section was evidently getting 
restive at the kindly disposition and the accommodating spirit 
which the dominant section in the Congress was showing to the 
Social Conference particularly in the matter of allowing it to use 
the Congress pandal for holding its session. In 1895 when the 
Congress met in Poona, this Anti-Social Reform section rebelled 
and threatened to burn the Congress pandal if the Congress 
allowed it to be used by the Social Conference. This opposition 
to the Social Conference was headed by no other person than 
the late Mr. Tilak one of those social tories and political radicals 
with which India abounds and who was the father of the 
slogan “Swaraj is my birthright” which is now seen blazoned on 
Congress banners. The rebellion succeeded largely because the 
Pro-Social Reform Party in the Congress was not prepared to 
fight its opponents. 1 This rebellion had one effect. It settled that 
the Congress was not to entertain any question of social reform 


1 That the Pro-Social Reform Party in the Congress did not like to take up the 
challenge is evident from the letter which Mr. Surrendranath Bannerjee wrote to 
Mr. Ranade over the question raised by Mr. Tilak’s Party regarding the use of 
the Congress pandal by the Social Conference in which he said “The raison d’etre 
for excluding social questions from our deliberations is that were we to take up 
such questions it might lead to serious differences ultimately culminating in a 
schism, and it is a matter of the first importance that we should prevent a split. 
The request of the other side is very unreasonable; but we have sometimes to 
submit to unreasonable demands to avert greater evils.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no matter how urgent. 1 This is the explanation why no Congress 
President after 1895 has referred to the question of social reform 
in his presidential address. The Congress by its action in 1895 had 
become a purely political body with no interest and no concern 
in the removal or mitigation of social wrongs. 

Ill 

Against this background the resolution passed by the Congress 
about the Depressed Classes in 1917 is obviously a strange event. 
The Congress had never done such a thing before although it 
had functioned for thirty-two years. It was even contrary to its 
declared policy. 

Why did the Congress think it necessary to pass such a 
resolution in the year 1917 ? What made it take cognizance of 
the Untouchables ? What did it want to gain ? Whom did it want 
to deceive ? Was it because of a change in its angle of vision or 
was it because of some ulterior motive ? For an answer to these 
questions one must turn to the following resolutions passed by 
the Depressed Classes in the year 1917 at two separate meetings 
held in the City of Bombay under two different Presidents. The 
first of these meetings was held on the 11th November 1917 
under the Chairmanship of the late Sir Narayan Chandavarkar. 
In that meeting the following resolutions 2 were passed : — 

“First Resolution — Loyalty to British Government and 
prayer for victory to the Allies.” 

“Second Resolution carried at the meeting by an 
overwhelming majority, the dissentients being about a 
dozen, expressed approval of the scheme of reform in the 
administration of India recommended by the Indian National 
Congress and the All-India Muslim League.” 

“Third Resolution carried unanimously was : ‘As the population 
of the Depressed Classes in India considered Untouchable 
and treated as such, is very large, as their condition is very 

1 Some of the leading Social Reformers welcomed this rebellion by the Anti- 
Social Reform Party in the Congress against the Conference. Dewan Bahadur 
R. Raghunath Rao wrote to Mr. Ranade that he “was glad that the panda was 
not allowed to be used by the Social Conference, for the deception that used to be 
practised by the Congress upon the English people that it worked in conjunction 
with the Social Conference was unveiled, and the English people would now 
clearly understand that the Congress really did not mean to work with the Social 
Conference.” 

2 Addresses presented to the Viceroy in India and the Right Hon’ble the 
Secretary of State for India (1918). Parliamentary Paper Cd. 9178 pages 74-75. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK SJ+YS 27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 IS 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 15 

A STRANGE EVENT 

degraded owing to that treatment and as they are behind the 
rest of the people in point of education, being unable to secure 
fair opportunities for their improvement, this public meeting 
of the Depressed Classes strongly feels that in the scheme of 
reform and reconstitution of the Legislative Councils which 
Government may be pleased to adopt, due regard be paid 
to the interests of the said classes. This meeting therefore 
prays the British Government to be so gracious as to protect 
those interests by granting to those classes the right to elect 
their own representatives to the said Councils in proportion 
to their numbers.” 

“Fourth Resolution unanimously carried at the meeting 
was : ‘That the Government be prayed for the adoption, 
with all convenient speed, of a compulsory and free system 
of education rendered necessary by the fact that the social 
elevation of any community depends upon the universal spread 
of education among its members and that degradation of the 
Depressed Classes is due to their illiteracy and ignorance.” 

“Fifth Resolution carried unanimously was as follows: — 
‘That the Chairman of this public meeting be authorised to 
request the Indian National Congress to pass at its forthcoming 
session a distinct and independent resolution declaring to the 
people of India at large the necessity, justice, and righteousness 
of removing all the disabilities imposed by religion and custom 
upon the Depressed Classes, those disabilities being of a most 
vexatious and oppressive character, subjecting those classes 
to considerable hardship and inconvenience by prohibiting 
them from admission into public schools, hospitals, courts 
of justice and public offices, and the use of public wells, 
etc. These disabilities social in origin, amount in law and 
practice to political disabilities and as such fall legitimately 
within the political mission and propaganda of the Indian 
National Congress.” 

“Sixth Resolution prays all Hindus of the castes other 
than the Untouchables and Depressed, especially those of 
the higher castes, who claim political rights, to take steps 
for the purpose of removing the blot of degradation from the 
Depressed Classes, which has subjected those classes to the 
worst, of treatment in their own country.” 

The second meeting was also held in November 1917 a week or 
so after the first meeting. The Chairman was one Bapuji Namdeo 
Bagade a leader of the Non-Brahmin Party. At this meeting the 
following resolutions 1 were unanimously adopted : — 

“(1) Resolution of loyalty to the British throne.” 


1 Ibid p. 75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“(2) That this meeting cannot give its support to the 
Congress-League Scheme in spite of its having been declared 
to have been passed at the meeting of 11th November 1917 
by an overwhelming majority.” 

“(3) That it is the sense of this meeting that the 
administration of India should be largely under the control 
of the British till all classes and specially the Depressed 
Classes, rise up to a condition to effectually participate in 
the administration of the country.” 

“(4) That if the British Government have decided to give 
political concession to the Indian Public, this meeting prays 
that Government should grant the Untouchables their own 
representatives in the various legislative bodies to ensure to 
them their civil and political rights.” 

“(5) That this meeting approves of the objects of the 
Bahiskrit Bharat Samaj (Depressed India Association) 
and supports the deputation to be sent on its behalf to 
Mr. Montagu.” 

“(6) That this meeting prays that Government looking 
to the special needs of the Depressed Classes, should make 
primary education both free and compulsory. That the meeting 
also requests the Government to give special facilities by way 
of scholarships to the students of the Depressed Classes.” 

“(7) That the meeting authorises the President to forward 
the above resolutions to the Viceroy and the Government of 
Bombay.” 

It is obvious that there is a close inter-connection between the 
resolution passed by the Depressed Classes at their meeting in 
Bombay under the chairmanship of Sir Narayan Chandavarkar and 
the Congress resolution of 1917 on the elevation of the Depressed 
Classes. This inter-connection will be easily understood by adverting 
to the political events of the year 1917. It will be recalled that it 
was in 1917 or to be precise, on the 20th August 1917 the late 
Mr. Montagu the then Secretary of State for India announced in 
the House of Commons the new policy of His Majesty’s Government 
towards India, namely, the policy of “gradual development of self- 
governing institutions with a view to progressive realization of 
responsible government in India as an integral part of the British 
Empire.” Leading Indian politicians were expecting some such 
declaration of policy on the part of His Majesty’s Government and 
were preparing schemes for changes in the constitutional structure 
of India in anticipation of such a policy. Of the many schemes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


17 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 17 

A STRANGE EVENT 

that were formulated, there were two around which public attention 
was centred. One was called “the Scheme of the Nineteen.” The 
second was called “the Congress-League Scheme.” The first was 
put forth by the 19 elected additional Members of the then 
Imperial Legislative Council. The second was an agreed scheme 
of political reforms supported by the Congress and the League 
otherwise known as the Lucknow Pact. Both these schemes had 
come into existence in 1916, a year before the announcement 
made by Mr. Montagu. 

Of the two schemes, the Congress was interested in seeing 
that its own scheme was accepted by His Majesty’s Government. 
The Congress with that purpose in view was keen on giving the 
Congress-League scheme the status and character of a National 
Demand. This could happen only if the scheme had the backing 
of all communities in India. In as much as the Muslim League 
had accepted the scheme, the problem of securing the backing of 
the Muslim Community did not arise. Next in numbers came the 
Depressed Classes. Though not as well organized as the Muslims, 
they were politically very conscious as their Resolutions show. Not 
only were they politically conscious but they were all along anti- 
Congress. Indeed in 1895 when Mr. Tilak’s followers threatened 
to burn the Congress pandal if its use was allowed to the Social 
Conference for ventilating social wrongs, the Untouchables 
organized a demonstration against the Congress and actually 
burned its effigy. This antipathy to the Congress has continued 
ever since. The resolutions passed by both the meetings of the 
Depressed Classes held in Bombay in 1917 give ample testimony 
to the existence of this antipathy in the minds of the Depressed 
Classes towards the Congress. The Congress while anxious to 
get the support of the Depressed Classes to the Congress-League 
scheme of Reforms knew very well that it had no chance of getting 
it. As the Congress did not then practise — it had not learned it 
then — the art of corrupting people as it does now, it enlisted the 
services of the late Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, an Ex-President of 
the Congress. As the President of the Depressed Classes Mission 
Society he exercised considerable influence over the Depressed 
Classes. It was as a result of his influence and out of respect 
for him that a section of the Depressed Classes agreed to give 
support to the Congress-League Scheme. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The resolution as its text shows did not give unconditional 
support to the Congress-League scheme. It agreed to give support 
on the condition that the Congress passed a resolution for the 
removal of the social disabilities of the Untouchables. The Congress 
resolution was a fulfilment of its part of the contract with the 
Depressed Classes which was negotiated through Sir Narayan 
Chandavarkar. 

This explains the genesis of the Congress Resolution of 1917 on 
the Depressed Classes and its inter-connection with the Resolutions 
of the Depressed Classes passed under the Chairmanship of 
Sir Narayan Chandavarkar. This explanation proves that there 
was an ulterior motive behind the Congress Resolution. That 
motive was not a spiritual motive. It was a political motive. 

What happened to the Congress Resolution ? The Depressed 
Classes in their Resolution had called upon the “higher castes, who 
claim political rights, to take steps for the purpose of removing 
the blot of degradation from the Depressed Classes, which has 
subjected these classes to the worst of treatment in their own 
country.” What did the Congress do to give effect to this demand 
of the Depressed Classes ? In return for the support it got, the 
Congress was bound to organize a drive against untouchability 
to give effect to the sentiments expressed in its Resolution. 
The Congress did nothing. The passing of the Resolution was a 
heartless transaction. It was a formal fulfilment of a condition 
which the Depressed Classes had made for giving their support 
to the Congress-League scheme. Congressmen did not appear to 
be charged with any qualms of conscience or with any sense of 
righteous indignation against man’s inhumanity to man which 
is what untouchability is. They forgot the Resolution the very 
day on which it was passed. The Resolution was a dead letter. 
Nothing came out of it. 

Thus ended the first chapter in the history of what the 
Congress has done to the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


19 


CHAPTER II 

A SHABBY SHOW 

Congress Abandons Its Plan 

I 

Mr. Gandhi entered Indian politics in 1919. Very soon 
thereafter, he captured the Congress. He not only captured it 
but overhauled it completely and changed it out of recognition. 
He introduced three main changes. The Old Congress had no 
sanctions. It only passed a resolution and left it there, hoping 
that the British Government will take some action on it. If the 
British Government did not, it merely repeated the resolution next, 
year and year after it. The old Congress was purely a gathering 
of intellectuals. It did not go down to the masses to secure their 
active participation in the political movement as it did not believe 
in mass action. The old Congress had no machinery and no funds 
to carry on mass agitation. It did not believe in spectacular 
political demonstration to impress the British Government of the 
magnitude of its strength or to attract and interest the masses. 
The new Congress changed all this. It made the Congress a mass 
organization by opening its membership to all and sundry. Any 
one paying four annas a year could be a member of the Congress. 
It forged sanctions behind its resolutions by adopting the policy 
of non-co-operation and civil disobedience. It made it a policy to 
stage demonstration of non-co-operation and civil disobedience 
and to court gaol. It launched a country-wide organization and 
propaganda in favour of the Congress. It put out what is called 
a Constructive Programme of social amelioration. To finance 
these activities it started a fund of one crore of rupees. It was 
called the Tilak Swaraj Fund. Thus by 1922, the Congress was 
completely transformed by Mr. Gandhi. The new Congress was 
entirely different from the old, except in name. 

The Constructive Programme of social amelioration was 
an important feature of the Congress. It was outlined by the 
Working Committee of the Congress at its meeting in Bardoli, 
held in February 1922. It was also known as the Bardoli 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Programme. The resolution setting out the details of the 
programme ran as follows : — 

“The Working Committee advises all Congress 
Organisations to be engaged in the following activities : — 

(1) To enlist at least one crore members of the Congress. 

k k k 

(2) To popularize the spinning wheel and to organize the 
manufacture of hand-spun and handwoven khaddar. 

k k k 

(3) To organize national schools. 

k k k 

(4) To organize the Depressed Classes for a better life, to 
improve their social, mental and moral condition, to induce 
them to send their children to national schools and to provide 
for them the ordinary facilities which the other citizens enjoy. 

k k k 

(5) To organize the temperance campaign amongst the 
people addicted to the drink habit by house to house visits 
and to rely more upon appeal to the drinker in his home 
than upon picketting. 

(6) To organize village and town Panchayats for the private 
settlement of all disputes, reliance being placed solely upon 
force of public opinion and the truthfulness of Panchayat 
decisions to ensure obedience to them. 

(7) In order to promote and emphasise unity among all 
classes and races and mutual goodwill, the establishment 
of which is the aim of the movement of non-co-operation, to 
organize a social service department that will render help to 
all, irrespectives of differences, in times of illness or accident. 

k k k 

(8) To continue the Tilak Memorial Swaraj Fund collections 
and call upon every Congress man, or Congress, sympathiser 
to pay at least one-hundredth part of his annual income for 
1921. Every province to send every month twenty-five per 
cent of its income from the Tilak Memorial Swaraj Fund to 
the All-India Congress Committee.” 

The resolution was placed before the All-India Congress 
Committee at its meeting held in Delhi on 20th February 1922 
for confirmation, which it did. I am not concerned to set out what 
happened to the different items in this Programme of constructive 
work. I am concerned with only one item namely that which 
relates to the Depressed Classes and it is that part of it which 
I propose to deal with. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


21 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 21 

A SHABBY SHOW 

I will relate the story of the fate, which overtook this part 
of the Bardoli resolution relating to the Untouchables, stage by 
stage. To begin with the story, after the Bardoli resolution was 
confirmed by the All-India Congress Committee, the matter was 
remitted to the Working Committee for action. The Working 
Committee took up the matter at its meeting held in Lucknow 
in June 1922. On that part of the Bardoli problem which related 
to the uplift of the Untouchables, the Working Committee passed 
the following resolutions : — 

“This Committee hereby appoints a Committee consisting 
of Swami Shradhanandji, Mrs. Sarojini Naidu and Messrs. 

I. K. Yajnik and G. B. Deshpande to formulate a scheme 
embodying practical measures to be adopted for bettering 
the condition of the so-called Untouchables throughout the 
country and to place it for consideration before the next 
meeting of this Committee, the amount to be raised for the 
scheme to be Rs. 2 lakhs for the present.” 

This resolution of the Working Committee was placed before 
the All-India Congress Committee at its meeting held in Lucknow 
in June 1922. It accepted the resolution of the Working Committee 
after making an amendment to it saying that “the amount to be 
raised for the scheme should be 5 lakhs for the present” instead of 
2 lakhs as put forth in the resolution of the Working Committee. 

It seems that before the resolution appointing the Committee 
was adopted by the Working Committee, one of its Members Swami 
Shradhanand tendered his resignation of the membership of the 
Committee. At the very sitting at which the Working Committee 
passed the resolution appointing a Committee, another resolution 
on the same subject and to the following effect was passed by it: — 

“Read letter from Swami Shradhanandji, dated 8th June 
1922 for an advance for drawing up a scheme for Depressed 
Classes work. Resolved that Mr. Gangadhar Rao B. Deshpande 
be appointed convener of the Sub-Committee appointed for 
the purpose and he be requested to convene a meeting, at 
an early date, and that Swami Shradhananda’s letter be 
referred to the Sub-Committee.” 

The formation of a Committee marks the second stage in the 
history of this interesting resolution. 

The next reference to the resolution appointing the Com- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

mittee is found in the proceedings of the Congress Working 
Committee held in Bombay in July 1922. At that meeting the 
Committee passed the following resolution.: — 

“That the General Secretary be asked to request Swami 
Shradhanand to reconsider his resignation and withdraw it 
and a sum of Rs. 500 be remitted to the Convener, Syt. G. B. 
Deshpande, for the contingent expenses of the Depressed 
Classes Sub-Committee.” 

Here the matter ended, so far as the year 1922 was concerned. 
Nothing further seems to have been done. The year 1923 came 
on. Seeing that nothing was done to set going the Scheme for 
ameliorating the condition of the Untouchables, the Working 
Committee which met also at Gaya in January, 1923 took up the 
matter and passed the following resolution : — 

“With reference to Swami Shradhanand’s resignation, 
resolved that the remaining members of the Depressed Classes 
Sub-Committee do form the Committee and Mr. Yajnik be 
the convener.” 

Thereafter the All-India Congress Committee which met 
Bombay in May 1923 passed the following resolution : — 

“Resolved that the question of the condition of the 
Untouchables be referred to the Working Committee for 
necessary action.” 

Here ends the second stage in the history of the resolution 
remitting the question of the Untouchables to a special Committee. 
The third stage in its history is marked by the resolution of the 
Working Committee passed in May 1923 at its meeting held in 
Bombay. This resolution ran as follows : — 

“Resolved that while some improvement has been effected 
in the treatment of the so-called Untouchables in response 
of the policy of the Congress, this Committee is conscious 
that much work remained yet to be done in this respect 
and in as much as this question of untouchability concerns 
the Hindu community particularly, it requests the All-India 
Hindu Mahasabha also to take up this matter and to make 
strenuous efforts to remove this evil from amidst the Hindu 
Community.” 

Thus is told the sad tale of the resolution and how it began 
and how it ended. What shameful close to a flaring start! 

It will be seen how the Congress washed its hands of the 
problem of the Untouchables. It need not have added insult 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


23 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 23 

A SHABBY SHOW 

to injury by relegating it to the Hindu Mahasabha. There could 
not be a body most unsuited to take up the work of the uplift 
of the Untouchables than the Hindu Mahasabha. If there is any 
body which is quite unfit for addressing itself to the problem of 
the Untouchables, it is the Hindu Mahasabha. It is a militant 
Hindu organization. Its aim and object is to conserve in every way 
everything that is Hindu, religious and cultural. It is not a social 
reform association. It is a purely political organization, whose 
main object and aim are to combat the influence of the Muslims 
in Indian politics. Just to preserve its political strength, it wants 
to maintain its social solidarity, and its way to maintain social 
solidarity is not to talk about caste or untouchability. How could 
such a body have been selected by the Congress for carrying on the 
work of the Untouchables passes my comprehension. This shows 
that the Congress wanted somehow to get rid of an inconvenient 
problem and wash its hands of it. The Hindu Mahasabha of 
course did not come forth to undertake the work for it had no 
urge for it and also because the Congress had merely passed a 
pious resolution recommending the work to them without making 
any promise for financial provision. So the project came to an 
inglorious and an ignominious end: 

Before closing this chapter, it would not be unprofitable 
to ascertain why did the Congress abandon the work of social 
amelioration of the Untouchables of which it had made so much 
show ? Was it because the Congress intended that the scheme 
should be a modest one not costing more than two to five lakhs of 
rupees but felt that from that point of view they had made a mistake 
in including Swami Shradhanand in the Committee and rather 
than allow the Swami to confront them with a huge scheme which 
the Congress could neither accept nor reject? The Congress thought 
it better in the first instance to refuse to make him the convener 1 
and subsequently to dissolve the Committee and hand over the 
work to the Hindu Mahasabha. Circumstances are not quite against 
such a conclusion. The Swami was the greatest and the most 
sincere champion of the Untouchables. There is not the slightest 


1 The fact that the Congress was keen on having Mr. Deshpande as the convener 
shows that they did not like to leave matters in the hands of Swami Shradhanand. 
The choice of Mr. Deshpande also indicates that they did not want anything to 
be done for the simple reason that Mr. Deshpande was an Orthodox Brahmin 
who had taken no interest in the welfare of the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

doubt that if he had worked on the Committee he would have 
produced a very big scheme. That the Congress did not want him 
in the Committee and was afraid that he would make big demand 
on Congress funds for the cause of the Untouchables is clear 
from the correspondence 1 that passed between him and Pandit 
Motilal Nehru, the then General Secretary of the Congress, and 
which is printed in the Appendix. If this conclusion is right, then 
it shows how empty of sincerity were the words of the Congress 
which passed that resolution. 

Did the Congress abandon the programme because it was 
revolutionary ? The resolution was in no sense a revolutionary 
resolution. This will be clear from the note which the Working 
Committee had appended to the resolution and which the All-India 
Congress Committee had approved. The note said : — 

“Whilst therefore in places, where the prejudice against 
the Untouchables is still strong separate schools and separate 
wells must be maintained out of Congress funds, every effort 
should be made to draw such children to national schools 
and to persuade the people to allow the Untouchables to use 
the common wells.” 

Obviously, the Congress was not out for the abolition of 
Untouchability. It had accepted the policy of separate schools and 
separate wells. The resolution did no more than to undertake 
amelioration of the condition of the Untouchables. And even such 
a timid and mild programme the Congress was unable to carry 
through and which it gave up without remorse or shame. 

II 

Did the Congress abandon the programme because it had no 
funds ? Quite the contrary. The Congress had started the Tilak 
Swaraj Fund in 1921. How much money did the Congress collect? 
The following table will give some idea. Rupees one crore and 
thirty lakhs were contributed by the public to the fund. The fund 
was collected to carry out Congress propaganda and to finance 
the constructive programme of the Congress as drafted by the 
Working Committee at Bardoli. How was this huge amount 
spent by the Congress? Some idea as to the purposes on which 
the money out of this fund was spent can be gathered from the 
list of grants voted by the Working Committee during the years 
1921, 1922 and 1923. 


Appendix I. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


25 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 25 

A SHABBY SHOW 











The Indian Annual Register — 1923, p. 112. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I. Grants Voted in 1921 1 

I. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Calcutta on January 31st and February 1st, 2nd and 
3rd 1921 

1. Rs. 1,00,000 to remain at the disposal of Mahatma Gandhi 
for the support of lawyers who give up their practice and stand 
in need of support ( iv ). 

2. Read the following telegram dated the 31st January 1921 
from Syt. C. Rajagopalachariar : — 

“Regret unable to attend meeting. Selected full time 
public workers for Tamil, Kerala part Karnatak about 
hundred, of whom about forty lawyers suspending practice. 
Pending collection Tilak Fund sanction drawing Rs. 5,600 
per month. Students’ movement progressing rapidly though 
newspapers do not show up news. Must carry on against 
parental opposition, least two months. Must draw three 
thousand per month for this. Committee must immediately 
wire authority issuing Swarajya Fund receipts in name of 
Congress for convenient denominations like Khilafat receipts. 
Confident to make up all advances in three months. Do not 
hope large sums Madras.” 

Resolved that a sum of Rs. 8,600 be advanced to Tamil, Kerala 
and the Karnatak parts of the Madras Presidency for one month 
for the present, and for future advances the matter be placed 
before the next meeting of the Working Committee (xx). 

II. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held at Bezwada on the 31st March and 1st April 1921 : — 

3. A lump sum of Rs. 6,000 be advanced to Pandit Mohanlal 
Nehru, Secretary, U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, for carrying 
on propaganda and collecting funds (p). 

“4. Rs. 17,000 be sanctioned for the remainder of the 
current year for the expenses of the office of the President, the 
Secretaries, the Cashier, and that out of the above a sum of 
Rs. 300 per mensem be assigned to Mr. C. Rajagopalachariar 
for the expenses of his secretary and the President’s steno- 
typist (vii). 

5. A sum of 1,000 dollars remitted by cable to Mr. D. 

V. S. Rao of the India Home Rule League of America, 1,400 
Broadway, New York ( viii ).” 

III. The Working Committee at its resolution No. 18 
dated 31st July 1921 appointed a Grants Sub-Committee to 

1 Roman figures in the brackets after each grant refer to the resolution of the 
Working Committee by which the grant was made. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


27 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 27 

A SHABBY SHOW 

dispose of all applications for grants. The Sub-Committee consisted 
of Mr. Gandhi, Pandit Motilal Nehru and Seth Jamnalal Bajaj 
The following grants were voted by the Grants Sub-Committee 
in the course of several meetings : — 

“6. A sum of Rs. 1 lakh be voted as a grant for Swadeshi 
work in Bihar and a loan of Rs. 4 lakhs recommended for 
the same purpose ( 2 ). 

7. A loan of Rs. 35,000 to the C. P. (Hindustani) Provincial 
Congress Committee for Swadeshi (ii). 

8. Rs. 25,000 for famine relief in the U.P. (Hi). 

9. Rs. 25,000 to the Punjab Provincial Congress Committee 
for famine relief, and the Jagraon School (iv). 

10. Rs. 50,000 on the telegraphic application for the relief 
of the distressed in Malabar ( v ). 

11. Rs. 15,000 to the Gandhi Ashram, Benares City ( vi ). 

12. Rs. 10,000 to the Pallipadu Ashram (vii). 

13. Rs. 15,000 to the Andhra Jatheeya Kalashala, 
Masulipatam (viii). 

14. Rs. 10,000 to the Secretary, Taluka Congress 
Committee, Karjat (Maharashtra) ( xx ). 

15. Rs. 10,000 to the Anatha Vidyarthi Griha, Chinchwad 
(Maharashtra) (x). 

16. The applications of (1) Mr. K. G. Patade, Assistant 
General Secretary of the Depressed Classes Mission 
Society of India, (2) of the Kulladaikurichi National 
School, Vidyasangam and (3) of the Rajahmundry 
Depressed Classes Mission were rejected as unbacked 
and not in accordance with the instructions issued by 
the Sub-Committee (xiii). 

17. Rs. 10000 to the Kerala Provincial Congress Committee 
to be principally spent on Swadeshi and the popularising of 
the hand-spinning and hand-weaving (xx). 

18. Rs. 60,000 to the Madras Provincial Congress 
Committee (xxii). 

19. Rs. 1,50,000 set apart for the U. P. Provincial Congress 
Committee (xxiii). 

20. Rs. 63,000 to the Sind Provincial Congress Committee 
(xxiv). 

21. Rs. 25,000 for famine relief in the Ceded Districts 
in Andhra (xxv). 

22. Rs. 20,000 to the Maharashtra Provincial Congress 
Committee ( xxvi ). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

23. Rs. 20,000 be granted to the Ganjam District Congress 
Committee for Swadeshi and for popularising hand-spinning 
and hand-weaving ( xvii ).” 

The Working Committee dissolved the Sub-Committee by 
resolution No. 8 dated the 6th November 1921 and took the 
question of voting grants in its own hands. 

IV. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held at Delhi on the 3rd, 5th and 6th November 1921 : — 

“24. Rs. 25,000 to Mr. Phukan of Assam for the purchase 
of cotton to be used in the manufacture of hand-spun yarn 
and khaddar ( ix ). 

25. Rs. 5,000 to the Krishnapuram, Guntur District 
Andhra (x). 

26. Rs. 10,000 as an additional grant to the Andhra 
Jateeya Kalashala ( xi ). 

27. Rs. 1,000 to the Rajahmundry Depressed Classes 
Mission (xii). 

28. Rs. 5,000 to the Angalur Jateeya Parishramalayam 
(xii). 

29. Rs. 3,000 to Kautaram, Andhra (xii/). 

30. Rs. 15,000 to the Andhra Provincial Congress 
Committee for general Swadeshi work (xu). 

31. Rs. 3,000 to the Masulipatam District Congress 
Committee ( xvi ). 

32. Rs. 30,000 to the Utkal Provincial Congress Committee 
earmarked for the manufacture of handspun yarn and 
khaddar (xvii). 

33. Rs. 3,000 to help the toddy tappers of the Thana 
District who wanted to give up their profession (xviii). 

34. Rs. 5,000 to the Nagpur Tilak Vidyalaya (xix). 

35. Rs. 5,000 to the Nagpur Asahyogashram (xx). 

36. Rs. 25,000 to the Ajmere Provincial Congress 
Committee for the purpose of increasing the production of 
khaddar and charkah yarn (xxi). 

37. Rs. 18,00,000 if possible, and in any case, at least 
Rs. 10,00,000 for Gujarat (xxii). 

38. Rs. 40,000 to be immediately remitted to Sjt. 

C. Rajagopalachariar for the relief of the distressed in 
Malabar (xxiii).” 

V. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Bombay on the 22nd and 23rd November 1921: — 

“39. Rs. 10,000 to the Jat Anglo Sanskrit High School, 
Rohtak, Punjab (iii). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


29 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 29 

A SHABBY SHOW 

40. Rs. 25,000 to the Bijapur District Congress Committee 
for famine relief and Swadeshi work ( iii ). 

41. Rs. 30,000 to help the dismissed mill-labourers of 
Madras by giving them Swadeshi work (iii).” 

II. Grants Voted in 1922. 

I. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Bombay on 17th January 1922 : — 

“42. Application by the U. P. Provincial Congress 
Committee for Rs. 50,000 already sanctioned and for a further 
grant of one lakh of rupees for Swadeshi work, be referred 
to Mahatma Gandhi for final disposal (ii). 

43. The application of the Assam Provincial Congress 
Committee for a remittance of Rs. 25,000, the balance out of 
the sanctioned grant of Rs. 50,000 be referred to Mahatma 
Gandhi for final disposal ( vi ).” 

II. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Delhi on 26th February 1922 : — 

“44. Rs. 10,000 for initial expenditure on foreign scheme 
prepared by Mahatma Gandhi (i). 

45. Rs. 14,000 for the office expenditure for the current 
year (iv).” 

III. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Ahmedabad on 17th and 18th March 1922 : — 

“46. Rs. 3,00,000 for organizing a larger production and 
marketing of khaddar (i). 

47. Rs. 10,000 out of Rs. 50,000 already sanctioned for 
the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee ( ix ). 

48. Rs. 5,000 to the Kerala Provincial Congress Committee 
for general Congress work; amount to be deducted from 
the sum of Rs. 84,000 sanctioned for relief in Malabar and 
further Rs. 20,000 out of the above amount of Rs. 84.000 be 
remitted for relief work ( x ). 

49. Rs. 10,000 to the Rohtak Anglo-Vernacular School (xi). 

50. Rs. 15,000 out of the amount of Rs. 25,000 sanctioned 
for famine relief in the Ceded Districts be paid to Sjt. T. 
Prakasam representing the Andhra Provincial Congress 

Committee(xii)-” 

IV. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held at Calcutta on the 20th, 21st and 22nd April 1922 : — 

“51. Rs. 5,000 to the Antyaja Karyalaya, Ahmedabad, for 
organizing education amongst Depressed Classes in Gujarat (v). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


30 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

52. Rs. 40,000 as loan to Moulvi Badrul Hasan of 
Hyderabad Deccan to be exclusively devoted to the Khaddar 
work ( vi ). 

53. Rs. 25,000 to the Nationalist Journals Ltd., to enable 
them to re-start the Independent and run it on Congress 
lines, providing for a lien on properties of the Company for 
the amount advanced (xix).” 

V. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Bombay on the 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th May 1922 : — 

“54. Rs. 17,381 to the Antyaja Karyalaya, Ahmedabad, 
in addition to Rs. 5,000 already granted (x). 

55. Resolved that the Punjab Provincial Congress 
Committee’s application for Rs. 1,25,000 for Shahadara 
Depressed Classes settlement cannot be considered 
unless the Working Committee is satisfied that 
sufficient funds are raised locally to start the scheme 
and the scheme so started is in working order (xi). 

56. Resolved that Rs. 5,000 be earmarked for 
Ahmednagar Depressed Classes home and that the 
amount be recommended to be paid when the Working 
Committee is satisfied that the home is started by local 
efforts and is in working order (xii). 

57. Rs. 10,000 be earmarked for Depressed Classes 
work in Madras, as applied for by Mr. S. Srinivas 
Iyengar, to be paid when the application is sent to this 
Committee through the Provincial Congress Committee 
and on this Committee being satisfied that at least an 
equal amount is raised by local effort (xiii). 

58. Rs. 7,000 to Mr. T. Prakasam for Depressed 
Classes work in Andhra (xxiv).” 

VI. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Lucknow on June 6th, 7th and 10th, 1922 : — 

“59. Rs. 50,000 for khaddar work in Sind-Province ( vii ). 

60. Rs. 1,000 be advanced to Sjt. C. Rajagopalachariar 
for contingent expenses ( viii ).” 

VII. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Delhi on 30th June 1922 : — 

“61. Rs. 180 per mensem for the next three months be 
sanctioned for the expenses of six workers from Bengal to 
serve in Assam (vi).” 

VIII. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Bombay on 18th and 19th July 1922 : — 

“62. Rs. 5,000 to Assam ( i ). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


31 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 31 

A SHABBY SHOW 

63. Rs. 1,50,000 each as loan for Khaddar work in Andhra 
and Utkal ( x ).” 

IX. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Calcutta on 18th, 19th and 25th November 1922 : — 

“64. Rs. 3,00,000 to Gujarat as grant (xii). 

65. Rs. 16,000 for the expenses of the Civil Disobedience 
Enquiry Committee ( xxi ).” 

III. Grants Voted in 1923. 

I. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting held 
in Gaya on the 1st and 2nd of January 1923 : — 

“66. Rs. 3,000 to the General Secretary, Indian 
National Social Conference, for the removal of 
untouchability and the promotion of temperance and 
inter-communal unity (xxii). 

67. Rs. 1,200 as aid to the Navayuga, a Hindi daily 
paper of Allahabad, on condition that it would carry on 
propaganda in pursuance of the resolutions of the Congress 
held at Gaya ( xxxi ). 

68. Rs. 10,000 for the Congress Publicity Bureau ( xxxii ).” 

II. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Allahabad on 26th and 28th February 1923 : — 

“69. Rs. 10,000 for the Depressed Classes work by 
the Tamil Desh Provincial Congress Committee (vi). 

70. Loan of Rs. 15,000 be advanced to the U.P. Provincial 
Congress Committee on the application of Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru (x). 

71. A loan of Rs. 15,000 be advanced to Tamil Desh 
Provincial Congress Committee on the application of Mr. C. 
Rajagopalachariar (x). 

72. Rs. 5,000 granted to the IT. P. Provincial Congress 
Committee for Gandhi Ashram, Benares (xi).” 

III. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Bombay on, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th 27th and 28th May 
1923 : — 

“73. Loan of Rs. 5 lakhs to the Gujarat Provincial Congress 
Committee to relieve the surplus stock of khadi in various 
provinces in the country (v). 

74. Loan of Rs. 50,000 be advanced to Bengal Provincial 
Congress Committee for Khadi work ( viii ). 

75. Rs. 15,000 to the Bihar Rashtriya Vidyalaya (xii). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

76. Rs. 10,000 for the Satyavadi Vidyalaya. 

77. Rs. 5,000 Swavalamban Rashtriya Pathshala ( xiv ). 

78. Rs. 5,000 to Dr. Sathaye for carrying on such work 
as the Congress Labour Committee decides ( xxxiv ).” 

IV. Grants voted by the Working Committee at its meeting 
held in Nagpur on 7th, 8th, 11th and 12th July 1923 : — 

“79. Rs. 20,000 to Sjt. Brajaraj, Secretary, Hindi Sahitya 
Sammelan for the work of teaching Hindustani in the Madras 
Presidency ( ix ). 

80. Rs. 2,000 to the C. P. Hindustani Provincial Congress 
Committee to be utilized for general Congress purposes with 
special regard to rendering help to Satyagraha in Nagpur ( xi ).” 

The reader may not get a precise idea of the management 
or mismanagement of public funds by the Congress from this 
itemized account of expenditure. Was this expenditure regulated 
by any principle ? Was it distributed according to the needs of 
the Provinces ? Consider the following table: — 

Table 2 


Provinces 

Amount 

Granted 

Population f 

Percentage 
Grant due 
on the basis 
of Popula- 
tion ratio 
to total 
Population 

Percentage 
of Grant 
actually 
paid 

General — All- India* ... 

Rs. 

4,94,000 

227,238,000 


10 

Bombay 

26,90,381 

16,012,623 

8 

54.3 

Madras 

5,05,000 

42,319,000 

18 

10.1 

Bihar and Orissa 

5,65,000 

33,820,000 

15 

11.3 

U.P. 

3,11,200 

45,376,000 

20 

6.26 

Sind 

1,13,000 

3,279,377 


2.2 

Assam 

51,080 

6,735,000 

3 

1.1 

Bengal 

50,000 

46,241,000 

20 

1.0 

C.P. 

47,000 

12,780,000 

5 

.95 

Punjab ... 

45,000 

20,675,000 

9 

.9 

Hyderabad 

40,000 

— 

— 

.81 

Ajmer 

25,000 

— 

— 

.5 

Foreign 

14,000 

— 

— 

.28 

Total ... 

49,50,661 





*Excluding Burma and Native States. 

fThese figures are taken from the Simon Commission Report, Vol. I and refer 
to the year 1921. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


33 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 33 

A SHABBY SHOW 


Was it distributed on the basis of cultural units and their 
relative size ? Compare the following figures: — 

Table 3 


Linguistic 

Areas 

Total 

Grant 

Amount 
of Grant 

Percentage 
of the Total 
Grant to the 
Province 

Percentage 
of Popula- 
tion of the 
Area to the 
Population 
of the 
Province 

Bombay Presidency 

Rs. 

... 26,90,381 

Rs. 


100 

Gujarath 

— 

26,22,381 

97.4 

18 

Maharashtra 

— 

43,000 

1.6 

69 

Karnatak 

— 

25,000 

0.93 

13 

Central Provinces 

47,000 

— 

— 

100 

Marathi Districts ... 

— 

10,000 

21.2 

45 

Hindustani Districts 

— 

37,000 

78.7 

55 

Madras Presidency 

... 5,05.000 

— 

— 

100 

Tamil Nad 

— 

1,03,000 

20.4 

38 

Andhra 

— 

3,02,000 

60.0 

52 

Kerala 

— 

1,00,000 

19.6 

10 

Bihar and Orissa 

... 5,65,000 

— 

— 

100 

Bihar 

— 

5,15,000 

91.0 

73 

Orissa 

— 

50,000 

0.9 

27 


From these figures it is clear that the distribution of these 
sums was not made on the basis of any intelligibly principle. 
There is no relation between the grants and the population, nor 
between the grants and the claims of the cultural units. A province 
like Bombay with a population of one and a half crores gets as 
much as 27 lakhs while U. P. and Madras with a population of 
about 4 crores each get no more than about five lakhs severally. 
Consider the grants in relation to cultural units. Take Bombay 
Presidency. It includes three cultural units, Maharashtra, Gujrath 
and Karnatak. Out of the 26 lakhs and 90 thousand given to the 
Bombay Presidency Gujrath with only 18 per cent, of the population 
of the Province got as much as 26 lakhs and 22 thousand i.e., 
97.4 per cent, and Maharashtra with a population of 69 per cent 
got only Rs. 43,000 or 1.6 per cent and Karnatak. with a population 
of 13 per cent got Rs. 25,000 or .9 per cent of the grant. In C. P. 
out of a total grant of Rs. 47,000 the Hindustani districts having 
55 per cent of the population got Rs. 37,000 or 78.7 per cent 
while the Marathi speaking districts having 45 per cent of 
the population got only Rs. 10,000 i.e., 21.2 per cent. In 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bihar and Orissa out of the total grant of 5 lakhs and 65 
thousand Bihar got 5 lakhs and 15 thousand or 91 per cent with 
a population of 73 per cent, and Orissa got only 50 thousand or 
9 per cent while its population was as much as 27 per cent. The 
same inequity is noticeable in the distribution of grants in the 
three areas of the Madras Presidency. 

There was not only no principle, there was shameful 
favouritism in the distribution of the fund. Out of the total of 
49 'A lakhs which was distributed in the three years Gujrath — 
Mr. Gandhi’s province — got 26 4 lakhs while the rest of India got 
23 lakhs. This means that a population numbering 29 j lakhs 
got 26 j lakhs while the rest of India numbering about 23 crores 
got 23 lakhs ! ! 

There was no check, no control, no knowing for what purpose 
money was voted and to whom it was granted. Note the following 
cases : — 


Table 4 


Moneys allotted but kept at the Disposal of 
Individuals without Appropriating 
them to any specified purpose 

Moneys allotted without Appropri- 
ation to any purpose without naming 
the guarantee 


Rs. 


Rs. 

Moulvi Badrul Hasan 

40,000 

To Gujrath 

3,00,000 

T. Prakasam 

7,000 

To Gujrath 

18,00,000 

C. Rajagopalachariar 

1,000 

To Gujrath 

3,00,000 

Barajaj 

20,000 



Mr. Gandhi 

1,00,000 




It is not known whether these huge sums kept at the disposal 
of the named payees were accounted for or who received the 
formidable amounts made payable to the nameless payees. Even 
if there were satisfactory answers to these questions there can be 
no doubt that a worse case of frenzied finance of extravagance and 
waste, it would be very difficult to find. It is a sad episode marked 
by a reckless plunder committed by the predatory leaders of the 
Congress of public money for nursing their own constituencies 
without any qualms of conscience. 

It is unnecessary to pursue the story of the organized and 
systematic loot by Congressmen of the balance of 1 crore and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


35 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 35 

A SHABBY SHOW 

30 lakhs which was spent in subsequent years. It is enough to say 
that never was there such an organized loot of public money. The 
point of immediate interest however is that the scrutiny of this 
list of grants does not show the amelioration of the Untouchables, 
which has been one of the purposes for which money has been 
advanced from the Swaraj Fund. One would have expected the 
Congress to make the amelioration of the Untouchables as the 
first charge on the Swaraj Fund. It should have at least made 
it a charge if not the first charge especially when thousands of 
rupees were spent on feeding briefless lawyers who were alleged 
to have given up practice in the cause of the nation without even 
an inquiry whether they had any, when thousands of rupees were 
spent to feed toddy drawers who had given up their profession 
for living on alms from public fund and many other wild cat 
schemes carrying the marks of dishonesty on their faces. But 
it did nothing of the kind. Instead, the Congress proposed that 
a separate fund should be started for the amelioration of the 
Untouchables. And what was to be the dimension of this separate 
Untouchable Fund ? The All-India Congress Committee fixed it at 
five lakhs. The Working Committee felt it was too big an amount 
for so unimportant and so unprofitable a work as the amelioration 
of the Untouchables and reduced its total to Rs. two lakhs. Two 
lakhs for sixty millions Untouchables!! 

This was the grand sum that was fixed by the Congress for 
the salvage of the Untouchables. How much of this was actually 
appropriated ? Here are the figures : — 

Table 5 


Purpose 

Amount 

Sanctioned 


Rs. 

Rajamuhendry Depressed Glass Mission 

1,000 

Antyaj Karyalaya, Ahmedabad 

5,000 

Antyaj Karyalaya, Ahmedabad 

17,381 

Depressed Classes Work in Andhra 

7,000 

National Social Conference for Depressed Classes Work 

3,000 

Tamil District P.C.C. for Depressed Classes Work 

10,000 

Total Rs. ... 

43,381 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To sum up, the Congress could find only Rs. 43,381 out of 
Rs. 4914 lakhs which it spent for carrying out the Constructive 
otherwise known as the Bardoli Programme in which the uplift 
of the Untouchables was given so much prominence. Can there 
be a grosser instance of insincerity than this ? Where is the 
love for the Untouchables which the Congress professed for the 
Untouchables ? Where is the desire of the Congress to undertake 
the uplift of the Untouchables ? Would it be wrong to say that 
the Bardoli resolution was a fraud in so far as it related to the 
Untouchables ? 

One is however bound to ask one question. Where was 
Mr. Gandhi when all this was happening to the cause of the 
Untouchables in the Congress Camp ? The question is very relevant 
because it was Mr. Gandhi who had laid stress, ever since he 
entered the Congress, upon the intimate relation between the 
winning of Swaraj and the abolition of Untouchability. In the 
Young India, which was Mr. Gandhi’s organ, of 3rd November 
1921, Mr. Gandhi wrote : — 

“Untouchability cannot be given a secondary place on 
the programme. Without the removal of the taint Swaraj is 
a meaningless term. Workers should welcome social boycott 
and even public execration in the prosecution of their work. 

I consider the removal of untouchability as a most powerful 
factor in the process of attainment of Swaraj.” 

Accordingly, he had been exhorting the Untouchables not to 
join hands with the British against Swaraj but to make common 
cause with the Hindus and help to win Swaraj. In an article in 
Young India dated 20th October 1920, Mr. Gandhi addressed the 
Untouchables in the following terms : — 

“There are three courses open to these down-trodden 
members of the nation. For their impatience they may call 
in the assistance of the slave-owning Government. They will 
get it, but they will fall from the frying pan into the fire. 
Today they are slaves of slaves. By seeking Government aid, 
they will be used for suppressing their kith and kin. Instead 
of being sinned against, they will themselves be the sinners. 

The Musalmans tried it and failed. They found that they were 
worse than before. The Sikhs did it unwittingly and failed. 
Today there is no more discontented community in India 
than the Sikhs. Government aid is, therefore, no solution. 

The second is rejection of Hinduism and wholesale 
conversion to Islam or Christianity. And if a change of religion 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


37 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 37 

A SHABBY SHOW 

could be justified for worldly betterment I would advise it 
without hesitation. But religion is a matter of the heart. No 
physical inconvenience can warrant abandonment of one’s 
own religion. If the inhuman treatment of the Panchamas 
were a part of Hinduism, its rejection would be a paramount 
duty both for them and for those like me who would not 
make a fetish even of religion and condone every evil in its 
sacred name. But I believe that untouchability is no part 
of Hinduism. It is rather its excrescence to be removed by 
every effort. And there is quite an army of Hindu reformers 
who have set their heart upon ridding Hinduism of this blot. 
Conversion there fore, I hold, is not remedy whatsoever. 

Then, there remains, finally, self-help and self-dependence, 
with such aid as the non-Panchama Hindus will render of 
their own motion, not as a matter of duty. And herein comes 

the use of Non-co-operation Therefore, by way of protest 

against Hinduism, the Panchamas can certainly stop all 
contact and connection with the other Hindus so long as the 
special grievances are maintained. But this means organised 
intelligent effort. And so far as I can see, there is no leader 
among the Panchamas who can lead them to victory through 
Non-cooperation. 

The better way therefore, perhaps, is for the Panchamas 
heartily to join the great national movement that is now going 
on for throwing off the slavery of the present Government. 

It is easy enough for the Panchama friends to see that Non- 
co-operation against this evil Government pre-supposes co- 
operation between the different sections forming the Indian 
nation.” 

In the same article Mr. Gandhi told the Hindus : — 

“The Hindus must realise that, if they wish to offer 
successful Non-co-operation against the Government they 
must make common cause with the Panchamas, even as they 
have made common cause with the Musalmans.” 

He repeated the warning in the Young India of 29th December 
1920 in which he said : — 

“Non-co-operation against the Government means co- 
operation among the governed, and if Hindus do not remove 
the sin of untouchability, there will be no Swaraj whether in 
one year or in one hundred years... Swaraj is as unattainable 
without the removal of the sins of untouchability as it is 
without Hindu-Muslim unity.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

From all this, one would expect Mr. Gandhi to see that the 
Congress policy of ameliorating the condition of the Untouchables 
as set out in the Bardoli resolution was given effect to. The fact 
is that Mr. Gandhi, besides giving utterance to pious platitude, 
did not take the slightest interest in the programme of the 
amelioration. If he was so minded, he could have appointed another 
Committee. If he was so minded, he could have saved a large 
part of the Tilak Swaraj Fund from the organized loot that was 
being carried on by Congressmen and reserved it for the benefit 
of the Untouchables. Strange as it may appear, he sat silent and 
unconcerned. Instead of feeling any remorse, Mr. Gandhi justified 
his indifference to the qause of the Untouchables by arguments 
so strange that no one would believe them. They are to be found 
in the Young India of 20th October 1920 : — 

“Should not we the Hindus wash our bloodstained hands 
before we ask the English to wash theirs ? This is a proper 
question reasonably put. And if a member of a slave, nation 
could deliver the suppressed classes from their slavery, 
without freeing myself from my own I would do so today. 

But it is an impossible task. A slave has not the freedom 
even to do the right thing.” 

Mr. Gandhi concluded by saying : — 

“That process has commenced and whether the Panchamas 
deliberately take part in it or not, the rest of the Hindus dare 
not neglect them without hampering their own progress. Hence 
though the Panchama problem is as dear to me as life itself, 

I rest satisfied with the exclusive attention to national non- 
co-operation. I feel sure that the greater includes the less.” 

Thus ended the second chapter of what the Congress has 
done to the Untouchables. The regrettable part of this tragedy 
is the realization of the fact how Mr. Gandhi has learned to find 
unction in illusions. Whether Mr. Gandhi likes to live in a world 
of illusions may be a matter of doubt. But there is no doubt he 
likes to create illusions in order to use them as arguments to 
support his cherished proposition. The reason he has given for not 
taking personal responsibility for the uplift of the Untouchables 
furnishes the best evidence of this habit of Mr. Gandhi. To tell the 
Untouchables that they must not act against the Hindus, because 
they will be acting against their kith and kin, may be understood. 
But to assume that the Hindus regard the Untouchables as their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


39 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 39 

A SHABBY SHOW 

kith and kin is to set up an illusion. To ask the Hindus to 
undertake the removal of untouchability is good advice. But 
to go to the length of assuring oneself that the Hindus are so 
overwhelmed with a sense of shame for the inhuman treatment 
they have accorded to the Untouchables that they dare not fail 
to abolish untouchability and that there is a band of Hindu 
Reformers pledged to do nothing but remove untouchability is 
to conjure an illusion to fool the Untouchbles and to fool the 
world at large. It may be sound logic to argue that what benefits 
the whole also benefits the part and that one need not confine 
himself to looking after the part. But to assume that a piece, as 
separate as the Untouchables, is a part of the Hindu whole is 
to deceive oneself. Few know what tragedies the Untouchables 
as well as the country have had to go through on account of the 
illusions of Mr. Gandhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


40 


CHAPTER III 
A MEAN DEAL 

Congress Refuses To Part With Power 

I 

In the Government of India Act of 1919, there was a provision 
which had imposed an obligation on His Majesty’s Government to 
appoint at the end of ten years a Royal Commission to investigate 
into the working of the Constitution and report upon such 
changes as may be found necessary. Accordingly, in 1928 a Royal 
Commission was appointed under the Chairmanship of Sir John 
Simon. Indians expected that the Commission would be mixed in 
its personnel. But Lord Birkenhead who was then the Secretary 
of State for India was opposed to the inclusion of Indians and 
insisted on making it a purely Parliamentary Commission. At this, 
the Congress and the Liberals took great offence and treated it 
as an insult. They boycotted the Commission and carried on a 
great agitation against it. To assuage this feeling of opposition 
it was announced by His Majesty’s Government that after the 
work of the Commission was completed representative Indians 
would be assembled for a discussion before the new constitution 
for India is settled. In accordance with this announcement 
representative Indians were called to London at a Round Table 
Conference with the Representatives of Parliament and of His 
Majesty’s Government. 

On the 12th November 1930, His late Majesty King George V 
formally inaugurated the Indian Round Table Conference. From the 
point of view of Indians the Round Table Conference was an event 
of great significance. Its significance lay in the recognition by His 
Majesty’s Government of the right of Indians to be consulted in the 
matter of framing a constitution for India. For the Untouchables 
it was a landmark in their history. For the Untouchables were for 
the first time allowed to be represented separately by two delegates 
who happened to be myself and Dewan Bahadur R. Srinivasan. This 
meant that the Untouchables were regarded not merely a separate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


41 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 41 

A MEAN DEAL 

element from the Hindus but also of such importance as to 
have the right to be consulted in the framing of a constitution 
for India. 

The work of the Conference was distributed among nine 
committees. One of these committees was called the Minorities 
Committee to which was assigned the most difficult work of 
finding a solution of the Communal question. Anticipating that 
this Committee was the most important committee the Prime 
Minister, the late Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, himself assumed 
its chairmanship. The proceedings of the Minorities Committee 
are of the greatest importance to the Untouchables. For, much 
of what happened between the Congress and the Untouchables 
and which has led to bitterness between them will be found in 
the proceedings of that Committee. 

When the Round Table Conference met the political demands 
of communities other than the Untouchables were quite well 
known. Indeed the Constitution of 1919 had recognized them 
as statutory minorities and provisions relating to their safety 
and security were embodied in it. In their case the question 
was of expanding those provisions or altering their shape. With 
regard to the Depressed Classes the position was different. The 
Montagu-Chelmsford Report which preceded the Constitution 
of 1919 had said in quite unmistakable terms that provision 
must be made in the Constitution for their protection. But 
unfortunately when the details of the Constitution were 
framed, the Government of India found it difficult to devise 
any provisions for their protection except to give them token 
representation in the legislatures by nomination. The first thing 
that was required to be done was to formulate the safeguards 
deemed necessary by the Untouchables for their protection 
against the tyranny and oppression of the Hindus. This I did 
by submitting a Memorandum to the Minorities Committee of 
the Round Table Conference. To give an idea of the safeguards 
that were formulated by me, I reproduce below the text of the 
Memorandum : — 

A Scheme of Political Safeguards for the Protection of the 
depressed Classes in the Future Constitution of a self-governing 
India, submitted to the Indian Round Table Conference. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The following are the terms and conditions on which the Depressed 
Classes will consent, to place themselves under a majority rule 
in a self-governing India. 

Condition No. 1 : 

EQUAL CITIZENSHIP 

The Depressed Classes cannot consent to subject themselves 
to majority rule in their present state of hereditary bondsmen. 
Before majority rule is established their emancipation from the 
System of untouchability must be an accomplished fact. It must 
not be left to the will of the majority. The Depressed Classes must 
be made free citizens entitled to all the rights of citizenship in 
common with other citizens of the State. 

(A) To secure the abolition of untouchability and to create the 
equality of citizenship, it is proposed that the following fundamental 
right shall be made part of the constitution of India. 

FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT 


“All subjects of the State in India are equal before the 
USA Constitution ^ aw an< ^ possess equal civic rights. 


Amendment XIV 
and Government of 
Ireland Act 1920, 
10 & 11, Geo. V. 
Ch. 67, Sec. 5 (2). 


Any existing enactment, regulation, 
order, custom or interpretation of law 
by which any penalty, disadvantage, 
disability is imposed upon or any 
discrimination is made against any 
subject of the State on account of untouchability shall, as 
from the day on which this Constitution comes into operation, 
cease to have any effect in India.” 

(B) To abolish the immunities and exemptions now enjoyed by 

executive officers by virtue of Sections 
110 and 111 of the Government of India 
Act 1919 and their liability for executive 
action be made co-extensive with what it is 
in the case of a European British Subject. 


This is so in all 
Constitutions. 
See Prof. Keith’s 
remarks in Cmd. 
207, p. 56. 


Condition No. II: 


FREE ENJOYMENT OF EQUAL RIGHTS 

It is no use for the Depressed Classes to have a declaration of 
equal rights. There can be no doubt that the Depressed Classes 
will have to face the whole force of orthodox society if they try 
to exercise the equal rights of citizenship. The Depressed Classes 
therefore feel that if these declarations of rights are not to be 
mere pious pronouncements, but are to be realities of everyday 
life, then they should be protected by adequate pains and penalties 
from interference in the enjoyment of these declared rights. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


43 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 43 

A MEAN DEAL 


(A) The Depressed Classes therefore propose that the following 
section should be added to Part XI of the Government of India Act 
1919, dealing with Offences, Procedure and Penalties . — 

(i) Offence of Infringement of Citizenship. 


“Whoever denies to any person except for reasons by law 
applicable to persons of all classes and 
regardless of any previous condition of 
untouchability the full enjoyment of 
any of the accommodations, advant- 
ages, facilities, privileges of inns, 
educational institutions, roads, paths, 
streets, tanks, wells and other watering 
places, public conveyances on land, 
air or water, theatres or other places 
of public amusement, resort or convenience whether they are 
dedicated to or maintained or licensed for the use of the public 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to five years and shall also 
be liable to fine.” 


U.S. Statutes At 
Large. 

Civil Eights Protec- 
tion Acts of April 0, 
1866, and of March, 
1, 1875 — passed in 
the interest of the 
Negroes after their 
emancipation. 


(B) Obstruction by orthodox individuals is not the only menace 
to the Depressed Classes in the way of peaceful enjoyment of their 
rights. The commonest form of obstruction is the social boycott. 
It is the most formidable weapon in the hands of the orthodox 
classes with which they beat down any attempt on the part of the 
Depressed Classes to undertake any activity if it happens to be 
unpalatable to them. The way it works and the occasions on which 
it is brought into operation are well described in the Report of 
the Committee appointed by the Government of Bombay in 1928 
“to enquire into the educational, economic and social condition 
of the Depressed Classes (untouchables) and of the Aboriginal 
Tribes in the Presidency and to recommend measures for their 
uplift.” The following is an extract from the same : — 


Depressed Classes and Social Boycott 

“102. Although we have recommended various remedies 
to secure to the Depressed Classes their rights to all public 
utilities we fear that there will be difficulties in the way 
of their exercising them for a long time to come. The first 
difficulty is the fear of open violence against them by the 
orthodox classes. It must be noted that the Depressed Classes 
form a small minority in every village, opposed to which is 
a great majority of the orthodox who are bent on protecting 
their interests and dignity from any supposed invasion by the 
Depressed Classes at any cost. The danger of prosecution by 
the Police has put a limitation upon the use of violence by 
the orthodox classes and consequently such cases are rare. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“The second difficulty arises from the economic position 
in which the Depressed Classes are found to-day. The 
Depressed Classes have no economic independence in most 
parts of the Presidency. Some cultivate the lands of the 
orthodox classes as their tenants at will. Others live on their 
earnings as farm labourers employed by the orthodox classes 
and the rest subsist on the food or grain given to them by 
the orthodox classes in lieu of service rendered to them as 
village servants. We have heard of numerous instances where 
the orthodox classes have used their economic power as a 
weapon against those Depressed Classes in their villages, 
when the latter have dared to exercise their rights, and have 
evicted them from their land, and stopped their employment 
and discontinued their remuneration as village servants. 
This boycott is often planned on such an extensive scale 
as to include the prevention of the Depressed Classes from 
using the commonly used paths and the stoppage of sale of 
the necessaries of life by the village Bania. According to the 
evidence sometimes small causes suffice for the proclamation 
of a social boycott against the Depressed Classes. Frequently 
it follows on the exercise by the Depressed Classes of their 
right to the use of the common-well, but cases have been by 
no means rare where a stringent boycott has been proclaimed 
simply because Depressed Class man has put on the sacred 
thread, has bought a piece of land, has put on good clothes 
or ornaments, or has carried a marriage procession with the 
bridegroom on the horse through the public street. 

“We do not know of any weapon more effective than 
this social boycott which could have been invented for 
the suppression of the Depressed Classes. The method of 
open violence pales away before it, for it has the most far 
reaching and deadening effects. It is the more dangerous 
because it passes as a lawful method consistent with the 
theory of freedom of contact. We agree that this tyranny of 
the majority must be put down with a firm hand, if we are 
to guarantee the Depressed Classes the freedom of speech 
and action necessary for their uplift.” 

In the opinion of the Depressed Classes the only Way to 
overcome this kind of menace to their rights and liberties is 
to make social boycott an offence punishable by law. They are 
therefore bound to insist that the following sections should 
be added to those included in Part XI, of the Government of 
India Act 1919, dealing with Offences, Procedure and Penalties. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


45 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 45 

A MEAN DEAL 

I. OFFENCE OF BOYCOTT DEFINED 

(i) A person shall be deemed to boycott another who — 

(a) refuses to let or use or occupy any 
house or land, or to deal with, work for 
hire, or do business with another person, 
or to render to him or receive from him 
any service, or refuses to do any of the 
said things on the terms on which such 
things should commonly be done in the 
ordinary course of business, or 

(b) abstains from such social, professional or business relations 
as he would, having regard to such existing customs in the 
community which are not inconsistent with any fundamental 
right or other rights of citizenship declared in the Constitution 
ordinarily maintain with such person, or 

(c) in any way injures, annoys or interferes with such other 
person in the exercise of his lawful rights. 

II. PUNISHMENT FOR BOYCOTTING 

Whoever, in consequence of any person having done any act 
which he was legally entitled to do or of his having omitted to do 
any act which he was legally entitled to omit to do, or with intent 
to cause any person to do any act which he is not legally bound to 
do or to omit to do any act which he is legally entitled to do, or 
with intent to cause harm to such person in body, mind, reputation 
or property, or in his business or means of living, boycotts such 
person or any person in whom such person is interested, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description which may 
extend to seven years or with fine or with both. 

Provided that no offence shall be deemed to have been committed 
under this Section, if the Court is satisfied that the accused person 
has not acted at the instigation of or in collusion with any other 
person or in pursuance of any conspiracy or of any agreement or 
combination to boycott. 

III. PUNISHMENT FOR INSTIGATING OR 
PROMOTING A BOYCOTT 

Whoever — 

(a) publicly makes or publishes or circulates a proposal for, or 

(b) makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or 
report with intent to, or which he has reason to believe to be 
likely to, cause or 

(c) in any other way instigates or promotes the boycotting of any 
person or class of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend to five years, or with fine or with both. 


This and the following 
legal provisions are 
bodily taken from 
Burma Anti-Boycott 
Act, 1922, with a few 
changes to suit the 
necessities of the case. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Explanation. — An offence under this section shall be deemed 
to have been committed although the person affected or likely to 
be affected by any action of the nature referred to herein is not 
designated by name or class but only by his acting or abstaining 
from acting some specified manner. 

TV. PUNISHMENT FOR THREATENING A 
BOYCOTT 

Whoever, in consequence of any person having done any act 
which he was legally entitled to do or of his having omitted to 
do any act which he was legally entitled to omit to do, or with 
intent to cause any person to do any act which he is not legally 
bound to do, or to omit to do any act which he is legally entitled 
to do, threatens to cause such person or any person in whom 
such person is interested, to be boycotted shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years or with fine or with both. 

Exception : — It is not boycott 

(i) to do any act in furtherance of a bona fide labour dispute, 

(ii) to do any act in the ordinary course of business competition. 
N.B. — All these offences shall be deemed to be cognizable offences. 

Condition No. III. 

PROTECTION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION 

The Depressed Classes entertain grave fears of discrimination 
either by legislation or by executive order being made in the future. 
They cannot therefore consent to subject themselves to majority 
rule unless it is rendered impossible in law for the legislature or 
the executive to make any invidious discrimination against the 
Depressed Classes. 

It is therefore proposed that the following Statutory provision 
be made in the constitutional law of India : — 

“ It shall not be competent for any Legislature or executive 
in India to pass a law or issue an order, rule or regulation so 
as to violate the rights of the Subjects of the State, regardless 
of any previous condition of untouchability, in all territories 
subject to the jurisdiction of the dominion of India, 

( 1 ) to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and 
give evidence, to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold and convey 
real and personal property, 

( 2 ) to be eligible for entry into the civil and military 
employ and to all educational institutions except for such, 
conditions and limitations as may be necessary to provide 
for the due and adequate representation of all classes of the 
subjects of the State, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


47 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 47 

A MEAN DEAL 

(5) to be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of 
the accommodations, advantages, facilities, educational 
institutions, privileges of inns, rivers, streams, wells, tanks, 
roads, paths, streets, public conveyances on land, air and 
water, theatres, and other places of public resort or amusement 
except for such conditions and limitations applicable alike to 
all subjects of every race, class, caste, colour or creed, 

( 4 ) to be deemed fit for and capable of sharing without 
distinction the benefits of any religious or charitable trust 
dedicated to or created, maintained or licensed for the general 
public or for persons of the same faith and religion, 

(5) to claim full and equal benefit of all laws and 
proceedings for the security of person and property as is 
enjoyed by other subjects regardless of any previous condition 
of untouchability and be subject to like punishment pains and 
penalties and to none other. 

Condition No. IV 

ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION IN THE 
LEGISLATURES 

The Depressed Classes must be given sufficient political power 
to influence legislative and executive action for the purpose of 
securing their welfare. In view of this they demand that the 
following provisions shall be made in the electoral law so as to 
give them — 

(1) Right to adequate representation in the Legislatures of the 
Country, Provincial and Central. 

(2) Right to elect their own men as their representatives, 

(a) by adult suffrage, and 

(b) by separate electorates for the first ten years and 
thereafter by joint electorates and reserved seats, it 
being under stood that joint electorates shall not be 
forced upon the Depressed Classes against their will 
unless such joint electorates are accompanied by adult 
suffrage. 

N.B . — Adequate Representation for the Depressed Classes 
cannot be defined in quantitative terms until the extent of 
representation allowed to other communities is known. But 
it must be understood that the Depressed Classes will not 
consent to the representation of any other community being 
settled on better terms than those allowed to them. They will 
not agree to being placed at a disadvantage in this matter. In 
any case the Depressed Classes of Bombay and Madras must 
have weightage over their population ratio of representation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

irrespective of the extent of representation allowed to other 
minorities in the Provinces. 

Condition No. V 

ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION IN THE SERVICES 

The Depressed Classes have suffered enormously at the hands 
of the high caste officers who have monopolized the Public Services 
by abusing the law or by misusing the discretion vested in them in 
administering it to the prejudice of the Depressed Classes and to 
the advantage of the caste Hindus without any regard to justice, 
equity or good conscience. This mischief can only be avoided by 
destroying the monopoly of caste Hindus in the Public Services 
and by regulating the recruitment to them in such a manner that 
all communities including the Depressed will have an adequate 
share in them. For this purpose the Depressed Classes have to 
make the following proposals for statutory enactment as part of 
the constitutional law: — 

(1) There shall be established in India and in each Province in 
India a public Services Commission to undertake the recruitment 
and control of the Public Services. 

(2) No member of the Public Service Commission shall be 
removed except by a resolution passed by the Legislature nor shall 
he be appointed to any office under the Crown after his retirement. 

(3) It shall be the duty of the Public Service Commission, 
subject to the tests of efficiency as may be prescribed, 

(a) to recruit the Services in such a manner as will secure 
due and adequate representation of all communities, 
and 

(b) to regulate from time to time priority in employment in 
accordance with the existing extent of the representation 
of the various communities in any particular service 
concerned. 

Condition No. VI 

REDRESS AGAINST PREJUDICIAL ACTION OR 
NEGLECT OF INTERESTS 

In view of the fact that the Majority Rule of the future 
will be the rule of the orthodox, the Depressed Classes fear 
that such a Majority Rule will not be sympathetic to them and 
that the probability of prejudice to their interests and neglect 
of their vital needs cannot be overlooked. It must be provided 
against particularly because, however adequately represented the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


49 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 49 

A MEAN DEAL 


Depressed Classes will be in a minority in all legislatures. The 
Depressed Classes think it very necessary that they should have 
the means of redress given to them in the constitution. It is 
therefore proposed that the following provision should be made 
in the constitution of India : — 


‘In and for each Province and in and for India it shall be 
the duty and obligation of the Legislature 
and the Executive or any other Authority 
established by Law to make adequate 
provision for the education, sanitation, 
recruitment in Public Services and other matters of social 
and political advancement of the Depressed Classes and to 
do nothing that will prejudicially affect them. 


British North 
American Act, 
1867, Sec. 93 


“(2) Where in any Province or in India the provisions of 
this section are violated an appeal shall lie to the Governor- 
General in Council from any act or decision of any Provincial 
Authority and to the Secretary of State from any act or decision 
of a Central Authority affecting the matter. 


“ (3) In every such case where it appears to the Governor- 
General in Council or to the Secretary of State that the 
Provincial Authority or Central Authority does not take 
steps requisite for the due execution of the provisions of this 
Section then and in every such case, and as far only as the 
circumstances of each case require the Governor-General 
in Council or the Secretary of State acting as an appellate 
authority may prescribe, for such period as they may deem 
fit, take remedial measures for the due execution of the 
provisions of this Section and of any of its decisions under 
this Section and which shall be binding upon the authority 
appealed against. 


Condition No. VII 


SPECIAL DEPARTMENTAL CARE 


The helpless, hapless and sapless condition of the Depressed 
Classes must be entirely attributed to the dogged and determined 
opposition of the whole mass of the orthodox population which 
will not allow the Depressed Classes to have equality of status or 
equality of treatment. It is not enough to say of their economic 
condition that they are poverty-stricken or that they are a 
class of landless labourers, although both these statements are 
statements of fact. It has to be noted that the poverty of the 
Depressed Classes is due largely to the social prejudices in 
consequence of which many an occupation for earning a living is 
closed to them. This is a fact which differentiates the position of 
the Depressed Classes from that of the ordinary caste labourer 
and is often a source of trouble between the two. It has also 
to be borne in mind that the forms of tyranny and oppression 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


27-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

practised against the Depressed Classes are very various and 
the capacity of the Depressed Classes to protect themselves is 
extremely limited. The facts, which obtain in this connection 
and which are of common occurrence throughout India, are well 
described in the Abstracts of Proceedings of the Board of Revenue 
of the Government of Madras dated 5th Nov., 1892, No. 723, from 
which the following is an extract: — 

“134. There are forms of oppression only hitherto hinted 
at which must be at least cursorily mentioned. To punish 
disobedience of Pariahs, their masters — 

(а) Bring false cases in the village court or in the criminal 
courts. 

(б) Obtain, on application, from Government waste lands 
lying all round the paracheri, so as to impound the 
Pariahs’ cattle or obstruct the way to their temple. 

(c) Have mirasi names fraudulently entered in the 
Government account against the paracheri. 

(i d ) Pull down the huts and destroy the growth in the 
backyards. 

(e) Deny occupancy right in immemorial sub-tenancies. 

if) Forcibly cut the Pariahs’ crops, and on being resisted, 
charge them with theft and rioting. 

(g) Under misrepresentations, get them to execute documents 
by which they are afterwards ruined. 

(h) Cut off the flow of water from their fields. 

(i) Without legal notice, have the property of sub-tenants 
attached for the land-lords’ arrears of revenue. 

“135. It will be said there are civil and criminal courts 
for the redress of any of these injuries. There are the courts 
indeed ; but India does not breed village Hampdens. One 
must have courage to go to the courts ; money to employ 
legal knowledge, and meet legal expenses ; and means to 
live during the case and the appeals. Further most cases 
depend upon the decision of the first court; and these courts 
are presided over by officials who are sometimes corrupt 
and who generally, for other reasons, sympathize with the 
wealthy and landed classes to which they belong. 

“136. The influence of these classes with the official world 
can hardly be exaggerated. It is extreme with natives and 
great even with Europeans. Every office, from the highest to 
the lowest, is stocked with their representatives, and there 
is no proposal affecting their interests but they can bring a 
score of influence to bear upon it in its course from inception 
to execution.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


51 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 51 

There can be no doubt that in view of these circumstances the 
uplift of the Depressed Classes will remain a pious hope unless 
the task is placed in the forefront of all governmental activities 
and unless equalization of opportunities is realized in practice by 
a definite policy and determined effort on the part of Government. 
To secure this end the proposal of the Depressed Classes is that 
the Constitutional Law should impose upon the Government of 
India a statutory obligation to maintain at all times a department 
to deal with their problems by the addition of a section in the 
Government of India Act to the following effect : — 

“1. Simultaneously with the introduction of this 
Constitution and as part thereof, there shall be created in 
the Government of India a Department to be in charge of 
a Minister for the purpose of watching the interests of the 
Depressed Classes and promoting their welfare. 

“2. The Minister shall hold office so long as he retains 
the confidence of the Central Legislature. 

“3. It shall be the duty of the Minister in the exercise of 
any powers and duties conferred upon him or transferred to 
him by law, to take all such steps as may be desirable to 
secure the preparation, effective carrying out and co-ordination 
of measures preventative of acts of social injustice, tyranny 
or oppression against the Depressed Classes and conducive 
to their welfare throughout India. 

“4. It shall be lawful for the Governor-General — 

(a) to transfer to the Minister all or any powers or duties 
in respect of the welfare of the Depressed Classes 
arising from any enactment relating to education, 
sanitation, etc. 

(b) to appoint Depressed Classes welfare bureaus in 
each province to work under the authority of and 
in co-operation with the Minister. 

Condition No. VIII 

DEPRESSED CLASSES AND THE CABINET 

Just as it is necessary that the Depressed Classes should 
have the power to influence governmental action by seats in the 
Legislature so also it is desirable that the Depressed Classes 
should have the opportunity to frame the general policy of the 
Government. This they can do only if they can find a seat in the 
Cabinet. The Depressed Classes therefore claim that in common 
with other minorities, their moral rights to be represented in 
the Cabinet should be recognized. With this purpose in view the 
Depressed Classes propose; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


52 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

52 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that in the Instrument of Instructions an obligation shall 
be placed upon the Governor and the Governor-General to 
endeavour to secure the representation of the Depressed Classes 
in his Cabinet. 

II 

What happened to these demands of the Untouchable and 
how the members of the Minorities Committee reacted to them 
can be well understood by a perusal of the Report made by the 
Minorities Committee to the Round Table Conference. I give below 
a few extracts from that Report : — 

“5. Claims were therefore advanced by various 
committees that arrangements should be made for communal 
representation and for fixed proportions of seats. It was 
also urged that the number of seats reserved for a minority 
community should in no case be less than its proportion in 
the population. The methods by which this could be secured 
were mainly three: (1) nomination, (2) electorates and (3) 
separate electorates. 

“6. Nomination was unanimously deprecated. 

“7. Joint electorates were proposed with the proviso that 
a proportion of seats should be reserved to the communities. 
Thus a more democratic form would be given to the elections 
whilst the purpose of the electorate system would be secured. 
Doubts were expressed that, whilst such a system of election 
might secure the representation of minorities, it provided 
no guarantee that the representation would be genuine, but 
that it might, in its working, mean the nomination or, in 
any event, the election of minority representatives by the 
majority communities. 

It was pointed out that this was in fact only a form 
of community representation and had in practice all the 
objections to the more direct form of community electorates. 

“8. The discussion made it evident that the demand 
which remained as the only one which would be generally 
acceptable was separate electorates. The general objection to 
this scheme has been subject to much previous discussion 
in India. It involves what is a very difficult problem for 
solution, viz., what should be the amount of communal 
representation in the various provinces and in the Centre ; 
that, if the whole, or practically the whole, of the seats 
in a legislature are to be assigned to communities, there 
will be no room for the growth of independent political 
opinion or of true political parties, and this problem 
received a serious complication by the demand of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


53 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 53 

representative of the Depressed Classes that they should be 
deducted from the Hindu population and be regarded, for 
electoral purposes, as a separate community. 

“9. It was suggested that, in order to meet the most 
obvious objection to the ear-marking of seats to communalities, 
only a proportion should be so assigned — say 80 per cent, or 
90 per cent. — and that the rest should be filled by open 
election. This, however, was not regarded by some of the 
communities as giving them the guarantees they required. 

“10. The scheme proposed by Maulana Muhammad Ali, 
a member of the Sub- Committee, whose death we deplore, 
that, as far as possible no communal candidate should be 
elected unless he secured at least 40 per cent, according to 
arrangement, of the votes of the other community, was also 
considered. It was, however, pointed out that such a scheme 
necessarily involved the maintenance of communal registers 
and so was open to objections similar to those urged against 
separate electorates. 

“11. No claim for separate electorate or for the reservation 
of seats in joint electorates was made on behalf of women 
who should continue to be eligible for election on the same 
footing as men. But, in order to familiarize the public mind 
with the idea of women taking an active part in political life 
and to secure their interim representation on the legislature, 
it was urged that 5 per cent, of the seats in the first three 
Councils should be reserved for women and it was suggested 
that they should be filled by co-option by the elected members 
voting by proportional representation. 

“ 12 . There was general agreement with the recommendation 
of Sub-Committee No. II (Provincial Constitution) that the 
representation on the Provincial Executive of important 
minority communities was a matter of the greatest 
practical importance for the successful working of the new 
constitution, and it was also agreed that, on the same 
grounds, Muhammadans should be represented on the Federal 
Executive. On behalf of the smaller minorities a claim was 
put forward for their representation, either individually or 
collectively, on the Provincial and Federal Executives or 
that, if this should be found impossible, in each Cabinet 
there should be a Minister specially charged with the duty 
of protecting minority interests. 

(Dr. Ambedkar and Sardar Ujjal Singh would add the words 
“and other important minorities” after the word Muhammadans 
in line 6). 

The difficulty of working jointly responsible Executives under 
such a scheme as this was pointed out. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


54 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

54 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“13. As regards the administration, it was agreed that 
recruitment to both Provincial and Central Services should 
be entrusted to Public Service Commissions, with instructions 
to reconcile the claims of the various communities to fair 
and adequate representation in the Public Services, whilst 
providing for the maintenance of a proper standard of 
efficiency. 

* * * 

“16. It has also been made clear that the British 
Government cannot, with any chance of agreement, impose 
upon the communities an electoral principle which, in some 
feature or other, would be met by their opposition. It was 
therefore plain that, failing an agreement, separate electorates, 
with all their drawbacks and difficulties, would have to be 
retained as the basis of the electoral arrangements under 
the new constitution. From this the question of proportions 
would arise. Under these circumstances, the claims of the 
Depressed Classes will have to be considered adequately. 

* * * 

“18. The Minorities and Depressed Classes were definite 
in their assertion that they could not consent to any self- 
governing constitution for India unless their demands were 
met in a reasonable manner.” 

The Federal Structure Committee, another Committee 
appointed by the Round Table Conference to discuss the form and 
functions of the Central Government, had also to consider the 
question of the Untouchables in connection with the composition of 
the Federal Legislatures. In the report it made to the Conference 
it said : — 

“Opinion was unanimous in the sub-committee that, 
subject to any report of the Minorities Sub- Committee, 
provision should be made for the representation, possibly 
in both Chambers and certainly in the Lower Chamber, of 
certain special interests, namely, the Depressed Classes, 
Indian Christians, Europeans, Anglo-Indians, Landlords, 
Commerce (European and Indian) and Labour.” 

Ill 

Before the first session of the Round Table Conference was 
concluded the reports of both the Committees were placed before 
the Conference and were passed by the Conference. It will be 
noticed that although agreement on details was lacking it was 
unanimously accepted that the Untouchables were entitled to 
recognition as a separate entity for political and constitutional 
purposes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


55 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 55 

The only party in the country whose attitude to this decision 
of the Round Table Conference was not known when the 
First Session of the Round Table Conference was closed, was 
the Congress. This was because the Congress had boycotted 
the Round Table Conference and was busy in carrying on 
civil disobedience against the Government. By the time the 
Second Session of the Round Table Conference became due, 
a compromise between His Majesty’s Government and the 
Congress was reached as a result of which the Congress agreed 
to participate in it and make its contribution to the solution 
of the many problems confronting the Conference. Everybody, 
who had witnessed the good temper, happy relationship and 
the spirit of give and take shown by the delegates at the first 
session of the Round Table Conference, hoped that the progress 
made would be maintained from session to session. Indeed the 
rate of progress in forging an agreement was expected to be 
much more rapid as a result of the advent of the Congress. 
In fact, friends of Congress were alleging that if the session 
did not produce an agreement it was because of the absence 
of the Congress. 

Everybody was therefore looking forward to the Congress 
to lead the Conference to success. Unfortunately, the Congress 
chose Mr. Gandhi as its representative. A worse person could not 
have been chosen to guide India’s destiny. As a unifying force 
he was a failure. Mr. Gandhi presents himself as a man full 
of humility. But his behaviour at the Round Table Conference 
showed that in the flush of victory Mr. Gandhi can be very 
petty-minded. As a result of his successful compromise with 
the Government just before he came, Mr. Gandhi treated the 
whole Non-Congress delegation with contempt. He insulted 
them whenever an occasion furnished him with an excuse 
by openly telling them that they were nobodies and that 
he alone, as the delegate of the Congress, represented the 
country. Instead of unifying the Indian delegation, Mr. Gandhi 
widened the breach. Prom the point of view of knowledge, 
Mr. Gandhi proved himself to be a very ill-equipped person. 
On the many constitutional and communal questions with 
which the Conference was confronted, Mr. Gandhi had 
many platitudes to utter but no views or suggestions of a 
constructive character to offer. He presented a curious complex 
of a man who in some cases would threaten to resist in every 
possible way any compromise on what he regarded as a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


56 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

56 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

principle though others regarded it as a pure prejudice but in 
other cases would not mind making the worst compromises on 
issues which appeared to others as matters of fundamental 
principle on which no compromise should be made. 

Mr. Gandhi’s attitude to the demands of the Untouchables 
at the second session of the Round Table Conference furnishes 
the best illustration of this rather queer trait in his character. 
When the delegates assembled for the second session of the 
Round Table Conference the Federal Structure Committee met 
first. In the very first speech which he made in the Federal 
Structure Committee on 15th September 1931, Mr. Gandhi 
referred to the question of the Untouchables. Mr. Gandhi 
said : — 

“The Congress has, from its very commencement, taken 
up the cause of the so-called ‘Untouchables.’ There was a 
time when the Congress had at every annual session as its 
adjunct the Social Conference, to which the late Ranade 
dedicated his energies, among his many other activities. 
Headed by him you will find, in the programme of the Social 
Conference, reform in connection with the ‘Untouchables’ 
taking a prominent place. But, in 1920, the Congress took 
a large step and brought in the question of the removal of 
untouchability as a plank on the political platform, making 
it an important item of the political programme. Just as 
the Congress considered the Hindu-Muslim unity — thereby 
meaning unity amongst all the classes — to be indispensable 
for the attainment of Swaraj, so also did the Congress 
consider the removal of the curse of untouchability as an 
indispensable condition for the attainment of full freedom. 

The position the Congress took up in 1920 remains the 
same today; and so you will see the Congress has attempted 
from its very beginning to be what it described itself to be, 
namely, national in every sense of the term.” 

Anyone, who has perused how the Congress failed to carry 
out the 1922 programme for the uplift of the Untouchables 
which was included in the Bardoli programme and how it left 
it to the Hindu Maha Sabha, could have no hesitation in saying 
that what Mr. Gandhi said was untrue. The speech however 
gave no indication as to what line Mr. Gandhi was going to 
take on the demands presented by the Untouchables, although 
I could see the drift of it. 1 But he did not leave people long in 
1 Before going to the First Session of the Round Table Conference I had an 
interview with Mr. Gandhi in Bombay in which he had told me that he was not 
in favour of regarding the Untouchables as a separate entity for political purposes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


57 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 57 

imagining what his position was going to be. The meeting of 
the Federal Structure Committee held on the 17th of September 
1931 provided him the necessary occasion. The agenda for 
the meeting included the question of election of members of 
the Federal Legislatures. Expressing his views on the subject, 
Mr. Gandhi made the following statement: — 

“I come to sub-head ( v ) — representation by special 
constituencies of special interests. I here speak for the 
Congress. The Congress has reconciled itself to special 
treatment of the Hindu-Muslim-Sikh tangle. There are sound 
historical reasons for it but the Congress will not extend 
that doctrine in any shape or form. I listened to the list of 
special interests. So far as the Untouchables are concerned, 

I have not yet quite grasped what Dr. Ambedkar has to 
say : but of course the Congress will share the honour with 
Dr. Ambedkar of representing the interests of the 
Untouchables. They are as clear to the Congress as the 
interests of any other body or of any other individual 
throughout the length and breadth of India. Therefore I 
would most strongly resist any further special representation.” 

This was nothing but a declaration of War by Mr. Gandhi and 
the Congress against the Untouchables. In any case it resulted 
in a war between the two. With this declaration by Mr. Gandhi, 
I knew what Mr. Gandhi would do in the Minorities Committee 
which was the main forum for the discussion of this question. 

Mr. Gandhi was making his plans to bypass the Untouchables 
and to close the communal problem by bringing about a settlement 
between the three parties, the Hindus, the Muslims and the Sikhs. 
He had been carrying on negotiations privately with the Muslims 
before the Minorities Committee met, but evidently they had not 
been concluded. Consequently, when the Minorities Committee 
met on 28th September 1931, Sir Ali Imam representing the 
Nationalist Muslim point of view started the debate. He began 
by saying : — 

“I am personally not aware if there are any negotiations 
going on so far as the Muslim Delegation is concerned. 

I have had no opportunity of knowing that there are 
any proposals at present that are under consideration. 

It may be, as I have heard generally, that some kind of 
understanding may be arrived at. I do not vouch for it; 

I know nothing about it. If you desire, Sir, that I should 
put before you the Muslim Nationalists’ point of view, 

I shall be ready to do so ; but of course, I must have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


58 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

58 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

your permission, because it may take a little time and economy 
of time in a meeting like this is one’s principal aim. 

“Chairman: The point is that this Committee’s business 
is very strictly limited to a consolidation of the Minorities 
problem. 

Sir Ali Imam: It is from that point of view that I shall 
approach the subject. 

Chairman : If there is no other official intervention shall 
I call on Sir Ali Imam ?” 

Then followed His Highness the Aga Khan who said : — 

“I believe that Mahatma Gandhi is going to see the Muslim 
Delegation to-night. We hope to-night to have a friendly talk 
with our friend. That is all that I can tell you as far as any 
possible negotiation is concerned.” 

Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya also suggested that a short 
adjournment may be fruitful of results. Knowing that this was a 
mischievous move I got up and spoke as follows : — 

“I should like to say one word before we adjourn. As 
regards your suggestion — that while these negotiations are 
going on members of the other minority communities should 
prepare their case — I should like to say that so far as the 
Depressed Classes are concerned, we have already presented 
our case to the Minorities Sub-Committee last time. 

“The only thing which remains for me to do is to put 
before this Committee a short statement 1 suggesting the 
quantum of representation which we want in the different 
Legislatures. Beyond that I do not think I am called upon to 
do anything; but the point I am anxious to make at the very 
outset is this. I have heard with great pleasure that further 
negotiations are going to take place for the settlement of 
the communal issue, but I would like to make our position 
clear at the very start. I do not wish any doubt should be 
left on this question. Those who are negotiating ought to 
understand that they are not plenipotentiaries appointed by 
the Committee to negotiate a settlement; that whatever may 
be the representative character of Mr. Gandhi or of the other 
parties with whom he wishes to negotiate, they certainly are 
not in a position to bind us — certainly not. I say that most 
emphatically in this meeting. 

“Another thing I want to say is this — that the claims put 
forward by the various minorities are claims put forward by 
them irrespective of the consideration as to whether the claims 
that they have put forward are consistent with the claims of 
the other minorities. Consequently, any settlement which takes 


This I did by putting in another memorandum which is included as Appendix II. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


59 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 59 

place between one minority on the one hand and the Congress 
or any other party for the matter of that on the other hand, 
without taking into consideration the claims which have been 
put forward by other minorities, can have no binding force as 
far as I am concerned. I have no quarrel with the question 
whether any particular community should get weightage or 
not, but I do want to say most emphatically that whoever 
claims weightage and whoever is willing to give that weightage 
he must not give it — he cannot give it — out of my share. I 
want to make that absolutely plain.” 

What followed will be clear from the extract from the 
proceedings given, below : — 

“Chairman: Do not let there be any misunderstanding. 
This is the body before which the final settlement must come, 
and the suggestion is merely that if there are minorities or 
communities that hitherto have been in conflict with each 
other they should use a short time for the purpose of trying 
to overcome their difficulties. That will be a step and a very 
important and essential step, towards a general agreement, 
but the agreement is going to be a general one. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have made my position absolutely clear. 

“Chairman: Dr. Ambedkar’s position has been made 
absolutely clear; in his usual splendid way he has left no 
doubt at all about it, and that will come up when this body 
resumes its discussion. What I would like to do is to get you 
all to feel that we are co-operating together for a general 
Settlement; not for a settlement between any two or any 
three, but a complete settlement. 

“Chairman: The position is this. We will adjourn now, 

I think, and later continue our meetings. Pending any 
negotitions that may be going on between any two or any three 
of you, we can take up the time in listening to a statement 
of the claims of the other minorities. I think that would be 
very useful. It would save time, and it would not mar the 
possibility of any harmony that may be reached between, say, 
our Sikh friends — who, we know, can look after themselves 
with a great deal of persistence — Mr. Gandhi and his friends 
and the Aga Khan and his. 

“Dr. Ambedkar: I should like to Suggest whether it 
would not be possible for you to appoint a small Committee 
consisting of members drawn from the various minority 
communities, along with the Congress representatives, to 
sit in an informal manner and discuss this problem during 
the period of the adjournment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


60 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

60 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Chairman: I was going to make this suggestion. Do not 
ask me to appoint that Committee; do it yourselves. I have 
invited you to get together. Could not you manage to hold 
an informal meeting amongst yourselves and talk the matter 
over, and then when you speak here you will speak with 
some sort of knowledge of the effect of what you are saying 
on others ? Could we leave it in that way ? 

“Dr. Ambedkar: As you like. 

“Chairman : That would be far better.” 

No settlement was evidently arrived at between the three 
parties during the adjournment. Consequently when the Minorities 
Committee met again on 1st October 1931, Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“Prime Minister, after consultation with His Highness 
the Aga Khan and other Muslim friends last night, we came 
to the conclusion that the purpose for which we meet here 
would be better served if a week’s adjournment was asked 
for. I have not had the opportunity of consulting my other 
colleagues, but I have no doubt that they will also agree in 
the proposal I am making.” 

The proposal was seconded by the Aga Khan. I got up to 
oppose the motion. What I said will be clear from the following 
extract from the proceedings : — 

“Dr. Ambedkar: I do not wish to create any difficulty in 
our making every possible attempt to arrive at some solution 
of the problem with which this Committee has to deal, and 
if a solution can be arrived at by the means suggested by 
Mahatma Gandhi, I, for one, will have no objection to that 
proposal. 

“But there is just this one difficulty with which I, as 
representing the Depressed Classes, am faced. I do not know 
what sort of committee Mahatma Gandhi proposes to appoint 
to consider this question during the period of adjournment, 
but I suppose that the Depressed Classes will be represented 
on this Committee. 

“Mr. Gandhi: Without doubt. 

“Dr. Ambedkar: Thank you. But I do not know whether in 
the position in which I am today it would be of any use for 
me to work on the proposed Committee. And for this reason. 
Mahatma Gandhi told us on the first day that he spoke in the 
Federal Structure Committee that as a representative of the 
Indian National Congress he was not prepared to give political 
recognition to any community other than the Muhammadans 
and the Sikhs. He was not prepared to recognize the Anglo- 
Indians, the Depressed Classes, and the Indian Christians. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


61 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 61 

I do not think that I am doing any violence to etiquette by 
stating in this Committee that when I had the pleasure of 
meeting Mahatma Gandhi a week ago and discussing the 
question of the Depressed Classes with him, and when we, 
as members of the other minorities, had the chance of talking 
with him yesterday in his office, he told us in quite plain terms 
that the attitude that he had taken in the Federal Structure 
Committee was a firm and well considered attitude. What I 
would like to say is that unless at the outset I know that the 
Depressed Classes are going to be recognised as a community 
entitled to political recognition in the future Constitution of 
India, I do not know whether it will serve any purpose for me 
to join the committee that is proposed by Mahatma Gandhi 
to be constituted to go into this matter. Unless, therefore, I 
have an assurance that this Committee will start with the 
assumption that all those communities which the Minorities 
Sub- Committee last year recommended as fit for recognition 
in the future constitution of India will be included, I do not 
know that I can whole-heartedly support the proposition for 
adjournment, or that I can whole heartedly co-operate with 
the Committee that is going to be nominated. That is what 
I wish to be clear about. 

* * * 

“Dr. Ambedkar: I should like to make my position further 
clear. It seems that there has been a certain misunderstanding 
regarding what I said. It is not that I object to adjournment; 
it is not that I object to serving on any Committee that might 
be appointed to consider the question. What I would like to 
know before I enter upon this committee, if they give me 
the privilege of serving on it, is : What is the thing that this 
Committee is going to consider ? Is it only going to consider 
the question of the Muhammadans vis-a-vis the Hindus ? 

Is it going to consider the question of the Muhammadans 
vis-a-vis the Sikhs in the Punjab ? Or is it going to consider 
the question of the Christians, the Anglo-Indians and the 
Depressed Classes ? 

“If we understand perfectly well before we start that this 
committee will not merely concern itself with the question 
of the Hindus and the Muhammadans, of the Hindus and 
the Sikhs, but will also take upon itself the responsibility 
of considering the case of the Depressed Classes, the Anglo- 
Indians and the Christians, I am perfectly willing to allow this 
adjournment resolution to be passed without any objection. But 
I do want to say this, that if I am to be left out in the cold and 
if this interval is going to be utilised for the purposes of solving 
the Hindu-Muslim question, I would press that the Minorities 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


62 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

62 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Committee should itself grapple with the question and 
consider it, rather than allow the question to be dealt with 
by some other informal Committee for arriving at a solution 
of the communal question in respect of some minorities only. 

“Mr. Gandhi: Prime Minister and friends, I see that 
there is some kind of misunderstanding with reference to the 
scope of the work that some of us have set before ourselves. 
I fear that Dr. Ambedkar, Colonel Gidney and other friends 
are unnecessarily nervous about what is going to happen. 
Who am I to deny political status to any single interest or 
class or even individual in India ? As a representative of 
the Congress I should be unworthy of the trust that has 
been reposed in me by the Congress if I were guilty of 
sacrificing a single national interest. I have undoubtedly 
given expression to my own views on these points. I must 
confess that I hold to those views also. But there are 
ways and ways of guaranteeing protection to every single 
interest. It will be for those of us who will be putting our 
heads together to try to evolve a scheme. Nobody would be 
hampered in pressing his own views on the members of this 
very informal conference or meeting. 

“I do not think, therefore, that anybody need be afraid as 
to being able to express his opinion or carrying his opinion 
also. Mine will be there equal to that of every one of us ; it 
will carry no greater weight; I have no authority behind me 
to carry my opinion against the opinion of anybody. I have 
simply given expression to my views in the national interest, 
and I shall give expression to these views whenever they 
are opportune. It will be for you, it is for you to reject or 
accept these opinions. Therefore please disburse your minds, 
to everyone of us, of the idea that there is going to be any 
steam-rolling in the Conference and the informal meetings 
that I have adumbrated. But if you think that this is one 
way of coming closer together than by sitting stiffly at this 
table, you will not carry this adjournment motion but give 
your whole-hearted co-operation to the proposal that I have 
made in connection with these informal meetings. 

* * * 

“Chairman : Then I shall proceed to put it. I put it 
on the clear understanding, my friends, that the time is 
not going to be wasted and that these conferences — as 
Mr. Gandhi has said, informal conferences, but nevertheless 
I hope very valuable and fruitful conferences — will take place 
beween now and our next meeting. I hope you will all pledge 
yourselves to use the time in that way.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


63 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 63 

It is unnecessary for me to recite what happened at the 
informal meeting held after the adjournment. It was a complete 
failure if not a fiasco. The meeting was presided over by 
Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Gandhi began with the most difficult part of the 
Communal question namely the dispute between the Sikhs and 
the Muslims in the Punjab. This problem at one stage appeared 
to be nearer solution when the parties agreed to abide by the 
decision of an Arbitrator. The Sikhs, however, refused to proceed 
further in the matter until they knew who the Arbitrator was. 
As the Musalmans were not prepared to have the name of the 
Arbitrator disclosed the matter fell through. Mr. Gandhi was not 
interested in the problem of the other minorities, such as the 
Untouchables although he enacted the farce of calling upon the 
representatives of the other minorities to present a catalogue of 
their demands. He heard them but took no notice of them much. 
Did he place them before the meeting for its consideration? 
As soon as the Sikh-Muslim settlement broke up, Mr. Gandhi 
dissolved the meeting. The Minorities Committee met on 8th 
October 1931. The Prime Minister having called upon Mr. Gandhi 
to speak first, the latter said : — 

“Prime Minister and friends, it is with deep sorrow and 
deeper humiliation that I have to announce utter failure 
on my part to secure an agreed solution of the communal 
question through informal conversations among and with 
the representatives of different groups. I apologise to you, 

Mr. Prime Minister, and the other colleagues for the waste 
of a precious week. My only consolation lies in the fact 
that when I accepted the burden of carrying on these talks 
I knew that there was much hope of success and still more 
in the fact that I am not aware of having spared any effort 
to reach a solution. 

“But to say that the conversations have to our utter 
shame failed is not to say the whole truth. Causes of 
failure were inherent in the composition of the Indian 
Delegation. We are almost all not elected representatives of 
the parties or groups whom we are presumed to represent; 
we are here by nomination of the Government. Nor are 
those whose presence was absolutely necessary for an 
agreed solution to be found here. Further, you will allow 
me to say that this was hardly the time to summon the 
Minorities Committee. It lacks the sense of reality in that 
we do not know what it is that we are going to get. If we 
knew in a definite manner that we were going to get the 
thing we want, we should hesitate fifty times before we 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


64 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

64 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

threw it away in a sinful wrangle as it would be if we are 
told that the getting of it would depend upon the ability 
of the present Delegation to produce an agreed solution of 
the communal tangle. The solution can be the crown of the 
Swaraj constitution, not its foundation — if only because our 
differences have hardened, if they have not arisen, by reason 
of the foreign domination. I have not a shadow of a doubt 
that the icebag of communal differences will melt under the 
warmth of the sun of freedom. 

“I, therefore, venture to suggest that the Minorities 
Committee be adjourned sine die and that the fundamentals 
of the constitution be hammered into shape as quickly as 
may be. Meanwhile, the informal work of discovering a true 
solution of the communal problem will and must continue; 
only it must not baulk or be allowed to block the progress 
of constitution-building. Attention must be diverted from it 
and concentrated on the main part of the structure. 

“I hardly need point out to the Committee that my failure 
does not mean the end of all hope of arriving at an agreed 
solution. My failure does not even mean my utter defeat; 
there is no such word in the dictionary. My confession merely 
means failure of special effort for which I presumed to ask 
for a week’s indulgence, which you so generously gave. 

“I propose to use the failure as a stepping-stone to success, 
and I invite you all to do likewise; but, should all effort 
at agreement fail, even when the Round Table Conference 
reaches the end of its labours, I would suggest the addition 
of a clause to the expected constitution appointing a judicial 
tribunal that would examine all claims and give its final 
decision on all the points that may be left unsettled.” 

In the discussion that followed everybody refuted Mr. Gandhi’s 
allegation that the delegates were nominated by Government and 
did not represent the people. Getting up to make my position 
clear, I said : — 

“Mr. Prime Minister, last night when we parted at 
the conclusion of the meeting of the informal Committee, 
we parted, although with a sense of failure, at least with 
one common understanding, and that was that when 
we met here today none of us should make any speech 
or any comment that would cause exasperation. I am 
sorry to see that Mr. Gandhi should have been guilty of 
a breach of this understanding. Excuse me, I must have 
the opportunity to speak. He started by giving what were, 
according to him, the causes of the failure of the informal 
Committee. Now, I have my own view of the causes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


65 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 65 

which I think were responsible for the failure of the informal 
Committee to reach an agreement, but I do not propose to discuss 
them now. What disturbs me after hearing Mr. Gandhi is that 
instead of confining himself to his proposition, namely, that the 
Minorities Committee should adjourn sine die, he started casting 
certain reflections upon the representatives of the different 
communities who are sitting round this table. He said that the 
Delegates were nominees of the Government, and that they 
did not represent the views of their respective communities for 
whom they stood. We cannot deny the allegation that we are 
nominees of the Government, but, speaking for myself, I have 
not the slightest doubt that even if the Depressed Classes of 
India were given the chance of electing their representatives to 
this Conference, I would, all the same, find a place here. I say 
therefore that whether I am a nominee or not, I fully represent 
the claims of my community. Let no man be under the mistaken 
impression as regards that. 

“The Mahatma has been always claiming that the 
Congress stands for the Depressed Classes, and that the 
Congress represents the Depressed Classes more than I or 
my colleague can do. To that claim I can only say that it is 
one of the many false claims which irresponsible people keep 
on making, although the persons concerned with regard to 
those claims have been invariably denying them. 

“I have here a telegram which I have just received from 
a place which I have never visited and from a man whom I 
have never seen — from the President of the Depressed Classes 
Union, Kumaun, Almora, which I believe is in the United 
Provinces, and which contains the following resolution : 

“This Meeting declares its non-confidence in the Congress 
movement which has been carried on in and outside the 
country, and condemns the methods adopted by the Congress 
workers.” 

I do not care to read further, but I can say this (and I think 
if Mr. Gandhi will examine his position he will find out the 
truth), that although there may be people in the Congress who 
may be showing sympathy towards the Depressed Classes, the 
Depressed Classes are not in the Congress. That is a proposition 
which I propose to substantiate. I do not wish to enter into 
these points of controversy. They seem to be somewhat outside 
the main proposition. The main proposition which Mr. Gandhi 
has made is that this Committee should be adjourned sine 
die. With regard to that proposition, I entirely agree with the 
attitude taken up by Sir Muhammad Shafi. I, for one, cannot 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


66 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

66 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consent to this proposition. It seems to me that there are only 
two alternatives — either that this Minorities Committee should go 
on tackling the problem and trying to arrive at some satisfactory 
solution, if that is possible, and then, if that is not possible, the 
British Government should undertake the solution of that problem. 
We cannot consent to leave this to the arbitration of third parties 
whose sense of responsibility may not be the same as must be 
the sense of responsibility of the British Government. 

“Prime Minister, permit me to make one thing clear. The 
Depressed Classes are not anxious, they are not clamorous, 
they have not started any movement for claiming that there 
shall be an immediate transfer of power from the British 
to the Indian people. They have their particular grievances 
against the British people and I think I have voiced them 
sufficiently to make it clear that we feel those grievances 
most acutely. But, to be true to facts, the position is that 
the Depressed Classes are not clamouring for transfer of 
political power. Their position, to put it plainly, is that we 
are not anxious for the transfer of power ; but if the British 
Government is unable to resist the forces that have been 
set up in the country which do clamour for transference of 
political power — and we know the Depressed Classes in their 
present circumstances are not in a position to resist that — 
then our submission is that if you make that transfer, that 
transfer will be accompanied by such conditions and by such 
provisions that the power shall not fall into the hands of a 
clique, into the hands of an oligarchy, or into the hands of a 
group of people, whether Muhammadans or Hindus ; but that 
that solution shall be such that the power shall be shared 
by all communities in their respective proportions. Taking 
that view, I do not see how I, for one, can take any serious 
part in the deliberation of the Federal Structure Committee 
unless I know where I and my community stand.” 

The Prime Minister in his concluding observations said: — 

“Let us adjourn, and I will call you together again. In 
the meantime what I would like would be if those of you 
are sitting opposite me, the representatives of the small 
minorities, would also try your hands. 

“If there are any common agreements among yourselves, I 

would suggest that you circulate them It is not the British 

Government that is going to stand in the way of any agreement 
.. .Therefore what I would like you to have in your minds after 
the rather depressing statements to which we have listened, 
is this: That the British Government wants to go on; the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


67 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 67 

British Government wants you to go on. The British 
Government will take its action if you cannot go on to an 
end, because we are determined to make such improvements 
in the Government of India as will make the Government 
of India consistent with our own ideas, as will make the 
Government of India something that is capable of greater and 
greater expansion towards liberty. That is what we want. I 
appeal to the Delegates here today — Delegates representing 
all communities — Do not stand in our way ; because that is 
what is happening.” 

IV 

Acting on the suggestion of the Prime Minister the minorities, 
met to consider if they could produce a settlement. They tried 
and produced a settlement which was submitted to the Prime 
Minister in the evening before the next meeting of the Minorities 
Committee which took place on 13th November 1931. In his 
opening remarks the Prime Minister said : — 

“The work of this Committee, therefore, was from the 
very beginning of supreme importance, and I am sorry that 
you have been unable to present to us an agreed plan. 

“Last night, however, I received a deputation representing 
the Muhammadans, the Depressed Classes, at any rate a 
section of the Indian Christians, the Anglo-Indians and the 
British Community. I think that is the complete range. They 
came and saw me in my room in the House of Commons 
last night with a document which embodied an agreement 
that they had come to amongst themselves. They informed 
me, in presenting the document to me, that it covered 
something in the region of 46 per cent, of the population 
of British India. 

“I think the best thing would be, as we have had no 
time to consider this, to treat this document as a document 
which is official to the records of this Committee and in 
order that that may be done I shall ask His Highness The 
Aga Khan formally to present it here, so that it may be 
entered in our official record.” 

His Highness The Aga Khan then got up and said 

“Mr. Prime Minister, on behalf of the Muhammadans, the 
Depressed Classes, the Anglo-Indians, the Europeans and a 
considerable section of the Indian Christian groups, I present 
the document embodying the agreement which has been arrived 
at between them with regard to the intercommunal problem 
with which the Round Table Conference in general and the 
Minorities Committee in particular are concerned. We desire 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


68 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

68 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to make it clear that this agreement has been arrived at 
after careful and anxious consideration of this difficult and 
complicated problem and must be taken as a whole. All 
parts of the agreement are interdependent and agreements 
stand or fall as a whole.” 

This document was known as the Minorities Pact . 1 In the 
general discussion that followed Mr. Gandhi’s speech no doubt 
attracted the greatest attention. Mr. Gandhi was furious. 
He attacked everybody who had taken part in producing the 
Minorities Pact. He was particularly furious for the recognition 
given to the Untouchables as a separate political entity. This 
is what Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“I would like to repeat what I have said before, that, 
while the Congress will always accept any solution that may 
be acceptable to the Hindus, the Muhammadans and the 
Sikhs, Congress will be no party to the special electorates 

for any other minorities One word more as to the so- 

called Untouchables. I can understand the claims advanced 
by other minorities, but the claims advanced on behalf of 
the Untouchables, that time is the ‘unkindest cut of all.’ 

It means the perpetual bar-sinister. I would not sell the 
vital interests of the Untouchables even for the sake of 
winning the freedom of India. I claim myself in my own 
person to represent the vast mass of the Untouchables. 
Here I speak not merely on behalf of the Congress, but I 
speak on my own behalf, and I claim that I would get, if 
there was a referendum of the Untouchables, their vote, 
and that I would top the poll. And I would work from one 
end of India to the other to tell the Untouchables that 
separate electorates, and separate reservation is not the 
way to remove this bar-sinister, which is the shame, not 
of them, but of orthodox Hinduism. 

“Let this Committee and let the whole world know 
that today there is a body of Hindu reformers who are 
pledged to remove this blot of untouchability. We do not 
want on our register and on our census Untouchables 
classified as a separate class. Sikhs may remain as such in 
perpetuity, so may Muhammadans so may Europeans. Will 
Untouchables remain Untouchables in perpetuity ? I would 
far rather that Hinduism died than that Untouchability 
lived. Therefore, with all my regard for Dr. Ambedkar, 
and for his desire to see the Untouchables uplifted, 
with all my regard for his ability, I must say in all 
1 It is reproduced as Appendix III. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


69 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 69 

humility that here the great wrong under which he has 
laboured and perhaps the bitter experiences that he has 
undergone have for the moment warped his judgment. It 
hurts me to have to say this, but I would be untrue to 
the cause of the Untouchables, which is as dear to me as 
life itself, if I did not say it. I will not bargain away their 
rights for the kingdom of the whole world. I am speaking 
with a due sense of responsibility, and I say that it is not a 
proper claim which is registered by Dr. Ambedkar when he 
seeks to speak for the whole of the Untouchables of India. 

It will create a division in Hinduism which I cannot possibly 
look forward to with any satisfaction whatsoever. I do not 
mind Untouchables, if they so desire, being converted to 
Islam or Christianity. I should tolerate that, but I cannot 
possibly tolerate what is in store for Hinduism if there are 
two divisions set forth in the villages. Those who speak of 
the political right of Untouchables do not know their India, 
do not know how Indian Society is today constructed, and 
therefore I want to say with all the emphasis that I can 
command that if I was the only person to resist this thing 
I would resist it with my life.” 

The Chairman knowing that there was no hope of getting 
an agreed solution before adjourning the Minorities Committee 
sine die made a suggestion to the delegates. He said : — 

“Will you, each of you, every member of this Committee, 
sign a request to me to settle the community question and 
pledge yourselves to accept my decision ? That, I think, is a 

very fair offer I do want any section, or any one man. Will 

the members of this Committee sign a declaration asking me 
to give a decision, even a temporary one, on the community 
question, and say that you will agree ? I do not want it now. 

I say, will you put your names to it and give that to me, with 
the assurance that the decision come to will be accepted by 
you and will be worked by you to the best of your ability in 
the course of the working of the new constitution ? I have 
asked several sections — at least, individuals — from time to 
time for that, and I have never got it. That would certainly 
straighten out the position, but apart from that, do, please, 
not forget what I said in opening this meeting — that the 
Government will not allow community differences to prevent 
it from carrying out its pledges and producing a constitution. 
Therefore do not make the community difference more 
important than it is.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


70 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

70 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

V 

Thus ended the efforts by the Minorities Committee 
to bring about a solution of the communal problem. The 
discussion in the Committee threw Mr. Gandhi’s attitude to 
the Untouchables in relief. Everybody felt that Mr. Gandhi 
was the most determined enemy of the Untouchables. So 
much of his energy and attention did Mr. Gandhi concentrate 
on the question of the Untouchables that it would not 
be unfair if it was said that the main purpose for which 
Mr. Gandhi came to the Round Table Conference was to 
oppose the demands of the Untouchables. 

Those, who were friends of Mr. Gandhi, could not 
understand Mr. Gandhis attitude to the demands of the 
Untouchables. To give recognition to the Muslims and the 
Sikhs and to refuse it to the Untouchables came to them 
as a surprise and a puzzle. Whenever they asked for an 
explanation, Mr. Gandhi did nothing except to get angry. 
Mr. Gandhi himself could not give a logical and consistent 
defence of his opposition to the Untouchables. Inside the 
Round Table Conference his defence, was that the Hindus 
had seriously taken up the cause of the Untouchables and 
that therefore there was no reason to give them political 
safeguards. Outside the Round Table Conference he gave 
totally different reasons. In a speech in defence of his position 
Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“Muslims and Sikhs are all well organized. The 
‘Untouchables’ are not. There is very little political 
consciousness among them and they are so horribly treated 
that I want to save them against themselves. If they had 
separate electorates their lives would be miserable in 
villages which are the strongholds of Hindu orthodoxy. It 
is the superior class of Hindus who have to do penance for 
having neglected the ‘Untouchables’ for ages. That penance 
can be done by active social reform and by making the 
lot of the ‘Untouchables’ more bearable by acts of service, 
but not by asking for separate electorates for them. By 
giving them separate electorates you will throw the apple 
of discord between the ‘Untouchables’ and the orthodox. 

You must understand I can tolerate the proposal for special 
representation of the Musalmans and the Sikhs only as 
a necessary evil. It would be a positive danger for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


71 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 71 

voters’ list, and provide for fundamental rights for them 
in the constitution. In cases they are unjustly treated and 
their representative is deliberately excluded they would have 
the right to special election tribunal which would give them 
complete protection. It should be open to these tribunals to 
order the unseating of an elected candidate and the election 
of the excluded men. 

“Separate electorates to the ‘Untouchables’ will ensure 
them bondage in perpetuity. The Musalmans will never cease 
to be Musalmans by having separate electorates. Do you 
want the ‘Untouchables’ to remain ‘Untouchables’ for ever ? 
Well, the separate electorates would perpetuate the stigma. 
What is needed is destruction of untouchability, and when 
you have done it, the bar-sinister which has been imposed 
by an insolent ‘superior’ class upon an ‘inferior’ class will 
be destroyed. When you have destroyed the bar-sinister, to 
whom will you give the separate electorates ? Look at the 
history of Europe. Have you got separate electorates for the 
working classes or women ? With adult franchise, you give 
the ‘Untouchables’ complete security. Even the orthodox 
would have to approach them for votes. 

“Now then you ask, does Dr. Ambedkar, their 
representative, insist on separate electorates for them ? I 
have the highest regard for Dr. Ambedkar. He has every 
right to be bitter. That he does not break our heads is an act 
of self-restraint on his part. He is today so much saturated 
with suspicion that he cannot see anything else. He sees in 
every Hindu a determined opponent of the ‘Untouchables’ 
and it is quite natural. The same thing happened to me in 
my early days in South Africa, where I was hounded out by 
Europeans wherever I went. It is quite natural for him to 
vent his wrath. But the separate electorates that he seeks 
will not give him social reform. He may himself mount 
to power and position but nothing good will accrue to the 
‘Untouchables.’ I can say all this with authority, having lived 
with the ‘Untouchables’ and having shared their joys’ and 
sorrows all these years.” 

Mr. Gandhi at the Round Table Conference was not satisfied 
with mere propaganda. When he found that the propaganda was 
not succeeding as well as he expected he resorted to intrigue. 
When Mr. Gandhi heard that at the suggestion of the Prime 
Minister the minorities were about to produce a settlement and 
that this settlement would have the effect of the Untouchables 
getting the support of the other minorities and particularly 
of the Muslims, Mr. Gandhi felt considerably disturbed. He 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


72 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

72 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

devised a scheme to isolate the Untouchables. For this 
Mr. Gandhi planned to buy out the Musalmans by giving to the 
Musalmans their fourteen demands, which Mr. Gandhi was not in 
the beginning prepared to agree. When he found the Musalmans 
were lending their support to the Untouchables Mr. Gandhi agreed 
to them their fourteen points on condition that they withdrew 
their support from the Untouchables. The agreement was actually 
drafted. The text of it is given below: — 

“DRAFT OF GANDHI-MUSLIM PACT 1 

Muslim Delegation to the Round Table Conference 2 

Tel.: Victoria 2360 Queen’s House, 

Telegrams: “Courtlike” London 57, St. James’ Court, 

Buckingham Gate 
London, S.W. 1 
6th October 1931. 

The following proposals were discussed by Mr. Gandhi and the 
Muslim Delegation at 10 p.m. last night. They are divided into 
two parts — The proposals made by the Muslims for safeguarding 
their rights and the proposals made by Mr. Gandhi regarding the 
Congress policy. They are given herewith as ; approved by Mr. 
Gandhi, and placed for submission to the Muslim Delegation for 
their opinion. 


MUSLIM PROPOSALS 

1. In the Punjab and Bengal bare 
majority of one per cent, of Musalmans 
but the question of whether it should 
be by means of joint electorates and 
reservation of 51 per cent, of the 
whole house should be referred to 
the Musalman voters before the new 
constitution comes into force and their 
verdict should be accepted. 


MR. GANDHI’S PROPOSALS 

1 . That the Franchise should be on the 
basis of adult suffrage. 

2. No special reservations to any other 
community save Sikhs and Hindu 
Minorities. ( Italics are not in the 
original) 

3. The Congress demands: 

A. Complete Independence. 


1. This document was printed by me in my Thoughts on Pakistan as an Appendix 
in 1939. It was the first time it saw the light of the day. Its genuineness has never 
been questioned. I was able to get a copy from a Hindu Delegate to the Round 
Table Conference who was privileged by the Muslim League to share the secret. 

2. This shows that the document was typed on the stationery of the Muslim 
League Delegation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


73 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 73 


2. In other provinces where the 
Musalmans are in a minority the 
present weightage enjoyed by them to 
continue, but whether the seats should 
be reserved to a joint electorate, or 
whether they should have separate 
electorates should be determined by 
the Musalman voters by a referendum 
under the new constitution, and their 
verdict should be accepted. 

3. That the Musalman representatives 
to the Central Legislature in both 
the houses should be 26 per cent, of 
the total number of the British India 
representatives, and 7 per cent, at least 
by convention should be Musalmans, out 
of the quota that may be assigned to 
Indian States, that is to say, one-third 
of the whole house when taken together. 

4. That the residuary power should 
vest in the federating Provinces of 
British India. 


5. That the other points as follows being 
agreed to : 

1. Sindh. 1 


2. N.W.F.P. 2 


3. Services. 3 


4. Cabinet. 4 


5. Fundamental rights and safeguards 
for religion and culture. 

6. Safeguards against legislation 
affecting any community. 


B. Complete control over the defenee 
immediately. 


C. Complete control over external 
affairs. 


D. Complete control over Finance. 

E. Investigation of public debts and 
other obligations by an independent 
tribunal. 


F. As in the case of a partnership, right 
of either party to terminate it. 


1. Stands for separation of Sindh. 

2. Stands for Provincial Autonomy and Responsible Government for the 
N. W. F. Province. 

3. Stands for Representation in Services. 

4. Stands for Representation in the Cabinet. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


74 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

74 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is true that the Untouchables are not mentioned in this 
draft agreement. But that the Musalmans are bound not to 
support any other minority except the Sikhs makes it quite 
clear that they were not to support the Untouchables. In this 
intrigue, Mr. Gandhi failed as he was bound to. The Musalmans 
who were out to demand safeguards for them selves could 
not stand up and oppose the demands of the Untouchables. 
Mr. Gandhi in his passion for suppressing the Untouchables 
had lost his sense of discrimination to such extent as not to be 
able to distinguish between means which are fair and means 
which are foul. Mr. Gandhi did not care to honour his word. 
In the Minorities Committee, Mr. Gandhi had said that if the 
Committee agreed to accept the claim of the Untouchables for 
separate recognition it was free to do so, which meant that 
he would abide by the decision of the majority. But when 
he came to know that the other minorities had agreed to 
support the Untouchables, he did not hesitate to approach 
the Musalmans and turn them against the Untouchables by 
accepting their fourteen points which the Congress, the Hindu 
Maha Sabha and even the Simon Commission had rejected. 
Even if Mr. Gandhi was prepared to flout public opinion and 
public morality this diabolical plot of Mr. Gandhi fell through 
because the Musalmans refused to disgrace themselves by 
joining in it. When the second session of the Round Table 
Conference was dissolved the delegates to the Minorities 
Committee accepted the proposal of the Prime Minister to 
put in a signed requisition authorizing him to arbitrate and 
give his decision on the communal issue. Many delegates 
did it including Mr. Gandhi . 1 There was nothing left for the 
delegates but to return to India and await the decision of the 
Prime Minister and having made him the sole arbitrator to 
accept it with good cheer. 


VI 

Before I resume the narrative and state what decision the 
Prime Minister gave, I must describe the strange phenomenon 
which I, as a member of the Franchise Committee, witnessed. 
After the close of the second session of the Round Table 
Conference, the Prime Minister thought it advisable to have 

1. I did not make any such requisition. I felt that the demands of the 
Untouchables were so reasonable that no arbitration was necessary, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


75 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 75 

the question of franchise for the new constitution examined by 
a Committee. Accordingly, in December 1931 he appointed a 
Committee with the late Lord Lothian as its Chairman. Its main 
term of reference was to devise a system of franchise whereby, 
to use the language of the Prime Minister’s letter of instructions 
to the Chairman, 

“The legislatures to which responsibility is to be 
entrusted should be representative of the general mass 
of the population, and that no important section of the 
community may lack the means of expressing its needs 
and its opinions.” 

The Committee started its work early in January 1932. For 
doing its work the Committee took the help of the Provincial 
Governments and of the Provincial Franchise Committees 
consisting of non-officials specially constituted for that purpose 
province by province. The Committee issued questionnaires. 
They were replied to by the Provincial Governments, by the 
Provincial Franchise Committees and by individuals. Witnesses 
were examined by the Committee sitting with each Provincial 
Franchise Committee. The Provincial Governments and the 
Provincial Committees submitted their reports separately to the 
Committee. They were discussed by the Committee with the 
Provincial Government and the Provincial Committee before it 
came to its own conclusion. Besides the general tasks assigned to 
the Lothian Committee, it had a special task with which it was 
charged by the Prime Minister. It had relation to the political 
demands of the Untouchables which the Prime Minister had 
referred to in the following terms in his letter of instruction to 
the Chairman : — 

“It is evident from the discussions which have 
occurred in various connections in the Conference that 
the new constitution must make adequate provision for 
the representation of the Depressed Classes, and that the 
method of representation by nomination is no longer regarded 
as appropriate. As you are aware, there is a difference of 
opinion whether the system of separate electorates should 
be instituted for the Depressed Classes and your committee’s 
investigations should contribute towards the decision of this 
question by indicating the extent to which the Depressed 
Classes would be likely, through such general extension of 
the franchise as you may recommend, to secure the right 
to vote in ordinary electorates. On the other hand, should 
it be decided eventually to constitute separate electorates 
for the Depressed Classes, either generally or in those 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


76 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

76 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

provinces in which they form a distinct and separable 
element in the population, your Committee’s inquiry into 
the general problem of extending the franchise should place 
you in possession of facts which would facilitate the devising 
of a method of separate representation for the Depressed 
Classes.” 

Following upon these instructions, it became the task of 
the Committee to come to some conclusion as to the total 
population of the Untouchables in British India. 

To the question what is the population of the Untouchables 
the replies received were enough to stagger anybody. Witness 
after witness came forward to say that the Untouchables in his 
Province were infinitesimally small. There were not wanting 
witnesses who said that there were no Untouchables at all!! 
It was a most extraordinary sight to see Hindu witnesses 
perjuring themselves regardless of truth by denying the 
existence of the Untouchables or by reducing their number to 
a negligible figure. The members of the Provincial Franchise 
Committee were also a party to this plan. Strange to say that 
some of the Hindu members of the Lothian Committee were 
in the game. This move of denying the very existence of the 
Untouchables or reducing their number almost to nil was 
particularly rampant in certain Provinces. How the Hindus 
were prepared to economise truth, even to a vanishing point, 
will be evident from the following figures. In the United 
Provinces, the Census Commissioner in 1931 had estimated 
the total population of the Untouchables at 12.6 millions, 
the Provincial Government at 6.8 millions but the Provincial 
Franchise Committee at .6 millions only!! In Bengal, the Census 
gave the figures of 10.3 millions, Provincial Government fixed 
it as 11.2 millions but the Provincial Franchise Committee 
at .07 millions only! 

Before the Round Table Conference no Hindu bothered 
about the exact population of the Untouchables and were quite 
satisfied with the accuracy of the Census figures which gave 
the total of the Untouchables at about 70 to 80 millions. Why 
did then the Hindus start suddenly to challenge this figure 
when the question was taken up by the Lothian Committee ? 
The answer is very clear. Before the time of the Lothian 
Committee the population of the Untouchables had no value. 
But after the Round Table Conference the Hindus had come to 
know that the Untouchables were demanding separate allot- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


77 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 77 

ment of their share of representation, that such share must come 
out of the lump which the Hindus had been enjoying in the 
past and that the measure of the share must depend upon the 
population of the Untouchables. The Hindus had realized that 
to admit the existence of the Untouchables was detrimental to 
their interest. They did not mind sacrificing truth and decency 
and decided to adopt the safest course, namely, to deny that 
there are any Untouchables in India at all, and thereby knock 
out the bottom of the political demands of the Untouchables and 
leave no room for argument. This shows how the Hindus can 
conspire in a cold, calculated manner against the Untouchables 
out of pure selfishness and do indirectly what they cannot do 
directly. 


VII 

To resume the thread. Having been disgusted with the Round 
Table Conference where there were critics but no devotees, 
Mr. Gandhi was the first to return to India. On account of a 
statement which he is alleged to have made in an interview 
he gave to a newspaper correspondent in Rome wherein 
he threatened to revive his campaign of civil disobedience, 
Mr. Gandhi on his arrival was arrested and put in jail. Though 
in jail, not Swaraj but the Untouchables were on his brain. 
He feared that, notwithstanding his threat to resist it with 
his life, the Prime Minister as a sole arbitrator might accept 
the claims made on behalf of the Untouchables at the Round 
Table Conference. Long before any decision was given by the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Gandhi on 11th March 1982 addressed 
from jail a letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, the then Secretary of 
State for India, reminding him of his opposition to the claim 
of the Untouchables. The following is the text of that letter: — 

“Dear Sir Samuel, 

You will perhaps recollect that at the end of my speech 
at the Round Table Conference when the Minorities’ claim 
was presented, I had said that I should resist with my life 
the grant of separate electorates to the Depressed Classes. 
This was not said in the heat of the moment nor by way 
of rhetoric. It was meant to be a serious statement. In 
pursuance of that statement, I had hoped on my return to 
India to mobilize public opinion against separate electorates, 
at any rate, for the Depressed Classes. But it was not to be. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


78 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

78 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“From the newspapers, I am permitted to read, I observe 
that any moment His Majesty’s Government may declare their 
decision. At first I had thought, if the decision was found 
to create separate electorates for the Depressed Classes, I 
should take such steps as I might then consider necessary 
to give effect to my vow. But I feel it would be unfair to the 
British Government for me to act without giving previous 
notice. Naturally, they could not attach the significance I 
give to my statement. 

“I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have to the 
creation of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes. I 
feel as if I was one of them. Their case stands on a wholly 
different footing from that of others. I am not against their 
representation in the legislatures. I should favour everyone 
of their adults, male and female, being registered as voters 
irrespective of education or property qualification, even though 
the franchise test may be stricter for others. But I hold that 
separate electorate is harmful for them and for Hinduism, 
whatever it may be from the purely political standpoint. 
To appreciate the harm that separate electorate would do 
them, one has to know how they are distributed amongst the 
so-called Caste Hindus and how dependent they are on the 
latter. So far as Hinduism is concerned, separate electorates 
would simply vivisect and disrupt it. 

“For me the question of these classes is predominantly 
moral and religious. The political aspect, important though 
it is, dwindles into insignificance compared to the moral and 
religious issue. 

“You will have to appreciate my feelings in this matter 
by remembering that I have been interested in the condition 
of these classes from my boyhood and have more than once 
staked my all for their sake. I say this not to pride myself 
in any way. For, I feel that no penance that the Hindus may 
do can in any way compensate for the calculated degradation 
to which they have consigned the Depressed Classes for 
centuries. 

“But I know that separate electorate is neither a penance 
nor any remedy for the crushing degradation they have 
groaned under. I, therefore, respectfully inform His Majesty’s 
Government that in the event of their decision creating 
separate electorate for the Depressed Classes, I must fast 
unto death. 

“I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a step, 
whilst I am a prisoner, must cause grave embarrassment to His 
Majesty’s Government, and that it will be regarded by many 
as highly improper on the part of one holding my position to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


79 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 79 

introduce into the political field methods which they would 
describe as hysterical if not much worse. All I can urge 
in defence is that for me the contemplated step is not a 
method, it is part of my being. It is the call of conscience 
which I dare not disobey, even though it may cost whatever 
reputation for sanity I may possess. So far as I can see now 
my discharge from imprisonment would not make the duty 
of fasting any the less imperative. I am hoping, however, all 
my fears are wholly unjustified and the British Government 
have no intention whatever of creating separate electorate 
for the Depressed Classes.” 

The following reply was sent to Mr. Gandhi by the Secretary 
of State : — 

India Office, Whitehall, 

April 13, 1932. 

Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

“I write this in answer to your letter of 11th March, 
and I say at once I realize fully the strength of your feeling 
upon the question of separate electorates for the Depressed 
Classes. I can only say that we intend to give any decision 
that may be necessary solely and only upon the merits 
of the case. As you are aware, Lord Lothian’s Committee 
has not yet completed its tour and it must be some weeks 
before we can receive any conclusions at which it may have 
arrived. When we receive that report we shall have to give 
most careful consideration to its recommendations, and we 
shall not give a decision until we have taken into account, 
in addition to the view expressed by the Committee, the 
views that you and those who think with you have so forcibly 
expressed. I feel sure if you were in our position you would 
be taking exactly the same action we intend to take. You 
would admit the Committees report, you would then give 
it your fullest consideration, and before arriving at a final 
decision you would take into account the views that have 
been expressed on both sides of the controversy. More than 
this I cannot say. Indeed I do not imagine you would expect 
me to say more.” 

After giving this warning, Mr. Gandhi slept over the matter 
thinking that a repetition of his threat to fast unto death was 
sufficient to paralyse the British Government and prevent 
them from accepting the claim of the Untouchables for special 
representation. On the 17th August 1932 the decision of the 
Prime Minister on the communal question was announced. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


80 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

80 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

That part of the decision which relates to the Untouchables 
is produced below: — 

Communal Decision by His Majesty’s Government 1932. 

In the statement made by the Prime Minister on 1st 
December last on behalf of His Majesty’s Government at the 
close of the second session of the Round Table Conference, 
which was immediately afterwards endorsed by both Houses 
of Parliament, it was made plain that if the communities 
in India were unable to reach a settlement acceptable to all 
parties on the communal questions which the Conference had 
failed to solve, His Majesty’s Government were determined 
that India’s constitutional advance should not on that account 
be frustrated, and that they would remove this obstacle by 
devising and applying themselves a provisional scheme. 

2. On the 19th March last His Majesty’s Government, 
having been informed that the continued failure of the 
communities to reach agreement was blocking the progress 
of the plans for the framing of a new Constitution, stated 
that they were engaged upon a careful re-examination of the 
difficult and controversial questions which arise. They are now 
satisfied that without a decision of at least some aspects of 
the problems connected with the position of minorities under 
the new Constitution, no further progress can be made with 
the framing of the Constitution. 

3. His Majesty’s Government have accordingly decided that 
they will include provisions to give effect to the scheme set 
out below in the proposals relating to the Indian Constitution 
to be laid in due course before Parliament. The scope of this 
scheme is purposely confined to the arrangements to be made 
for the representation of the British Indian communities in 
the Provincial Legislatures, consideration of representation in 
the Legislature at the Centre being deferred for the reason 
given in paragraph 20 below. The decision to limit the scope 
of the scheme implies no failure to realize that the framing 
of the Constitution will necessitate the decision of a dumber 
of other problems of great importance to minorities, but has 
been taken in the hope that once a pronouncement has been 
made upon the basic questions of method and proportions of 
representation the communities themselves may find it possible 
to arrive at modus vivendi on other communal problems, which 
have not received the examination they require. 

4. His Majesty’s Government wish it to be most clearly 
understood that they themselves can be no parties to any negotiations 
which may be initiated with a view to the revision of their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


81 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 81 

decision, and will not be prepared to give consideration to any 
representation aimed at securing the modification of it which 
is not supported by all the parties affected. But they are most 
desirous to close no door to an agreed settlement should such 
happily be forthcoming. If, therefore, before a new Government 
of India Act has passed into law, they are satisfied that the 
communities who are concerned are mutually agreed upon a 
practicable alternative scheme, either in respect of any one or 
more of the Governors’ Provinces or in respect of the whole 
of the British India, they will be prepared to recommend to 
Parliament that that alternative should be substituted for the 
provisions now outlined. 

k k k k 

k k k k 

k k k k 

k k k k 

9. Members of the “depressed classes” qualified to vote will 
vote in a general constituency. In view of the fact that for a 
considerable period these classes would be unlikely, by this 
means alone, to secure any adequate representation in the 
Legislature, a number of special seats will be assigned to them 
as shown in the table. These seats will be filled by election from 
special constituencies in which only members of the “depressed 
classes” electorally qualified will be entitled to vote. Any person 
voting in such a special constituency will, as stated above, be 
also entitled to vote in a general constituency. It is intended that 
these constituencies should be formed in selected areas where 
the depressed classes are most numerous, and that, except in 
Madras, they should not cover the whole area of the Province. 

In Bengal it seems possible that in some general 
constituencies a majority of the voters will belong to the 
Depressed Classes. Accordingly, pending further investigation, 
no number has been fixed for the members to be returned from 
the special Depressed Class constituencies in that Province. It 
is intended to secure that the Depressed Classes should obtain 
not less than 10 seats in the Bengal Legislature. 

The precise definition in each Province of those who (if 
electorally qualified) will be entitled to vote in the special 
Depressed Class constituencies has not yet been finally 
determined. It will be based as a rule on the general principles 
advocated in the Franchise Committee’s Report. Modification 
may, however, be found necessary in some Provinces in 
Northern India where the application of the general criteria of 


5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


82 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

82 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

untouchability might result in a definition unsuitable in some 
respects to the special conditions of the Province. 

His Majesty’s Government do not consider that these 
special Depressed Classes constituencies will be required for 
more than limited time. They intend that the Constitution 
shall provide that they shall come to an end after 20 years 
if they have not previously been abolished under the general 
powers of electoral revision referred to in paragraph 6. 

VIII 

Mr. Gandhi found that his threat had failed to have any effect. 
He did not care that he was a signatory to the requisition asking 
the Prime Minister to arbitrate. He forgot that as a signatory 
he was bound to accept the award. He started to undo what the 
Prime Minister had done. He first tried to get the terms of the 
Communal Award revised. Accordingly, he addressed the following 
letter to the Prime Minister: — 

Yeravda Central Prison, 

August 18, 1032. 

Dear Friend, 

“There can be no doubt that Sir Samuel Hoare has showed 
you and the Cabinet my letter to him of 11th March on the 
question of the representation of the Depressed Classes. That 
letter should be treated as part of this letter and be read 
together with this. 

“I have read the British Government’s decision on 
the representation of minorities and have slept over it. 

In pursuance of my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare and my 
declaration at the meeting of the Minorities Committee of 
the Round Table Conference on 13th November, 1931, at St. 
James’ Palace, I have to resist your decision with my life. The 
only way I can do so is by declaring a perpetual fast unto 
death from food of any kind save water with or without salt 
and soda. This fast will cease if during its progress the British 
Government, of its own motion or under pressure of public 
opinion, revise their decision and withdraw their scheme 
of communal electorates for the Depressed Classes, whose 
representatives should be elected by the general electorate 
under the common franchise, no matter how wide it is. 

“The proposed fast will come into operation in the ordinary 
course from the noon of 20th September next, unless the said 
decision is meanwhile revised in the manner suggested above. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


83 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 83 


“I am asking the authorities here to cable the text of 
this letter to you so as to give you ample notice. But in any 
case, I am leaving sufficient time for this letter to reach you 
in time by the slowest route. 

“I also ask that this letter and my letter to Sir Samuel 
Hoare already referred to be published at the earliest possible 
moment. On my part, I have scrupulously observed the rule 
of the jail and have communicated my desire or the contents 
of the two letters to no one, save my two companions, Sardar 
Vallabhbhai Patel and Mr. Mahadev Desai. But I want, if you 
make it possible, public opinion to be affected by my letters. 
Hence my request for their early publication. 

“I regret the decision I have taken. But as a man of religion 
that I hold myself to be, I have no other course left open to 
me. As I have said in my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, even 
if His Majesty’s Government decided to release me in order 
to save themselves from embarrassment, my fast will have 
to continue. For, I cannot now hope to resist the decision 
by any other means ; and I have no desire whatsoever to 
compass my release by any means other than honourable. 

“It may be that my judgment is warped and that I am 
wholly in error in regarding separate electorates for the 
Depressed Classes as harmful to them or to Hinduism. If 
so, I am not likely to be in the right with reference to other 
parts of my philosophy of life. In that case, my death by 
fasting will be at once a penance for my error and a lifting 
of a weight from off these numberless men and women who 
have childlike faith in my wisdom. Whereas if my judgment 
is right, as I have little doubt it is, the contemplated step is 
but due to the fulfilment of the scheme of life which I have 
tried for more than a quarter of a century, apparently not 
without considerable success. 

I remain, 

Your faithful friend, 

M. K. Gandhi.” 


The Prime Minister replied as under : — 

“ 10 , Downing Street, 
September 8th, 1932. 

“Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

“I have received your letter with much surprise and, let me 
add, with very sincere regret. Moreover, I cannot help thinking 
that you have written it under a misunderstanding as to what the 
decision of His Majesty’s Government as regards the Depressed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


84 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

84 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Classes really implies. We have always understood you were 
irrevocably opposed to the permanent segregation of the 
Depressed Classes from the Hindu community. You made 
your position very clear on the Minorities Committee of the 
Round Table Conference and you expressed it again in the 
letter you wrote to Sir Samuel Hoare on 11th March. We 
also knew your view was shared by the great body of Hindu 
opinion, and we, therefore, took it into most careful account 
when we were considering the question of representation of 
the Depressed Classes. 

“Whilst, in view of the numerous appeals we have received 
from Depressed Class Organizations and the generally 
admitted social disabilities under which they labour and which 
you have often recognized, we felt it our duty to safeguard 
what we believed to be the right of the Depressed Classes 
to a fair proportion of representation in the legislatures 
we were equally careful to do nothing that would split off 
their community from the Hindu world. You yourself stated 
in your letter of March 11, that you were not against their 
representation in the legislatures. 

“Under the Government scheme the Depressed Classes 
will remain part of the Hindu community and will vote with 
the Hindu electorate on an equal footing but for the first 
twenty years, while still remaining electorally part of the 
Hindu community, they will receive through a limited number 
of special constituencies, means of safeguarding their rights 
and interests that, we are convinced, is necessary under 
present conditions. 

“Where these constituencies are created, members of the 
Depressed Classes will not be deprived of their votes in the 
general Hindu constituencies, but will have two votes in 
order that their membership of the Hindu community should 
remain unimpaired. 

“We have deliberately decided against the creation of 
what you describe as a communal electorate for the Depressed 
Classes and included all Depressed Class voters in the 
general or Hindu constituencies so that the higher caste 
candidates should have to solicit their votes or Depressed 
Class candidates should have to solicit the votes of the 
higher castes at elections. Thus, in every way was the unity 
of Hindu society preserved. 

“We felt, however, that during the early period of responsible 
Government, when power in the Provinces would pass to whoever 
possessed a majority in the legislatures, it was essential that 
the Depressed Classes whom you have yourself described in 
your letter to Sir Samuel Hoare as having been consigned by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


85 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 85 

Caste Hindus to calculated degradation for centuries, should 
return a certain number of members of their own choosing 
to legislatures of seven of the nine provinces to voice their 
grievances and their ideals and prevent decisions going 
against them without the legislature and the Government 
listening to their case — in a word, to place them in a position 
to speak for themselves, which every fair-minded person 
must agree to be necessary. We did not consider the method 
of electing special representatives by reservation of seats in 
the existing conditions, under any system of franchise which 
is practicable, members who could genuinely represent them 
and be responsible for them, because in practically all cases, 
such members Would be elected by a majority consisting of 
higher caste Hindus. 

“The special advantage initially given under our scheme 
to the Depressed Classes by means of a limited number of 
special constituencies, in addition to their normal electoral 
rights in the general Hindu constituencies, is wholly different 
in conception and effect from the method of representation 
adopted for a minority such as the Moslems by means of 
separate communal electorates. For example, a Moslem cannot 
vote or be a candidate in a general constituency, whereas 
any electorally qualified member of the Depressed Classes 
can vote in and stand for the general constituency. 

“The number of territorial seats allotted to Moslems is 
naturally conditioned by the fact that it is impossible for them 
to gain any further territorial seats and in most provinces 
they enjoy weightage in excess of their population ratio ; the 
number of special seats to be tilled from special Depressed 
Classes constituencies will be seen to be small and has 
been fixed not to provide a quota numerically appropriate 
for the total representation of the whole of the Depressed 
Class population, but solely to secure a minimum number 
of spokesmen for the Depressed Classes in the legislatures 
who are chosen exclusively by the Depressed Classes. The 
proportion of their special seats is everywhere much below 
the population percentage of the Depressed Classes. 

“As I understand your attitude, you propose to adopt 
the extreme course of starving yourself td death not in 
order to secure that the Depressed Classes should have 
joint electorate with other Hindus, because that is already 
provided, nor to maintain the unity of Hindus, which 
is also provided, but solely to prevent the Depressed 
Classes, who admittedly suffer from terrible disabilities 
today, from being able to secure a limited number of 
representatives of their own choosing to speak on their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


86 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

86 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

behalf in the legislatures which will have a dominating 
influence over their future. 

“In the light of these very fair and cautious proposals, 

I am quite unable to understand the reason of the decision 
you have taken and can only think you have made it under 
a misapprehension of the actual facts. 

“In response to a very general request from Indians 
after they had failed to produce a settlement themselves 
the Government much against its will, undertook to give a 
decision on the minorities question. They have now given 
it, and they cannot be expected to alter it except on the 
condition they have stated. I am afraid, therefore, that my 
answer to you must be that the Government’s decision stands 
and that only agreement of the communities themselves 
can substitute other electoral arrangements for those that 
Government have devised in a sincere endeavour to weigh 
the conflicting claims on their just merits. 

“You ask that this correspondence, including your letter 
to Sir Samuel Hoare of March 11th, should be published. 

As it would seem to me unfair if your present internment 
were to deprive you of the opportunity of explaining to the 
public the reason why you intend to fast, I readily accede 
to the request, if on reconsideration you repeat it. Let me, 
however, once again urge you to consider the actual details 
of Government’s decision and ask yourself seriously the 
question whether it really justifies you in taking the action 
you contemplate. 

I am, 

Yours very sincerely, 

J. Ramsay MacDonald.” 

Finding that the Prime Minister would not yield he sent him 
the following letter informing him that he was determined to 
carry out his threat of fast unto death : — 

“Yeravda Central Prison, 

September 9th, 1932. 

Dear Friend, 

“I have to thank you for your frank and full 
letter telegraphed and received this day. I am sorry, 
however, that you put upon the contemplated step an 
interpretation that never crossed my mind. I have claimed 
to speak on behalf of the very class, to sacrifice whose 
interests you impute to me a desire to fast myself to 
death. I had hoped that the extreme step itself would 
effectively prevent any such selfish interpretation. Without 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK SJ+YS 28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 

WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 

A MEAN DEAL 

arguing, I affirm that for me this matter is one of pure religion. 

The mere fact of the Depressed Classes having double votes 
does not protect them or Hindu society in general from being 
disrupted. In the establishment of separate electorate at all 
for the Depressed Classes I sense the injection of poison that 
is calculated to destroy Hinduism and do no good whatever 
to the Depressed Classes. You will please permit me to say 
that no matter how sympathetic you may be, you cannot come 
to a correct decision on a matter of such vital and religious 
importance to the parties concerned. 

“I should not be against even over-representation of the 
Depressed Classes. What I am against is their statutory 
separation even in a limited form, from the Hindu fold, so 
long as they choose to belong to it. Do you realize that if 
your decision stands and the constitution comes into being, 
you arrest the marvellous growth of the work of Hindu 
reformers, who have dedicated themselves to the uplift of 
their suppressed brethren in every walk of life ? 

“I have, therefore, been compelled reluctantly to adhere 
to the decision conveyed to you. 

“As your letter may give rise to a misunderstanding, I 
wish to state that the fact of my having isolated for special 
treatment the Depressed Classes question from other parts of 
your decision does not in any way mean that I approve of or 
am reconciled to other parts of the decision. In my opinion, 
many other parts are open to very grave objection. Only, I 
do not consider them to be any warrant for calling from me 
such self immolation as my conscience has promoted me to 
in the matter of the Depressed Classes. 

I remain, 

Your faithful friend, 

M. K. Gandhi.” 

Accordingly, on the 20th September 1932, Mr. Gandhi 
commenced his “fast unto death” as a protest against the grant 
of separate electorates to the Untouchables. 

The story of this fact has been told by Mr. Pyarelal in a 
volume which bears the picturesque and flamboyant title of 
“The Epic Fast.” The curious may refer it. I must, however, 
warn him that it is written by a Boswell and has all the 
faults of a Boswelliana. There is another side to it, but there 
is neither time nor space to present it here. All I can do is to 
invite attention to the statement 1 I issued to the Press on the 


87 

87 


1. Appendix IV. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


88 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

88 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

eve of Mr. Gandhi’s fast exposing his tactics. Suffice it is to say 
that although Mr. Gandhi declared a fast unto death, he did not 
want to die. He wanted very much to live. 

The fast nonetheless created a problem, and that problem 
was how to save Mr. Gandhi’s life. The only way to save his 
life was to alter the Communal Award which Mr. Gandhi said 
hurt his conscience so much. The Prime Minister had made it 
quite clear that the British Cabinet would not withdraw it or 
alter it of its own, but that they were ready to substitute for it 
a formula that may be agreed upon by the Caste Hindus and 
the Untouchables. As I had the privilege of representing the 
Untouchables at the Round Table Conference, it was assumed 
that the assent of the Untouchables would not be valid unless 
I was a party to it. The surprising fact is that my position 
as the leader of the Untouchables of India was not only not 
questioned by Congressmen but it was accepted as a fact. All 
eyes naturally turned to me as the man of the moment or 
rather as the villain of the piece. 

As to myself it is no exaggeration to say that no man was 
placed in a greater and graver dilemma than I was then. It 
was a baffling situation. I had to make a choice between two 
different alternatives. There was before me the duty, which 
I owed as a part of common humanity, to save Gandhi from 
sure death. There was before me the problem of saving for the 
Untouchables the political rights which the Prime Minister had 
given them. I responded to the call of humanity and saved the 
life of Mr. Gandhi by agreeing to alter the Communal Award 
in a manner satisfactory to Mr. Gandhi. This agreement is 
known as the Poona Pact. 

Text of Poona Pact 

The following is the text of the agreement: — 

(1) There shall be seats reserved for the Depressed 
Classes out of the general electorate seats in the Provincial 
Legislatures as follows : 

Madras 30 ; Bombay with Sind 15 ; Punjab 8 ; Bihar 
and Orissa 18; Central Provinces 20; Assam 7 ; Bengal 
30; United Provinces 20; Total 148. 

These figures are based on the total strength of the Provincial 
Councils, announced in the Prime Minister’s decision. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


89 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 89 

(2) Election to these seats shall be by joint electorates 
subject, however, to the following procedure : 

All the members of the Depressed Classes, registered in the 
general electoral roll in a constituency, will form an electoral 
college, which will elect a panel of four candidates belonging 
to the Depressed Classes for each of such reserved seats, by 
the method of the single vote ; the four persons getting the 
highest number of votes in such primary election, shall be 
candidates for election by the general electorate. 

(3) Representation of the Depressed Classes in the Central 
Legislature shall likewise be on the principle of joint electorates 
and reserved seats by the method of primary election in the 
manner provided for in Clause 2 above, for their representation 
in the Provincial Legislatures. 

(4) In the Central Legislature, eighteen per cent of the 
seats allotted to the general electorate for British India in the 
said legislature shall be reserved for the Depressed Classes. 

(5) The system of primary election to a panel of candidates 
for election to the Central and Provincial Legislatures, as 
hereinbefore mentioned, shall come to an end after the first 
ten years, unless terminated sooner by mutual agreement 
under the provision of Clause 6 below. 

(6) The system of representation of the Depressed Classes 
by reserved scats in the Provincial and Central Legislatures as 
provided for in Clauses 1 and 4 shall continue until determined 
by mutual agreement between the communities concerned in 
the settlement. 

(7) Lranchise for the Central and Provincial Legislatures 
for the Depressed Classes shall be as indicated in the Lothian 
Committee Report. 

(8) There shall be no disabilities attaching to any one on 
the ground of his being a member of the Depressed Classes 
in regard to any elections to local bodies or appointment to 
the Public Services. Every endeavour shall be made to secure 
fair representation of the Depressed Classes in these respects, 
subject to such educational qualifications as may be laid down 
for appointment to the Public Services. 

(9) In every province out of the educational grant, an 
adequate sum shall be earmarked for providing educational 
facilities to the Members of the Depressed Classes. 

The terms of the Pact were accepted by Mr. Gandhi 
and given effect to by Government by embodying them in 
the Government of India Act. The Poona Pact had produced 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


90 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

90 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

different reactions. The Untouchables were sad. They had every 
reason to be. There are, however, people who do not accept 
this. They never fail to point out that the Poona Pact gave the 
Untouchables larger number of seats than what was given to 
them by the Prime Minister in his Communal Award. It is true 
that the Poona Pact gave the Untouchables 148 seats, while 
the Award had only given them 78. But to conclude from this 
that the Poona Pact gave them more than what was given by 
the Award is to ignore what the Award had in fact given to 
the Untouchables. 

The Communal Award gave the Untouchables two benefits: — 
(i) a fixed quota of seats to be elected by separate electorate 
of Untouchables and to be filled by persons belonging to the 
Untouchables ; ( ii ) double vote, one to be used through separate 
electorates and the other to be used in the general electorates. 

Now, if the Poona Pact increased the fixed quota of seats 
it also took away the right to the double vote. This increase in 
seats can never be deemed to be a compensation for the loss 
of the double vote. The second vote given by the Communal 
Award was a priceless privilege. Its value as a political weapon 
was beyond reckoning. The voting strength of the Untouchables 
in each constituency is one to ten. With this voting strength 
free to be used in the election of caste Hindu candidates, the 
Untouchables would have been in a position to determine, 
if not to dictate, the issue of the General Election. No caste 
Hindu candidate could have dared to neglect the Untouchable 
in his constituency or be hostile to their interest if he was 
made dependent upon the votes of the Untouchables. Today 
the Untouchables have a few more seats than were given 
to them by the Communal Award. But this is all that they 
have. Every other member is indifferent, if not hostile. If 
the Communal Award with its system of double voting had 
remained the Untouchables would have had a few seats less 
but every other member would have been a member for the 
Untouchables. The increase in the number of seats for the 
Untouchables is no increase at all and was no recompense 
for the loss of separate electorate and the double vote. The 
Hindus, although they did not celebrate the Poona Pact, did 
not like it. Throughout their commotion to save Mr. Gandhi’s 
life there was a definite current of conscious feeling that the 
cost of saving his life may be great. Therefore, when they saw 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


91 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 91 

the terms of the Pact they very definitely disliked it, although 
they had not the courage to reject it. Disliked by the Hindus 
and disfavoured by the Untouchables, the Poona Pact was 
given recognition by both parties and was embodied in the 
Government of India Act. 

IX 

The signing of the Poona Pact was followed by the 
appointment of the Hammond Committee to demarcate 
constituencies, to fix the number of seats for each constituency 
and settle the system of voting for the legislatures to be set 
up under the new constitution. 

In carrying out its functions, the Hammond Committee 
had to take into account the terms of the Poona Pact and 
the special sort of electoral plan agreed upon to meet the 
needs of the Untouchables. Unfortunately, the Poona Pact 
having been concluded in a hurry had left many things 
undefined. Of the things that were left undefined the most 
important were two namely : (1) Does the ‘panel of four’ to 
be elected at the primary election imply four as a maximum 
or a minimum ? (2) What was intended to be the method of 
voting in the final election ? It was contended on behalf of the 
Hindus that the panel of four was intended to be a minimum. 
If four candidates are not forthcoming there could be no 
primary election and therefore there can be no election for the 
reserved seat, which they said must remain vacant and the 
Untouchables should go without representation. On behalf of 
the Untouchables, I was called to state my interpretation of 
the disputed points. I contended that four in the Poona Pact 
meant “not more than four.” It did not mean “not less than 
four.” On the question of voting the Hindus contended that 
the compulsory distributive vote was the most appropriate. On 
behalf of the Untouchables I contended that the cumulative 
system of voting was the proper system to be introduced. 
Fortunately for the Untouchables the Hammond Committee 
accepted the views propounded by me and rejected those of 
the Hindus. It is interesting to know why the caste Hindus 
put forth their contentions. One may well stop here for a 
moment and ask, why did the Hindus raise their particular 
contentions before the Hammond Committee ? Was there any 
particular motive behind the stand they took ? So far as I am 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


92 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

92 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

able to see the object which the Hindus had in demanding 
four candidates as the minimum for a valid primary election 
was to place the Hindus in a position to capture the seat 
for an election of such a representative of the Untouchable 
candidate, who would be their nominee and who would be 
most willing to be the tool of the Hindus. To get such an 
Untouchable elected in the final election he must first come 
in the panel, and he can come in the Panel only if the panel 
is a large panel. As the election to the panel is by separate 
electorates consisting exclusively of Untouchable voters it is 
obvious that if there is only one candidate in the Panel then 
he would be the staunchest representative of the Untouchable 
and worst from the standpoint of the Hindus. If there are two, 
the second will be less staunch than the first and therefore 
good from the standpoint of the Hindus. If there are three, 
the third will be less staunch than the second and therefore 
better from the standpoint of the Hindus. If there be four 
the fourth will be less staunch than the third and therefore 
best from the point of view of the Hindus. The Panel of four 
could therefore give to the Hindus the best chance of getting 
into the Panel such representatives of the Untouchables as is 
most suitable to the Hindus. That Is why they insisted before 
the Hammond Committee that for a valid panel the minimum 
number must be four. 

The object of insisting upon the system of compulsory 
distributive vote was the same namely to enable the Hindus 
to capture the seats reserved for the Untouchables. Under 
the cumulative vote the elector has as many votes as there 
are seats. He may give them all to one candidate or he may 
distribute them over two or more candidates as he may desire. 
Under the distributive system of voting the elector has also 
as many votes as there are seats, but he can give only one 
vote to any one candidate. Although the two look different 
yet in effect there may be no difference, because even under 
the cumulative vote a voter is not prevented from distributing 
his votes. He is free to give one vote to one candidate. But 
the Hindus did not want to take any chance. Their main 
object was to flood the election to the seat reserved for the 
Untouchables in the joint electorate by using the surplus votes 
of the Hindus in favour of the Untouchable candidate, who 
happens to be their nominee. The object was to outnumber 
the Untouchable voters and prevent them from electing their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


93 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 93 

own nominee. This cannot be done unless the surplus votes of the 
Hindu voters were diverted from the Hindu candidate towards 
the Untouchable candidates. There is a greater chance of the 
diversion of these surplus votes under the distributive system 
than there is under the cumulative system. Under the former 
the Hindu voter can give only one vote to the Hindu candidate. 
The other vote not being of use to the Hindu candidate is usable 
only for an Untouchable candidate. The distributive system thus 
had the possibility of flooding the election to the seat reserved 
for the Untouchables and this is why the Hindus preferred 
it to the system of cumulative voting. But they did not want 
to leave it to chance. For, even the distributive system from 
their point of view was not fool-proof. Under the distributive 
system there was no compulsion upon the voter to use all his 
votes. He may use one vote for the caste Hindu candidate and 
may not at all use the balance of his votes. If this happened 
the purpose of getting in their untouchable nominee would be 
defeated. Not to leave things to chance, the Hindus wanted that 
the distributive system of voting should be made compulsory 
so that a caste Hindu voter whether he wants it or not can 
have no option but to vote for the Untouchable candidate who 
may be the nominee of the Hindus, and thus make his election 
sure and certain. 

In the light of these considerations, it cannot but appear 
that the Poona Pact was only the first blow inflicted upon the 
Untouchables and that the Hindus who disliked it were bent 
on inflicting on it other blows as and when circumstances gave 
them an occasion to do so. The two contentions, which the 
Hindus raised before the Hammond Committee, furnish the 
best evidence of the existence of a conspiracy by the Hindus 
the object of which was to make the Poona Pact, as it could 
not be repudiated, of no benefit to the Untouchables. The 
story of how the Congress dealt with the political demands 
of the Untouchables cannot be left here for the simple reason 
that it does not end here. The subsequent parts of it are more 
instructive than those that have gone before. 

X 

Continuing the story, the next part of it relates to the election 
that took place in February 1937 to the Provincial Legislatures, 
as reconstituted under the Government of India Act, 1935. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


94 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

94 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This was the first occasion in its life-time that the Congress came 
down to fight an election. It was also the first time that the 
Untouchables got the privilege to elect their own representatives. 
Some leaders of the Untouchables, who were siding with the 
Congress when the Poona Pact was being forged — such as the 
late Dewan Bahadur M. C. Raja — cherished the fond hope 
that the Congress will not inter-meddle in the elections of the 
Untouchables to the seats reserved for them. But this hope was 
dashed to pieces. The Congress had a double purpose to play its 
part in the election to the reserved seats of the Untouchables. 
In the first place, it was out to capture in order to build up its 
majority which was essential for enabling it to form a Government. 
In the second place, it had to prove the statement of Mr. Gandhi 
that the Congress represented the Untouchables and that the 
Untouchables believed in the Congress. The Congress, therefore, 
did not hesitate to play a full, mighty and, I may say so, a 
malevolent part in the election of the Untouchables by putting up 
Untouchable candidates on Congress ticket pledged to Congress 
programme for seats reserved for the Untouchables. With the 
financial resources of the Congress it made a distinct gain. 

The total number of seats allotted to the Untouchables under 
the Government of India Act, 1935 are 151 1 . The following table 
shows how many were captured by Untouchable candidates who 
stood on the Congress Ticket. 


Table 5 


Province 

Total Seats 
Reserved for the 
Untouchables 

Total Seats 
Captured by the 
Congress 

United Provinces 

20 

16 

Madras 

30 

26 

Bengal 

30 

6 

Central Provinces 

20 

7 

Bombay 

15 

4 

Bihar 

15 

11 

Punjab 

8 

Nil 

Assam 

7 

4 

Orissa 

6 

4 

Total 

151 

78 


1. This number of 148 seats was raised to 151 in making adjustments of seats 
for Bihar and Orissa. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


95 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 95 

This shows that the Congress got just about fifty-one per 
cent of the seats reserved for the Untouchables. 

The Congress in capturing 78 seats left only 73 seats 
to be filled by true and independent representatives of the 
Untouchables. The Untouchables were worse off under the 
Poona Pact than they would have been under the Prime 
Minister’s Award. In point of effective representation, the 
Untouchables got less than what the Prime Minister had 
given them. The Congress on the other hand gained by the 
Poona Pact. Although under the Poona Pact it gave 151 to the 
Untouchables it took back 78 and thereby made a handsome 
profit on its political transaction. 

This is by no means the sum total of the losses which the 
Congress inflicted on the Untouchables in the elections of 1937. 
There was another and a greater blow which the Congress 
inflicted on the Untouchables. It deprived them of any share 
in the Executive. 

From the very beginning, I had been pressing in 
the discussions in the Round Table Conference that the 
Untouchables must not only have the right to be represented in 
the legislature, they must also have the right to be represented 
in the Cabinet. The woes of the Untouchables are not due so 
much to bad laws as to the hostility of the administration, which 
is controlled by the Hindus who import into administration their 
age-old prejudices against the Untouchables. The Untouchables 
can never hope to get protection from the police, justice 
from the judiciary or the benefit of a statutory law from the 
administration, so long as the Public Services continued to be 
manned by the Hindus. The only hope of making the Public 
Services less malevolent and more responsible to the needs of 
the Untouchables is to have members of the Untouchables in 
the higher Executive. For these reasons, I had at the Round 
Table Conference pressed the claim of the Untouchables for 
the recognition of their right to representation in the Cabinet 
with the same emphasis as I had done for the recognition of 
their right to representation in the Legislature. The Round 
Table Conference accepted the validity of the claim and 
considered ways and means of giving effect to it. There were 
two ways of giving effect to this proposal. One was to have 
a statutory provision in the Government of India Act so as 
to make it a binding obligation which it would be impossible 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


96 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

96 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to evade or to escape ; the other way was not to have a statutory 
provision but to leave it to a gentleman’s agreement — to a 
convention — as is the case in the English Constitution. I and 
the representatives of the other minorities although we did not 
insist upon the first in deference to the wishes of some leading 
Indians not to show such distrust in our own countrymen were 
not prepared to accept the second alternative as there was no 
enforceable sanction behind it. A via media was agreed upon. 
It was to introduce a clause in the Instrument of Instructions 
to the Governors imposing an obligation upon them to see 
that in the formation of the Cabinet representatives of the 
Minorities were included. The clause ran as follows : — 

“In making appointments to his Council of Ministers 
our Governor shall use his best endeavours to select his 
Ministers in the following manner, that is to say, to appoint 
in consultation with the person who in his judgment is 
most likely to command a stable majority in the Legislature 
those persons (including so far as practicable members 
of important minority communities) who will best be in 
a position collectively to command the confidence of the 
Legislature. In so acting, he shall bear constantly in mind 
the need for fostering a sense of joint responsibility among 
his Ministers.” 

What happened to this provision is an interesting story. 
The Congress declared that they were not prepared to accept 
the Government of India Act 1985 for various reasons which 
it is not necessary to reproduce. It was obvious to all and 
even to many Congressmen that there was no sincerity behind 
this declaration. It had no other motive but to enhance the 
prestige of the Congress in the eyes of the public by making 
it appear that the Congress was a radical and revolutionary 
body which was out to destroy and bury British Imperialism 
which is a legend, the Congress has all along tried to create. 
It was a mere matter of tactics. The Congress wanted to take 
the powers which the Governors had been given under the 
Constitution to intervene whenever matters which were his 
special responsibilities were involved. The Congress did not 
mind, making the declaration rejecting the Constitution because 
it thought that as it was the only body which could run the 
new Parliamentary system the British Government would be 
obliged to come to terms with it. The British Government 
threatened to bypass the Congress. It not only appointed 1st 
April 1987 as the date of the inauguration of the Provincial 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


97 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 97 

part of the Constitution but actually went to the length 
of appointing an interim Ministry of non-Congressmen. 
Congressmen, who were hungering for power and who constitute 
a most jealous crowd of politicians, were shaken and felt that 
they were going to be deprived of the fruits of their labours. 
Negotiations were started between His Majesty’s Government 
and the Congress High Command. The Congress High Command 
demanded that if an undertaking was given by His Majesty’s 
Government that the Governors will not use their powers 
given to them under the Special Responsibility Clauses in the 
Constitution by interfering in the day to day administration 
of the Provinces, the Congress, which was most anxious that 
the new Constitution should begin to operate with the goodwill 
of the majority, agreed to give the undertaking demanded. 
The surprising part of it is that the Congress High Command 
enlarged the scope of this undertaking so as to include in 
the undertaking the non-exercise by the Governors of the 
Provinces of the powers given to them under the Instruments 
of Instructions to see that the representatives of the minorities 
were included in the Provincial Ministries. The Governors who 
gave full accommodation to the Congress surrendered their 
authority and allowed the Congress to ride rough shod through 
a very important part of the Constitution with the result that 
the Untouchables and the other minorities were deprived of 
their right to representation in the Cabinet by the Congress 
with impunity and with alacrity. 

The deprivation of the Untouchables by the Congress of their 
right to representation in the Cabinet has the appearance of 
malice aforethought. One of the grounds, urged by the Congress 
for the non-inclusion of representatives of the minorities in 
their Cabinets, was that a cabinet must be a party Cabinet if 
it is to take collective responsibility and that the Congress was 
quite ready to include members of the Minority communities in 
its Cabinet provided they were prepared to join the Congress 
and sign the Congress pledge. Whatever may be the value of 
such argument against other minorities, it had absolutely no 
value against the Untouchables. The Congress could not use it 
to defend its conduct in excluding the Untouchables from the 
Cabinet for two reasons. In the first place, the Congress was 
bound by the terms of the Poona Pact to give representation 
to the Untouchables in the Cabinet. In the second place, the 
Congress could not say that there were no Untouchables in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


98 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

98 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Legislatures who were not members of the Congress Party. On 
the contrary, there were as many as 78 Untouchables returned 
on the Congress ticket and pledged to the Congress policy. 
Why then did the Congress not include them in the Cabinet ? 
The only answer is that it was a part of the Congress policy 
not to admit the right of the Untouchables to be represented 
in the Cabinet and that this policy had the support of 
Mr. Gandhi. Those who may have any doubt as to the 
correctness of this statement may well consider the evidence 
set out below. 

The first piece of evidence lies imbedded in the story of the 
expulsion of the Hon’ble Dr. Khare from the Congress. As is 
well-known, Dr. Khare was the Prime Minister in the Congress 
Ministry in the Central Provinces. Owing to internal quarrels 
among the members of his Cabinet, Dr. Khare to get rid of those 
that were inconvenient adopted the perfectly normal course of 
tendering his own resignation and that of the other ministers 
to the Governor with a view to form a new Cabinet. Thereafter, 
the Governor in full conformity with constitutional practice 
recalled Dr. Khare and asked him to form another Cabinet with 
himself as the Premier. Dr. Khare accepted the invitation and 
formed a new Cabinet dropping old and inconvenient hands 
and taking in some new ones. Dr. Khare’s new Cabinet was 
different from the old in one important respect namely, that 
it included Mr. Agnibhoj, an Untouchable, who was a member 
of the Central Provinces, who belonged to the Congress Party 
and who by his education well qualified to be a minister. On 
the 26th July 1938, the Congress Working Committee met in 
Wardha and passed a resolution condemning Dr. Khare on the 
ground that in tendering the resignation of his colleagues in 
the old ministry he was guilty of a grave error of judgment and 
that in forming a new ministry he was guilty of indiscipline. 
In explaining what was behind this charge of indiscipline in 
forming a new ministry, Dr. Khare openly said that according to 
Mr. Gandhi the act of indiscipline consisted in the inclusion of 
an Untouchable in the Ministry. Dr. Khare also said that Mr. 
Gandhi told him that it was wrong on his part to have, raised 
such aspirations and ambitions in the Untouchables and it 
was such an act of bad judgment that he would never forgive 
him. This statement was repeatedly made by Dr. Khare from 
platforms. Mr. Gandhi has never contradicted it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


99 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 99 

There is, however, more direct evidence on this point. In 1942 
there was held All-India Conference of the Untouchables. In that 
Conference resolutions setting out the political demands of the 
Untouchables were passed. An Untouchable of the Congress Party 
who attended the Conference went to Mr. Gandhi to ascertain 
what Mr. Gandhi had to say about these demands and put him 
the following five questions : — 

“1. What will be the position of the Harijans in the future 
constitution to be framed ? 

“2. Will you advise the Government and the Congress to 
agree to fix the five seats from a Panchayat Board 
upwards to the State Council on population basis ? 

“3. Will you advise the Congress and the leaders of the 
various majority parties in the legislatures in the 
provinces to nominate the Cabinet members from among 
the Scheduled Caste legislators who enjoy the confidence 
of the majority of Scheduled Caste members ? 

“4. In view of the backwardness of the Harijans, will you 
advise the Government to make a provision in the Act 
that Executive posts in the Local Boards and Municipal 
Councils be held on communal rotation, so as to enable 
the Harijans to become Presidents and Chairmen ? 

“5. Why do you not fix some percentage of seats for Harijans 
from District Congress Committee upwards to the 
Working Committee of the Congress ? 

Mr. Gandhi gave his answers in the issue of the Harijan 
dated 2nd August 1942. This is what Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“1. The constitution, which I could influence, would contain a 
provision making the observance of untouchability in any 
shape or form an offence. The so-called ‘untouchables’ 
would have seats reserved for them in all elected bodies 
according to their population within the elected area 
concerned. 

“2. You will see that the answer is covered by the foregoing. 

“3. I cannot. The principle is dangerous. Protection of its 
neglected classes should not be carried to an extent 
which will harm them and harm the country. A 
cabinet minister should be a topmost man commanding 
universal confidence. A person after he has secured a 
seat in an elected body should depend upon his intrinsic 
merit and popularity to secure coveted positions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


100 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

100 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“4. In the first place, I am not interested in the present 
Act which is as good as dead. But I am opposed to your 
proposal on the ground already mentioned. 

“5. I am opposed for the reasons mentioned. But I should 
like to compel large elective Congress organizations to 
ensure the election of Harijan members in proportion 
to their numbers on the Congress register. If Harijans 
are not interested enough in the Congress to become 
4 anna members; they may not expect to find their 
names in elective bodies. But I would strongly advise 
Congress workers to see that they approach Harijans 
and induce them to become members of the Congress.” 

Is there any doubt that Mr. Gandhi and the Congress 
were determined on principle not to recognize the right of the 
Untouchables to be represented in the Cabinet ? As to the question 
of qualifications, there would have been some sense if Mr. Gandhi 
had that limiting condition applicable to all minorities. Dare 
Mr. Gandhi say that about the Muslim demand ? What is the 
use in shutting it out in the case of the Untouchables only ? 
Nobody has claimed that an unqualified Untouchable should be 
made a Minister. It only confirms the inner feeling of opposition 
that lies locked in the heart of Mr. Gandhi. 

In the series of acts which the Congress perpetrated in order 
to nullify the Poona Pact there remain two more to mention. 
First relates to the policy adopted by the Congress Parliamentary 
Board in selecting candidates for election. Unfortunately, this 
question has not been studied as deeply as its importance 
demands. I have examined this question and I hope to publish 
the results along with the evidence in a separate treatise. Here, 
all I can do is to set out the general principles which seem to 
have been adopted by these Boards in selecting candidates for 
election. Communal principle played a very great part in it. 
In a constituency where there were two candidates to choose 
from, the Congress did not feel it necessary to choose the one 
more worthy. It chose the one who belonged to a caste which 
was more numerous. Considerations of wealth also played 
their part. A wealthier candidate was often preferred to a poor 
and a better qualified candidate. These considerations were 
unjustifiable. But they could be understood as the object was 
to adopt a safe candidate who will pull through- But there 
were other principles followed which reveal a deep-seated plot. 
Different classes of qualifications were set down for different 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


101 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A MEAN DEAL 101 

classes of candidates. From candidates who came from high 
caste Hindus as Brahmins and the allied communities those 
with the highest qualifications were selected. In the case of 
the Non-Brahmins those with low qualifications were preferred 
to those with higher qualifications. And in the case of the 
Untouchables those with little or no qualifications were selected 
in preference to those who had. I don’t say that is true in 
every case. But the general result was that of the candidates 
selected by the Congress, the candidates from the Brahmin and 
allied communities were the most highly educated, candidates 
from the non-Brahmins were moderately educated and those 
from the Untouchables just about literates. This system of 
selection is very intriguing. There seems to be a deep laid 
game behind it. Any one who studies it carefully will find 
that it is designed to allow none but the Brahmins and the 
allied castes to form the main part of the ministry and to 
secure for them the support of a docile unintelligent crowd 
of non-Brahmins and Untouchables who by their intellectual 
attainments could never dream of becoming rivals of the 
minister-folk but would be content to follow the lead for no 
other consideration except that of having been raised to the 
status of members of the Legislatures. Mr. Gandhi did not 
see this aspect of the case when he said that to be a minister 
the Untouchable aspiring for it must be a qualified person. 
Otherwise, he would have seen that if there were no qualified 
persons among the Untouchable Congressmen, it was because 
the Congress Parliamentary Board did not choose well-qualified 
candidates from the Untouchables. 

If the present system of election continues the Congress 
can always prevent educated Indians from becoming members 
of the Legislature which is the stepping-stone for becoming a 
member of the Cabinet. It is a very grave prospect and some 
steps will have to be taken to retrieve the position. In the 
meantime, it is enough to say that the scheme of selecting 
candidates adopted by the Congress dealt the Untouchables 
a severe blow by depriving them of Executive power under 
the cover of there being no qualified men to hold it which it 
created for itself by such clandestine and subterranean means. 

The second misdeed of the Congress was to subject the 
Untouchable Congressmen to the rigours of party discipline. 
They were completely under the control of the Congress Party 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


102 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

102 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Executive. They could not ask a question which it did not like. 
They could not move a resolution which it did not permit. They 
could not bring in legislation to which it objected. They could 
not vote as they chose and could not speak what they felt. They 
were there as dumb driven cattle. One of the objects of obtaining 
representation in the Legislature for the Untouchables is to enable 
them to ventilate their grievances and to obtain redress for their 
wrongs. The Congress successfully and effectively prevented this 
from happening. 

To end this long and sad story, the Congress sucked the 
juice out of the Poona Pact and threw the rind in the face of 
the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


103 


CHAPTER IV 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 
Congress Beats An Inglorious Retreat 

I 

The Poona Pact was signed on the 24th September 1932. On 
25th September 1932, a public meeting of the Hindus was held 
in Bombay to accord to it their support. At that meeting the 
following resolution was passed : — 

“This Conference confirms the Poona agreement arrived 
at between the leaders of the Caste Hindus and Depressed 
Classes on September 24, 1932, and trusts that the British 
Government will withdraw its decision creating separate 
electorates within the Hindu community and accept the 
agreement in full. The Conference urges that immediate 
action be taken by Government so as to enable Mahatma 
Gandhi to break his fast within the terms of his vow and 
before it is too late. The Conference appeals to the leaders 
of the communities concerned to realize the implications of 
the agreement and of this resolution and to make earnest 
endeavour to fulfil them. 

“This Conference resolves that henceforth, amongst 
Hindus, no one shall be regarded as an Untouchable by 
reason of his birth, and that those who have been so regarded 
hitherto will have the same right as other Hindus in regard 
to the use of public wells, public schools, public roads, and 
all other public institutions. This right shall have statutory 
recognition at the first opportunity and shall be one of the 
earliest Acts of the Swaraj Parliament, if it shall not have 
received such recognition before that time. 

“It is further agreed that it shall be the duty of all Hindu 
leaders to secure, by every legitimate and peaceful means, 
an early removal of all social disabilities now imposed by 
custom upon the so-called Untouchable Classes, including 
the bar in respect of admission to temples.” 

This resolution was followed by a feverish activity on the 
part of the Hindus to throw open Temples to the Untouchables. 
No week passed in which the Harijan a weekly paper started 
by Mr. Gandhi which did not publish a long list of temples 
thrown open, wells thrown open and schools thrown open 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


104 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

104 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to the Untouchables set out under special column headed “Week to 
Week” on the first page. As samples I produce below these “Week to 
Week” columns from two issues from the Harijan. 

‘Harijan’ of 18th February 1933 

WEEK TO WEEK 

(During the Week ending 7th February 1933) 


Temples Thrown Open 

One temple recently built 
at a cost of a lakh and half 
rupees in North Calcutta. 

One temple in village Bhapur, 
district Ganjam, Madras. 

One Thakurdwar temple at 
Naurania, in Jullundar, Punjab. 

Wells Opened 

One Municipal well, at 
Guriapur in Jaipur town, 
district Cuttack, Orissa. 

Two wells in Wazirpura and 
Nikigali, Agra, U.P. 

In Trichinopoly (Madras) an 
orthodox Brahmin has offered 
expenses necessary for digging 
three wells for the common use 
of Harijans and caste Hindus. 

Schools Started 

A free school in Bachrota, 
district Meerut, U.P. 

One school at Metah district 
in Rajputana. 

Three schools at Fatehpur, 
Chemun and Abhaypur in 
Jaipur State, Rajputana. 

One school at Fatehghar, 
district Farukhabad, U.P. 

Three night schools in 
Muttra, U.P. 

Three night schools in 


Gorakhpur Town, U.P. 

One night school in Hata 
Tehsil, District Gorakhpur, U.P. 

One night school at Sak-honia. 
Indian States 

1. The Palitana State 
(Kathiawar) Assembly has 
passed by a large majority 
three resolutions relating to 
the facilities to be given to the 
Harijans. 

2. A standing committee has 
been appointed by the Government 
of Sandhur State, Madras, to 
concert measures calculated to 
ameliorate the condition of the 
Harijans in the State. 

General 

1. The Harijans in various 
villages near Kashia in Gorakhpur 
district have given up carrion 
eating. 

2. On the occasion of the 
‘Basantpanchami’ festival 
‘Basantotsava’ was celebrated 
at Muzaffarpur (Bihar) under 
the auspices of the Harijan 
Seva Sangh in the temple of 
Sri Chaturbhujnathji in which all 
castes of Hindus took part. 

A. V. Thakkar, 

General Secretary. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


105 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 105 


Sjt. V. R. Shinde, President, 
All-India Anti-Untouchability 
League and Founder-Trustee of 
the Depressed Mission Society 
of India, Poona, has addressed 
an open letter to the members 
of the Legislative Assembly on 
Sjt. Ranga Iyer’s Untouchability 
Bills, strongly urging them to 
support the two measures. 

In Taikalwadi in ‘G’ Ward of 
Bombay, there was an outbreak 
of fire recently which caused 
very setious damage to the huts 
and belongings of 48 Mahar 
families. The President of the 
Bombay Provincial Board of the 
Servants 


of Untouchables Society sanctioned 
Rs. 500 for giving relief to these 
families, and the relief was 
organised by a sub -Committee 
of the ‘G’ Ward Committee of 
the Society. A sum of Rs. 402-8 
was distributed as an urgent 
measure of help to the 48 families, 
containing in all 163 persons. 

The Bombay Government 
has issued orders that requests 
from local bodies for assignment 
of Government lands for wells, 
tanks, dharamshalas, etc., should 
not be granted except on condition 
that all castes alike will have 
equal use of such wells, tanks, etc. 


‘Harijan’ of July 15, 1933 
WEEK TO WEEK 


Educational Facilities 

Three reading rooms for 
Harijans have been opened in 
the North Arcot District by the 

s.u.s. 

In the Madura District S.U. 
S. workers got Harijan children 
admitted into the Viraganur 
taluq board school. 

Banians, towels, slates, etc. 
were distributed free to the 
children of the Melacheri school 
established by the Madura 
S.U.S. 

Two Harijan students of 
Ramjas College, Delhi, have 
been allowed free scholarship 
and free lodging and one a 
free scholarship by Principal 
Thadani of the College. 

One night school for adult 
Harijans was opened under 


the auspices of the Lahore 
Harijan Seva Sangh in the 
Harijan quarters outside Mochi 
Gate. The opening ceremony 
was performed by Mrs. Brij Lai 
Nehru. 

It has been decided to start 
one more hostel for Harijan 
students in Brahmana Kodur 
(Guntur) . 

The East Godavery District 
Harijan Seva Sangham has 
resolved to start a hostel for 
Harijan Girl Students studying 
in Coconada. A sum of Rs. 630, 
20 bags of rice, fuel necessary 
for one year, have been already 
received as donations for the 
hostel, which will be started 
with 15 students. 

The Anantapur District 
Harijan Seva Sangam has 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


106 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


106 

decided to start a hostel for 
Harijau students in Uravakonda. 
Some provisions and money 
have already been collected and 
it is intended to start the hostel 
with 20 students. 

Owing to the unremitting 
efforts of the District Harijan 
Seva Sangham, Guntur, Harijan 
boys have been allowed into the 
savarna schools in a manner of 
villages and towns. 

Wells 

Three wells in Coimbatore 
District which were in a bad 
condition, were cleaned and 
made available for use. 

The District Board President, 
South Arcot, has promised to dig 
four wells in cheries selected by 
the S.U.S. 

During the fortnight ending 
31-5-33, no less than 125 wells 
in all were opened to Harijans 
and 5 new ones constructed in 
Andhradesh. 

General 

A shop has been opened 
in a bustee near Hogg Market 
(Calcutta) where Doms live, for 
supplying them with articles of 
food at cheap rates. 

Rs. 60 has been paid by the 
S.U.S. Bengal for paying up the 
debts of a Harijan family at Bibi 
Bagan bustee (Calcutta). 

The Amrita Samaj (Calcutta) 
has given service to some 
Harijans. 

450 Harijans of Bolpur 
(Birbhum) have given up 
drinking habits and 1,275 
Muchis have taken a vow not 
to take beef. 


Three new district centres 
of S.U.S. have been opened 
during the month in Bankura, 
Murshidabad, and 24 Parganas. 

Trichinopoly, Tanjore, 
Tinnevelley, Salem. Dindigul, 
North Arcot and Madura have 
all taken up the idea of a 
Gandhi Harijan Service corps 
for direct and personal service 
in the cheris. 

Alandural, a Harijan village 
12 miles from Coimbatore was 
given Rs. 25 worth of grain, 
Rs. 100 worth of cloth and 
Rs. 5 worth of oil, as relief after 
a fire in the village. 

A Harijau Youth League has 
been formed in Chidambaram. 

A shop to supply provisions 
at cost price to the Harijans 
has been set up in Tenali and 
is being made use of by them. 

A sum of Rs. 110 was spent 
in giving help for rebuilding 
houses of Harijans in Valanna 
Palem (East Kistna) recently 
destroyed by fire. 

A sum of Rs. 100 was 
contributed by the Provincial 
Committee towards the relief 
of Harijans in Yellamanchili 
(Vizag) who lost their houses 
by a fire. The local Harijan 
Seva Sangham is endeavouring 
to erect new houses for the 
Harijans in a better locality and 
is collecting donations — in cash 
and building materials. 

One Harijan has been 
employed as a servant by 
a savarna gentleman in 
Gollapalem. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK SJ+YS 28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 107 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 107 

When the owners or trustees of temples were not prepared 
to throw open their temples to the Untouchables, the Hindus 
actually started satyagraha against them to compel them to 
fall in line. The satyagraha by Mr. Kelappan for securing 
entry to the Untouchables in the temple at Guruvayur was 
a part of this agitation. To force the hands of the trustees 
of the temples who had the courage to stand against the 
current, many Hindu legislators came forward, tumbling 
over one another, with Bills requiring the trustees to throw 
open temples to the Untouchables if a referendum showed 
that the majority of the Hindu worshippers voted in favour. 
There was a spate of such Bills and a race among legislators 
to take the first place. There was a Temple Entry Bill by 
Dr. Subbaroyan of the Madras Legislative Council. There 
were four Bills introduced in the Central Assembly. One was 
by Mr. C. S. Ranga Iyer, another by Mr. Harabilas Sarda, 
a third by Mr. Lalchand Navalrai, and a fourth one by 
Mr. M. R. Jayakar. 

In this agitation Mr. Gandhi also joined. Before 1932, 
Mr. Gandhi was opposed to allow Untouchables to enter 
Hindu Temples. To quote his own words Mr. Gandhi said 1 : — 

“How is it possible that the Antyajas (Untouchables) 
should have the right to enter all the existing temples ? As 
long as the law of caste and ashram has the chief place in 
Hindu Religion, to say that every Hindu can enter every 
temple is a thing that is not possible today.” 

His joining the movement for Temple entry must therefore 
remain a matter of great surprise. Why Mr. Gandhi took this 
somersault it is difficult to imagine. Was it an honest act of 
change of heart, due to a conviction that he was in error in 
opposing the entry of the Untouchables in Hindu temples ? Was 
it due to a realization that the political separation between 
the Hindus and the Untouchables brought about by the Poona 
Pact might lead to a complete severance of the cultural and 
religious ties and that it was necessary to counteract the 
tendency by some such measure as Temple Entry as will bind 
the two together ? Or was his object in joining the Temple 
Entry movement to destroy the basis of the claim of the 
Untouchables for political rights by destroying the barrier 
between them and the Hindus which makes them separate 
from the Hindus ? Or was it because Mr. Gandhi saw before 


Gandhi Shikshan, Vol. II, p. 132. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


108 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

108 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

him looming large a possibility of adding to his name and fame 
and rushed to make the most of it, as is his habit to do ? The 
second or the third explanation may be nearer the truth. 

II 

What was the attitude of the Untouchables to this movement 
for Temple entry? I was asked by Mr. Gandhi to lend my support 
to the movement for Temple entry. I declined to do so and issued 
a statement on the subject to the Press. As it will help the reader 
to know the grounds for my attitude to this question I have 
thought it well to set it in full. Here it is ! 

Statement on Temple Entry Bill 
14th February, 1933 

Although the controversy regarding the question of Temple 
Entry is confined to the Sanatanists and Mahatma Gandhi, 
the Depressed Classes have undoubtedly a very important 
part to play in it, in so far as their position is bound to weigh 
the scales one way or the other when the issue comes up 
for a final settlement. It is, therefore, necessary that their 
viewpoint should be defined and stated so as to leave no 
ambiguity about it. 

To the Temple-Entry Bill of Mr. Ranga Iyer as now 
drafted, the Depressed Classes cannot possibly give their 
support. The principle of the Bill is that if a majority of 
Municipal and Local Board voters in the vicinity of any 
particular temple on a referendum decide by a majority that 
the Depressed Classes shall be allowed to enter the temple, 
the Trustees or the Manager of that temple shall give effect 
to that decision. The principle is an ordinary principle of 
Majority rule, and there is nothing radical or revolutionary 
about the Bill, and if the Sanatanists were a wise lot, they 
would accept it without demur. 

The reasons why the Depressed Classes cannot support a 
Bill based upon this principle are two: One reason is that the 
Bill cannot hasten the day of temple-entry for the Depressed 
Classes any nearer than would otherwise be the case. It is true 
that under the Bill, the minority will not have the right to 
obtain an injunction against the Trustee, or the Manager who 
throws open the temple to the Depressed Classes in accordance 
with the decision of the majority. But before one can draw 
any satisfaction from this clause and congratulate the author 
of the Bill, one must first of all feel assured that when 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


109 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
AN ABJECT SURRENDER 

the question is put to the vote there will be a majority in 
favour of Temple Entry. If one is not suffering from illusions 
of any kind one must accept that the hope of a majority 
voting in favour of Temple-Entry will be very rarely realised, 
if at all. Without doubt, the majority is definitely opposed 
to-day — a fact which is conceded by the author of the Bill 
himself in his correspondence with the Shankracharya. 

What is there in the situation as created after the passing 
of the Bill, which can lead one to hope that the majority 
will act differently ? I find nothing. I shall, no doubt, be 
reminded of the results of the referendum with regard to 
the Guruvayur Temple. But I refuse to accept a referendum 
so overweighted as it was by the life of Mahatma Gandhi 
as the normal result. In any such calculations, the life of 
the Mahatma must necessarily be deducted. 

Secondly, the Bill does not regard Untouchability in 
temples as a sinful custom. It regards Untouchability merely 
as a social evil not necessarily worse than social evils of other 
sorts. For, it does not declare Untouchability as such to be 
illegal. Its binding force is taken away, only, if a majority 
decides to do so. Sin and immorality cannot become tolerable 
because a majority is addicted to them or because the majority 
chooses to practise them. If Untouchability is a sinful and an 
immoral custom, then in the view of the Depressed Classes 
it must be destroyed without any hesitation even if it was 
acceptable to the majority. This is the way in which all 
customs are dealt with by Courts of Law, if they find them 
to be immoral and against public policy. 

This is exactly what the Bill does not do. The author 
of the Bill takes no more serious view of the custom of 
Untouchability than does the temperance reformer of the 
habit of drinking. Indeed, so much is he impressed by the 
assumed similarity between the two that the method he 
has adopted is a method which is advocated by temperance 
reformers to eradicate the evil habit of drinking, namely, 
by local option. One cannot feel much grateful to a friend 
of the Depressed Classes, who holds Untouchability to 
be no worse than drinking. If Mr. Ranga Iyer had not 
forgotten that only a few months ago Mahatma Gandhi 
had prepared himself to fast unto death if Untouchability 
was not removed, he would have taken a more serious view 
of this curse and proposed a most thoroughgoing reform 
to ensue its removal lock, stock and barrel. Whatever its 
shortcomings may be from the standpoint of efficacy, the 
least that the Depressed Classes could expect is for the 
Bill to recognise the principle that Untouchability is a sin. 


109 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


110 


no 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I really cannot understand how the Bill satisfies Mahatma 
Gandhi, who has been insisting that Untouchability is a sin 
! It certainly does not satisfy the Depressed Classes. The 
question whether this particular Bill is good or bad, sufficient 
or insufficient, is a subsidiary question. 

The main question is: Do the Depressed Classes desire 
Temple Entry or do they not ? This main question is being 
viewed by the Depressed Classes by two points of view. One is 
the materialistic point of view. Starting from it, the Depressed 
Classes think that the surest way for their elevation lies 
in higher education, higher employment and better ways of 
earning a living. Once they become well placed in the scale 
of social life, they would become respectable and once they 
become respectable the religious outlook of the orthodox 
towards them is sure to undergo change, and even if this did 
not happen, it can do no injury to their material interest. 
Proceeding on these lines the Depressed Classes say that 
they will not spend their resources on such an empty thing 
as Temple Entry. There is also another reason why they do 
not care to fight for it. That argument is the argument of 
self-respect. 

Not very long ago there used to be boards on club doors 
and other social resorts maintained by Europeans in India, 
which said “Dogs and Indians” not allowed. The temples of 
Hindus carry similar boards to-day, the only difference is 
that the boards on the Hindu temples practically say: “All 
Hindus and all animals including dogs are admitted, only 
Untouchables not admitted.” The situation in both cases is on a 
parity. But Hindus never begged for admission in those places 
from which the Europeans in their arrogance had excluded 
them. Why should an Untouchable beg for admission in a 
place from which he has been excluded by the arrogance of 
the Hindus ? This is the reason of the Depressed Class man 
who is interested in his material welfare. He is prepared to 
say to the Hindus, “to open or not to open your temples is 
a question for you to consider and not for me to agitate. If 
you think, it is bad manners not to respect the sacredness of 
human personality, open your temples and be a gentleman. 
If you rather be a Hindu than be gentleman, then shut the 
doors and damn yourself for I don’t care to come.” 

I found it necessary to put the argument in this form, 
because I want to disabuse the minds of men like Pandit 
Madan Mohan Malaviya of their belief that the Depressed 
Classes are looking forward expectantly for their patronage. 

The second point of view is the spiritual one. As religiously 
minded people, do the Depressed Classes desire temple entry 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


111 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
AN ABJECT SURRENDER 

or do they not ? That is the question. From the spiritual 
point of view, they are not indifferent to temple entry as 
they would be, if the material point of view alone were to 
prevail. But their final answer must depend upon the reply 
which Mahatma Gandhi and the Hindus give to the question 
namely : What is the drive behind this offer of temple entry ? 
Is temple entry to be the final goal of the advancement in 
the social status of the Depressed Classes in the Hindu 
fold ? Or is it only the first step and if it is the first step, 
what is the ultimate goal ? Temple Entry as a final goal, 
the Depressed Classes can never support. Indeed they will 
not only reject it, but they would then regard themselves 
as rejected by Hindu Society and free to find their own 
destiny elsewhere. On the other hand, if it is only to be 
a first step in the direction they be may be inclined to 
support it. The position would then be analogous to what is 
happening in the politics of India to-day. All Indians have 
claimed Dominion Status for India. The actual constitution 
will fall short of Dominion Status and many Indians will 
accept it. Why ? The answer is that as the goal is defined, 
it does not matter much if it is to be reached by steps and 
not in one jump. But if the British had not accepted the 
goal of Dominion Status, no one would have accepted the 
partial reforms which many are now prepared to accept. 
In the same way, if Mahatma Gandhi and the reformers 
were to proclaim what the goal which they have set before 
themselves is for the advancement of the Social Status of 
the Depressed Classes in the Hindu fold, it would be easier 
for the Depressed Classes to define their attitude towards 
Temple Entry. The goal of the Depressed Classes might as 
well be stated here for the information and consideration 
of all concerned. What the Depressed Classes want is a 
religion, which will give them equality of social status. To 
prevent any misunderstanding, I would like to elaborate the 
point by drawing a distinction between social evils which 
are the results of secular causes and social evils which 
are founded upon the doctrine of religion. Social evils can 
have no justification whatsoever in a civilised society. But 
nothing can be more odious and vile than that admitted 
social evils should be sought to be justified on the ground 
of religion. The Depressed Classes may not be able to 
overthrow inequities to which they are being subjected. But 
they have made up their mind not to tolerate a religion that 
will lend its support to the continuance of these inequities. 

If the Hindu religion is to be their religion, then it must 
become a religion of Social Equality. The mere amendment of 
Hindu religious code by the mere inclusion in it of a provision 


111 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


112 


112 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to permit temple entry for all, cannot make it a religion of 
equality of social status. All that it can do is to recognize them 
as nationals and not aliens, if I may use in this connection 
terms which have become so familiar in politics. But that 
cannot mean that they would thereby reach a position where 
they would be free and equal, without being above or below 
any one else, for the simple reason that the Hindu religion 
does not recognise the principle of equality of social status; on 
the other hand it fosters inequality by insisting upon grading 
people as Brahmins, Kshatrias, Vaishyas and Shudras, which 
now stand towards one another in an ascending scale of hatred 
and descending scale of contempt. If the Hindu religion is to 
be a religion of social equality then an amendment of its code 
to provide temple-entry is not enough. What is required is to 
purge it of the doctrine of Chaturvarna. That is the root cause 
of all in equality and also the parent of the caste system and 
Untouchability, which are merely forms of inequality. Unless 
it is done not only will the Depressed Classes reject Temple 
Entry, they will also reject the Hindu faith. Chaturvarna 
and the Caste system are incompatible with the self-respect 
of the Depressed Classes. So long as they stand to be its 
cardinal doctrine the Depressed Classes must continue to 
be looked upon as low. The Depressed Classes can say that 
they are Hindus only when the theory of Chaturvarna and 
caste system is abandoned and expunged from the Hindu 
Shastras. Do the Mahatma and the Hindu reformers accept 
this as their goal and will they show the courage to work 
for it ? I shall look forward to their pronouncements on this 
issue, before I decide upon my final attitude. But whether 
Mahatma Gandhi and the Hindus are prepared for this or 
not, let it be known once for all that nothing short of this 
will satisfy the Depressed Classes and make them accept 
Temple Entry. To accept temple entry and be content with 
it, is to temporise with evil and barter away the sacredness 
of human personality that dwells in them. 

There is, however, one argument which Mahatma 
Gandhi and the reforming Hindus may advance against 
the position I have taken. They may say: “acceptance 
by the Depressed Classes of Temple Entry now, will not 
prevent them from agitating hereafter for the abolition 
of Chaturvarna and Caste. If that is their view, I like to 
meet the argument right at this stage so as to clinch the 
issue and clear the road for future developments. My reply 
is that it is true that my right to agitate for the abolition 
of Chaturvarna and Caste System will not be lost, if I 
accept Temple Entry now. But the question is on what side 
will Mahatma Gandhi be at the time when the question 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


113 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 113 

is put. If he will be in the camp of my opponents, I must 
tell him that I cannot be in his camp now. If he will be in 
my camp he ought to be in it now. 

B. R. Ambedkar. 

Dewan Bahadur R. Srinivasan who along with me re- 
presented the Untouchables at the Round Table Conference 
also did not support the movement for Temple entry. In a 
statement to the Press, he said : — 

“When a Depressed Classes member is permitted to 
enter into the caste Hindu temples he would not be taken 
into any one of the four castes, but treated as man of fifth 
or the last or the lower caste, a stigma worse than the one 
to be called an Untouchable. At the same time he would be 
subjected to so many caste restrictions and humiliations. 

The Depressed Classes shun the one who enters like that 
and exclude him as casteman. The crores of Depressed 
Classes would not submit to caste restrictions. They will 
be divided into sections if they do. ‘Temple entry cannot be 
forced by law. The village caste-men openly or indirectly 
defy the law. To the village Depressed Class man it would 
be like a scrap of paper on which the “sugar” was written 
and placed in hands for him to taste. The above facts are 
placed before the public in time to save confusion and 
disturbance in the country.” 

To the question I put to Mr. Gandhi in my statement he 
gave a straight reply. He said that though he was against 
untouchability he was not against caste. If at all, he was in 
favour of it and that he would not therefore carry his social 
reform beyond removing untouchability. This was enough for 
me to settle my attitude. I decided to take no further part 
in it. 

The only leading member from the Untouchable community 
was the late Dewan Bahadur Rajah. One cannot help saying 
that he played a very regrettable part in this business. The 
Dewan Bahadur was a nominated member of the Central 
Assembly from 1927. He had nothing to do with the Congress 
either inside or outside the Assembly. Neither by accident nor 
by mistake did he appear on the same side of the Congress. 
Indeed, he was not merely a critic of the Congress but its 
adversary. He was the staunchest friend of the Government 
and never hesitated to stand by the Government. He stood 
for separate electorates for the Untouchables to which the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


114 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

114 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Congress was bitterly opposed. In the crisis of 1932, the Dewan 
Bahadur suddenly decided to desert the Government and take 
sides with the Congress. He became the spearhead of the 
Congress movement for joint electorates and Temple entry. 
It is impossible to discover a parallel in the conduct of any 
other public cause. The worst part of the business was that 
it had none but personal motive behind. The Dewan Bahadur 
was deeply cut because the Government did not nominate him 
as a delegate to the Round Table Conference to represent the 
Untouchables and in his stead nominated Dewan Bahadur R. 
Srinivasan. The Government of India had good ground for not 
nominating him. It was decided that neither the members of the 
Simon Commission nor the members of the Central Legislative 
Committee should have a place in the Round Table Conference. 
The Dewan Bahadur was a member of the Central Legislative 
Committee and had therefore to be dropped. This was quite a 
natural explanation. But the wounded pride of Dewan Bahadur 
Rajah could not let him see it. When the Congress Ministry 
took office in Madras, when he saw how the Poona Pact was 
being trampled upon, how his rival was made a Minister and 
how notwithstanding his services to the Congress he was left 
out, he bitterly regretted What he did! The fact, however, 
remains that in the critical year of 1932, Dewan Bahadur 
Rajah lent his full support to the Congress. He was not only 
running with the Congress crowd but he took care not to fall 
out in the race for legislation against untouchability. He too 
had sponsored two Bills. One of them was called the Removal 
of Untouchability Bill and the other was called the Criminal 
Procedure Amendment Bill. 


Ill 

Mr. Gandhi did not mind any opposition and was indifferent 
as to whether it came from the orthodox Hindus or from the 
Untouchables. He went on in mad pursuit of his object. It is 
interesting to ask, what happened to this movement? Within 
the short compass of this book it is not possible to spread out 
this inquiry and cover everything that was done and claimed 
as evidence of the success of the movement. 

To put it briefly, after a short spurt of activity in the 
direction of removing untouchability by throwing open temples 
and wells the Hindu mind returned to its original state. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


115 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 115 

reports appearing in the “Week to Week” columns of the 
Harijan subsided, became few and far between and ultimately 
vanished. For myself I was not surprised to find that the Hindu 
heart was so soon stricken with palsy. For I never believed 
that there was so much milk of human kindness locked up 
in the Hindu breast as the “Week to Week” column in the 
Harijan would have the world believe. As a matter of fact a 
large part of the news that appeared in the “Week to Week” 
was faked and was nothing but a lying propaganda engineered 
by Congressmen to deceive the world that the Hindus were 
determined to fight untouchability. Few temples if any were 
really opened and those that were reported to have been 
opened most of them were dilapidated and deserted temples 
which were used by none but dogs and donkeys. One of the 
evil effects of the Congress agitation is that it has made the 
political minded Hindus a lying squad which will not hesitate 
to tell any lie if it can help the Congress. Thus ended the part 
which the Hindu public played or was made to appear to play 
in this Temple- Entry movement. The same fate overtook the 
Guruvayur Temple satyagraha and the legislation for securing 
Temple-Entry for the Untouchables. As these are matters 
which were pursued by Mr. Gandhi and Congressmen their 
history might be told in some detail inasmuch as it reveals 
the true mentality of Mr. Gandhi and the Congress towards 
the Untouchables. 


IV 

To begin with the Guruvayur Temple Satyagraha. A temple 
of Krishna is situated at Guruvayur in the Ponnani taluk in 
Malabar. The Zamorin of Calicut is the trustee of the temple. 
One Mr. Kelappan, a Hindu who was working for the cause of 
the Untouchables of Malabar, began an agitation for securing 
the Untouchables entry into the temple. The Zamorin of Calicut 
as the trustee of the temple refused to throw open the temple 
to the Untouchables and in support of his action cited Section 
40 of the Hindu Religious Endowments Act which said that 
no trustee could do anything against the custom and usage of 
the temples entrusted to him. On the 20th September 1932, 
Mr. Kelappan commenced a fast in protest lying in front of 
the temple in the sun till the Zamorin revised his views in 
favour of the Untouchables. To get rid of this annoyance and 
embarrassment the Zamorin appealed to Mr. Gandhi to request 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


116 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

116 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Kelappan to suspend his fast for a time. After a fast 
for ten days Mr. Kelappan at the request of Mr. Gandhi 
suspended the fast on 1st October 1932 for three months. The 
Zamorin did nothing. Mr. Gandhi sent him a wire telling him 
that he must move in the matter and get over all difficulties 
legal or otherwise. Mr. Gandhi also told the Zamorin that as 
Mr. Kelappan had suspended his fast on his advice he had 
become responsible for securing to the Untouchable entry into 
the temple to the extent of sharing the fast with Mr. Kelappan. 
On 5th November 1932, Mr. Gandhi issued the following 
statement to the press : — 

“There is another fast which is a near possibility and 
that in connection with the opening of the Guruvayur temple 
in Kerala. It was at my urgent request that Mr. Kelappan 
suspended his fast for three months, a fast that had well nigh 
brought him to death’s door. I would be in honour bound to 
fast with him if on or before 1st January 1933 that temple 
is not opened to the Untouchables precisely on the same 
terms as to the Touchables, and if it becomes necessary for 
Mr. Kelappan to resume his fast.” 

The Zamorin refused to yield and issued a counter-statement 
to the press in which he said : — 

“The various appeals that are being made for throwing 
open the temples to Avarnas proceed upon an inadequate 
appreciation of such difficulties. In these circumstances, 
there is hardly any justification for thinking that it is in my 
power to throw open the Guruvayur temple to the Avarnas 
as desired by the supporters of the temple-entry campaign.” 

In these circumstances a fast by Mr. Gandhi became 
inevitable, and obligatory. But Mr. Gandhi did not go on fast. 
He modified his position and said that he would, refrain from 
fasting if a referendum was taken in Ponnani taluk in which 
the temple was situated and if the referendum showed that 
the majority was against the throwing open of the temple to 
the Untouchables. Accordingly, a referendum was taken. Voting 
was confined to those who were actual temple goers. Those who 
were not entitled to enter the temple and those who would not 
enter it were excluded from the voters’ list. It was reported 
that 73 per cent, of eligible voters voted. The result of the poll 
was 56 per cent, were in favour of temple entry, 9 per cent, 
against, 8 per cent, were neutral and 27 per cent, abstained 
from recording their votes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


117 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 117 

On this result of the referendum, Mr. Gandhi was bound 
to start the fast. But he did not. Instead, on the 29th of 
December 1932 Mr. Gandhi issued a statement to the press 
which he concluded by saying : — 

“In view of the official announcement that the Viceregal 
decision as to sanction for the introduction, in the Madras 
Legislative Council, of Dr. Subbaroyan’s permissive Bill 
with reference to the temple-entry could not possibly be 
announced before the 15th January, the fast contemplated 
to take place on the second day of the New Year will be 
indefinitely postponed and in any case up to the date of 
the announcement of the Viceregal decision. Mr. Kelappan 
concurs in this postponement.” 

The Viceregal pronouncement mentioned by Mr. Gandhi 
had reference to the Viceroy’s granting permission or refusing 
permission to the moving of the Temple Entry Bills in the 
Legislature. That permission was given by the Viceroy. Yet 
Mr. Gandhi did not fast. Not only did he not fast, he completely 
forgot the matter as though it was of no moment! Since then 
nothing has been heard about Guruvayur Temple Satyagraha 
though the Temple remains closed to the Untouchables even 
to-day. 


V 

Thus ended Guruvayur. Let me now turn to the other 
project namely legislation for Temple-Entry. Of the many 
bills the one in the name of Mr. Ranga Iyer in the Central 
Legislature was pursued. The rest were dropped. There was 
a storm at the very birth of the Bill. Under the Government 
of India Act as it then stood no legislative measure which 
affected religion and customs and usages based on religion 
could be introduced in the Assembly unless it had the previous 
sanction of the Governor-General. When the Bill was sent for 
such sanction another commotion was created by the reports 
that were circulated that the Governor-General was going 
to refuse his sanction. Mr. Gandhi was considerably excited 
over these reports. In a statement to the press issued on the 
21st January 1933, Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“If the report is an intelligent anticipation of the 
forthcoming Viceregal decision, can only say that it will be a 
tragedy... .1 emphatically repudiate the suggestion that there is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


118 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

118 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

any political objective behind these measures. If court 
decisions had not hardened a doubtful custom into law, 
no legislation would be required. I would myself regard 
State interference in religious matters as an intolerable 
nuisance. But here legislation becomes an imperative 
necessity in order to remove the legal obstruction and based 
as it will be on popular will, as far as I can see, there 
can be no question of clash between parties representing 
rival opinions.” 

The decision of the Government was announced on the 
23rd of January 1933. Lord Willingdon refused sanction to 
Dr. Subbaroyan’s Temple-Entry Bill in the Madras Council, but 
His Excellency permitted the introduction, in the Legislative 
Assembly, of Mr. Ranga Iyer’s Untouchability Abolition Bill. 
The Government emphasised the need of ascertainment of 
Hindu opinion before they (Government) could decide what 
attitude to adopt. The announcement further stated that the 
Governor-General and the Government of India desired to 
make it plain that it was essential that consideration of any 
such measure should not proceed unless the proposals were 
subjected to the fullest examination in all their aspects, not 
merely in the Legislature but also outside it, by all who would 
be affected by them. This condition can only be satisfied if 
the Bill is circulated in the widest manner for the purpose 
of eliciting public, opinion. It must also be understood that 
the grant of sanction to the introduction, in the Central 
Legislature, Bills relating to temple entry do not commit the 
Government in any way to the acceptance or support of the 
principles contained therein. On the next day, Mr. Gandhi 
issued a statement in which he said : — 

“I must try to trace the hand of God in it. He wants 
to try me through and through. The sanction given to the 
All-India Bill was an unintentional challenge to Hinduism 
and the reformer. Hinduism will take care of itself if the 
reformer will be true to himself. Thus considered the 
Government of India’s decision must be regarded as God- 
send. It clears the issue. It makes it for India and the 
world to understand the tremendous importance of the 
moral struggle now going on in India. But whatever the 
Sanatanists may decide the movement for Temple-Entry 
now broadens from Guruvayur in the extreme south to 
Hardwar in the north and my fast, though it remains 
further postponed, depends not now upon Guruvayur only 
but extends automatically to temples in general.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


119 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 119 

One can well realize under what fanfare the Bill began 
its legislative career. On the 24th of March 1933, Mr. Ranga 
Iyer formally introduced the Bill in the Assembly. As it was 
a Bill for Mr. Gandhi the Congress members of the Assembly 
were of course ready to give it their support. Mr. Gandhi had 
appointed Mr. Rajagopalachari and Mr. G. D. Birla to canvass 
support for the Bill among the Non-Congress members with 
a view to ensure safe passage for the Bill. He said they were 
better lobbyists than he was. The motion for introduction was 
opposed by the Rajah of Kollengode and Mr. Thampan raised 
a preliminary objection that the Bill was ultra vires of the 
legislature. The latter objection was overruled by the President 
and the House allowed the Bill to be introduced. Mr. Ranga Iyer 
next moved that the Temple-Entry Bill be circulated to elicit 
public opinion by the 30th July. Raja Bahadur Krishnamachari 
opposed the circulation motion and condemned the proposed 
legislation in strong terms. At last he urged that the date 
for circulation should be 31st December instead of 31st July. 
Mr. Gunjal opposed the circulation motion and asked the House 
not to support the Bill. As it was already 5 p.m. and as that 
was the last day of the session for non-official business, the 
President wanted to take the sense of the House for a late 
sitting. As there was no overwhelming majority for it, the 
President adjourned the House. So the Bill stood postponed 
to the Autumn session of the Assembly. 

The discussion of the Bill was resumed on 24th August 
1933 during the Autumn session of the Central Legislature. 
Sir Harry Haig on behalf of the Government explained that 
their support to the motion for circulation of the Bill should in 
no way be construed as implying support to its provisions. It 
was true that the Government sympathized for the Depressed 
Classes and were anxious to do what they could for their social 
and economic improvement. He quoted from the communique 
issued in January last, wherein the Government’s view was 
fully explained. In his opinion, circulation by the end of June 
was a fair and reasonable time to secure the widest possible 
circulation. As regards the limit of circulation to temple going 
Hindus, Sir Harry Haig said from the practical viewpoint that 
it would really hardly be possible to impose the restriction 
as proposed. The Government wanted the matter to be fully 
discussed by all classes of Hindus and were therefore prepared 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


120 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

120 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to give their support to the amendment of Mr. Sharma. 
Closure was moved and the House accepted Mr. Sharma’s 
motion for circulation of the Bill by the end of June 1934. 
Opinions were duly received. They fill a whole volume of over a 
thousand foolscap pages. The Bill was ready for the next stage 
namely to move for the appointment of a Select Committee. 
Mr. Ranga Iyer had even given notice for such a motion. A 
strange thing happened. The Government of India decided to 
dissolve the Assembly and order new election. The result of 
this announcement was a sudden change in the attitude of 
the Congress members in the Central Legislature towards 
Mr. Ranga’s Bill. One and all stood out against it and refused 
to give any further support to the Bill. They were terrified of 
the electorates. Mr. Ranga Iyer’s position was very pitiable. 
He described it in very biting language, the venom of which 
could hardly be improved upon. So well did he describe the 
situation that I make no apology for reproducing the following 
extract from his speech Rising to move his motion Mr. Ranga 
Iyer said: 

“Sir, I rise to move what is known as the Temple-Entry 
Bill, to remove the disabilities of the so-called Depressed 
Classes. Sir, I move : — 

‘That the Bill to remove the disabilities of the so-called 
Depressed Classes in regard to entry into Hindu temples be 
referred to a Select Committee consisting of the Honourable 
Sir Nripendra Sircar, the Honourable Sir Henry Craik, 
Bhai Parma Nand, Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah, Mr. T. N. 
Ramakrishna Reddi, Rao Bahadur B. L. Patil and the Mover.’ 

“I will delete with your permission, the words ‘with 
instructions to report within a fortnight’ and then I will 
continue the remaining portion of the motion : 

‘and that the number of members whose presence shall 
be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall 
be five.’ 

“Sir, at the time I gave notice of this motion, I did not 
think that before a fortnight we would be going into the 
wilderness. Therefore, I recognise the limitations of this 
motion, for there will be no time even to go to a Select 
Committee. I recognise that it gives us an opportunity to 
express our opinion on the subject. 

“I have already stated that I owed an apology to 
Mr. Satyamurthi for while interrupting Mr. Mudaliar, I was not in a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


121 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
AN ABJECT SURRENDER 

position naturally as he was rushing along with his speech to 
explain myself fully and he would have been at a disadvantage 
if I had done so. I recognise that Mr. Satyamurthi, who was 
at no time in favour of the Temple Entry Bill, has succeeded 
in making the Congress drop it. I read the following written 
statement of Mr. C. Rajagopalachariar in the Hindu of Madras, 
dated the 16th August. The Hindu is a very responsible 
newspaper, and as it is not a mere telegraphic interview 
but a written statement, I believe Mr. Rajagopalachariar’s 
statement can be taken as accurate. Mr. Rajagopalachariar 
is apologising to the public for his betrayal of the cause of 
the Untouchables. As the principal lieutenant of Mahatma 
Gandhi, his betrayal must be placed on record. He says : 

‘The question has been asked by some Sanatanists 
whether Congress candidates will give an undertaking 
that Congress will not support any legislative interference 
with religious observances. Similar questions may be 
asked on a variety of topics by persons and groups 
interested in each one of them. That such questions 
are asked only of the Congress candidates and similar 
elucidation is not attempted in respect of other parties 
and independent candidates is a very great compliment 
paid to the Congress.’ 

“So says, Sriman Rajagopalachariar. And, instead of 
following up the compliment and arousing public opinion 
on an unpopular measure, here is a great Congress leader 
who sat dharna at our house with his son-in-law, Devidas 
Gandhi, who repeatedly called on me at Delhi and said ‘We 
seek joint support for this legislative measure,’ — here is a 
man who goes back ‘like a crab,’ to borrow the language of 
Shakespeare. Political parties, explains this subtle brain 
from the South, have distinctive policies on various questions 
covering a wide field : 

‘Not all of them, however, are made into election 
issues at any one time.’ 

“Sir, this Congress leader is afraid of facing the public 
opinion which he has roused. 

“Sir, are the Congress people slaves ? 

‘They are slaves who fear to speak, 

For the fallen and the weak.’ 

“According to Milton, ‘To say and straight unsay argues no 
liar but a coward traced.’. ..Mr. Rajagopalachariar unsays now 
what, he had been saying long before the General Election 
from every platform in the following words : 

‘The Congress candidates go to the electorate in this 
election on well-defined political issues.’ 


121 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


122 


122 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“That is to say, they go to the electorate with a view 
to pandering to the prejudice of the masses whom they 
have misled, so much so, that they have got themselves 
into a bog., Lord Willingdon came to their rescue, to take 
them out of the bog by announcing the dissolution of this 
Assembly and giving them an opportunity, as a Constitutional 
Viceroy, to return to the sheltered paths of constitutionalism. 
Therefore, they have run away from their own convictions 
and are playing every trick to come back to the Legislature 
with as large a number as possible. Had they gone on with 
the Temple Entry Bill or the Untouchability question, they 
would have lost many votes, for it is not a popular issue. I 
said so, though Mahatma Gandhi contradicted me publicly 
at the time, I said so when Shankaracharya was staying in 
Malabar in my brother’s house at Palghat. My brother came 
on a deputation to the Viceroy to oppose the Bill. I said : ‘I 
know, the reformer is not in a majority in Malabar.’ Nowhere 
else are the reformers in a majority but the reformers believe 
in persuading the majority to their way of thinking. Then, 
I said — whatever the result of a referendum, the Congress 
people might have taken in Guruvayur in Malabar, might 
be, I could not for a moment believe that the majority of the 
temple-going people in Malabar were in favour of admitting 
the Untouchables into the temples: but I was prepared to 
fight the in, also to argue with them and to persuade them 
and to make them take an interest in the cause and the 
case of the Untouchables, for, I feel, the Untouchables are a 
part of my community. Sir, if one-third of my community is 
to remain submerged in exclusion in the name of religion, I 
feel, as I have always felt and said, that that community has 
no right to existence. It is with a view to the unification of 
the Hindu community, it is with a view to building up the 
greatness of the future of that community on the past of that 
community, when Untouchability was quite unknown as in 
the Vedic ages, that I have taken up their cause. And now, 
I find Congressmen, so keen about Untouchability yesterday, 
explaining why they are not taking it up today. Mr. Raja- 
gopalachariar has driven the last nail into the coffin of the 
Temple Entry Bill as Raja Bahadur Krishnamachariar, the 
Raja Saheb of Kollengode or Sir Satya Charan Mukherji 
would perhaps like to say, representing as they do the various 
Sana-tanist groups of the country. 

“Sir, Mr. Rajagopalachariar goes on to say that they asked 
to be returned ‘on no other issue,’ that is to say, not on Temple 
Entry issue, but merely on a political Anglo-phobia issue, an 
anti-British issue, because, having traded on public feeling, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


123 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
AN ABJECT SURRENDER 

having tried to give it as much racial antipathy as possible 
in the name of non-violence, in the name of religion itself, 
because non-violence was sometimes given a religious bias, 
having created that atmosphere of distrust in the country, 
finding that that atmosphere might not help them in the 
election if they fought it on a bigger, a cleaner and higher 
issue, namely, the removal of Untouchability itself, they 
side-track the issue, they run away from their conviction : 

‘They are slaves who dare not be 
In the right with two or three.’ 

“Then he. a principal lieutenant of Gandhiji goes on to 
say : ‘If successful at the polls, they cannot believe they will 
receive the mandate of the electorate on any other questions.’ 

“That is to say, they are not receiving the mandate of 
the electorate on the Temple Entry Bill. This man, who came 
screaming at our doors, begging us for support — these beggars 
in the cause of the Congress — who just begged of us to proceed 
with this Temple Entry Bill, are not only betraying the cause 
of the Untouchables, but they are betraying the principles 
of the Mahatma himself, for, we know, that Mahatma’s 
fast was directed toward the uplift of the Untouchables by 
giving them concession in regard to the Communal Award, 
which the Congress naturally has hesitated to repudiate, 
and we, therefore, know that that has a direct bearing on 
the Untouchability question to approach which, to solve 
which, the Mahatma, the great Mahatma, wanted to tour the 
country, but today the Congress, who betrayed him first in 
the betrayal of the Congress boycott of the Councils, have, 
by seeking to come to the Councils, further betrayed him 
with the assistance of his own samandhi, Rajagopalachariar, 
and they say that they are not going to proceed with the 
Untouchability question and the Temple Entry Bill without 
a mandate from the people ! 

“Sir, where is the difference, I ask, between Raja Bahadur 
Krishnamachariar and Sriman Rajagopalachariar ? Raja 
Bahadur Krishnamachariar has always conceded — ‘take a 
mandate from the people and then come and legislate.’ Sir, 
he is not a coward; a great Sanatanist himself, he is willing 
to face the music. On the contrary, these people who pillory 
the Sanatanists up and down the country, forgetting that 
Sanatan Dharma is eternal truth itself, are behaving in a 
manner which even the Sanatanists will not appreciate, for 
Sanatan Dharma is eternal truth and the betrayal of truth 
is worthy only of untruthful people ! Having betrayed many 


123 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


124 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

124 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a principle which would lead us to our national goal, having 
taken up the case of the Untouchables only to save their faces, 
with no conviction behind them, as we now see, the great 
Congress leaders with the exception of Mahatma Gandhi, 
have said through Rajagopalachariar, the Organizer-in-chief 
of the coming elections on behalf of the Congress : 

‘It will be open to all Congressmen to have the matter 
duly considered before it is ever made into an official 
Congress Bill.’ 

“For this betrayal of the cause of the Untouchables, I 
hope constitutionalists will organize themselves, whether 
Hindus or Mussalmans. They can agree to differ later on on 
communal issues, but they will unite and offer a great battle 
to the Congress and bring that organ of masqueraders down 
on its knees. Sir, I think here is a betrayal of the cause of 
the Untouchables and the Depressed Classes; and, if I did 
not believe in this movement before Mahatma Gandhi could 
take it up or Mr. Rajagopalachariar went from door to door 
in Delhi, I should not have been here to move this Bill.” 

VI 

Here was a case of retreat from glory! And what an inglorious 
retreat? How did Mr. Gandhi react to it? In a statement issued 
on 4th November 1982, Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“Untouchables in the villages should be made to feel that 
their shackles have been broken, that they are in no way 
inferior to their fellow villagers, that they are worshippers 
of the same God as the other villagers and entitled to the 
same rights and privileges that the latter enjoy. 

“But if these vital conditions of the Pact are not carried 
out by caste-Hindus, could I possibly live to face God and 
man ? I ventured even to tell Dr. Ambedkar, Rao Bahadur 
M. C. Raja and other friends belonging to the suppressed 
group that they should regard me as a hostage for the due 
fulfilment by caste-Hindus of the conditions of the Pact. The 
fast, if it is to come, will not be for coercion of those who 
are opponents of reform, but it will be intended to sting into 
action those who have been my comrades or who have taken 
pledges for the removal of Untouchability. If they belie their 
pledges or if they never meant to abide by them and their 
Hinduism was a mere camouflage, I should have no interest 
left in life.” 

He was never tired of repeating this. Exclusion of the 
Untouchables from the Hindu Temples, he described, as the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


125 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

AN ABJECT SURRENDER 125 

agony of his soul. What did Mr. Gandhi do in this connection ? 
Did he resent this betrayal by Mr. Rajagopalachari of this 
project without which he said he had no interest left in life ? 
One would naturally expect Mr. Gandhi to denounce this 
betrayal by the Congress Party to achieve success at the polls ? 
Quite the contrary. Instead of blaming Mr. Rajagopalachari, 
he blamed Mr. Ranga Iyer for his violent denunciation of the 
Congress Party for withdrawing its support to the Bill. This 
is what Mr. Gandhi said in the issue of the Harijan dated 
August 31, 1934 : — 

“The ill-fated Temple Entry Bill deserved a more decent 
burial, if it deserved it at all, than it received at the hands 
of the mover of the Bill. It was not a bill promoted by, and 
on behalf of, the reformers. The mover should, therefore, 
have consulted reformers and acted under instructions from 
them. So far as I am aware, there was hardly any occasion 
for the anger into which he allowed himself to be betrayed 
or the displeasure which he expressed towards Congressmen. 

On the face of it, it was, and was designed to be, a measure 
pertaining to religion, framed in pursuance of the solemn 
declaration publicly made in Bombay at a meeting of 
representative Hindus, who met under the chairmanship 
of Pandit Malaviyaji on 25th September, 1932. The curious 
may read the declaration printed almost every week on 
the front page of Harijan. Therefore, every Hindu, caste 
or Harijan, was interested in the measure. It was not a 
measure in which Congress Hindus were more interested 
than the other Hindus. To have, therefore, dragged the 
Congress name into the discussion was unfortunate. The 
Bill deserved a gentler handling.” 

The Temple Entry, what one is to say of, except to describe 
it a strange game of political acrobatics! Mr. Gandhi begins 
as an opponent of Temple Entry. When the Untouchables put 
forth a demand for political rights, he changes his position 
and becomes a supporter of Temple Entry. When the Hindus 
threaten to defeat the Congress in the election, if it pursues 
the matter to a conclusion, Mr. Gandhi, in order to preserve 
political power in the hands of the Congress, gives up Temple 
Entry ! Is this sincerity ? Does this show conviction ?Was 
the “agony of soul” which Mr. Gandhi spoke of more than a 
phrase ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


126 


CHAPTER V 
A POLITICAL CHARITY 
Congress Plan to Kill Untouchables by Kindness 

I 

On the 30th September 1932, a largely attended meeting 
of the Hindus of Bombay was held in the Cowasjee Jehangir 
Hall under the Presidentship of Pandit Malaviya. The object 
of the meeting was to form an All-India Anti-Untouchability 
League with branches in different provincial centres. The 
headquarters of the League were to be in Delhi. Mr. G. D. 
Birla was to be the President and Mr. Amritlal V. Thakkar, 
General Secretary. The All-India Anti-Untouchability League 
was Mr. Gandhi’s project. It was inspired by him and was the 
direct outcome of the Poona Pact. At any rate, Mr. Gandhi 
adopted it as his baby, the moment it was born. The first 
thing Mr. Gandhi did was to change its name. In a press 
message issued on 9th December 1932, Mr. Gandhi told the 
public that the organisation would thenceforth be known as 
Servants of the Untouchables Society. This name also did 
not appear to Mr. Gandhi as the best. He was searching for 
another. Ultimately he decided to give it a new name. He 
called it the Harijan Sevak Sangh. Which means a society 
of those engaged in Service to the Untouchables. This was a 
natural sequence of the name Harijan by which Mr. Gandhi 
used to call the Untouchables. This change did not pass off 
without a controversy between the Shaivas and Vaishnavas. 
Hari is one of the hundred names of Vishnu, while Har is 
one of the hundred names of Shiva. In choosing the name 
Harijan, Mr. Gandhi was accused of sectarian partiality. The 
Shaivas contended that the Untouchables should be called 
Harijan. Mr. Gandhi did not yield and as the first fruits of 
this new organisation the Untouchables got a new name. 

On the 3rd November 1932, Mr. Birla and Mr. Thakkar 
issued a statement to the Press in which they set out 
the programme of this organization and the set-up of the 
machinery to carry out the programme. 

As to the programme the statement said: — 

“The League believes that reasonable persons among the 

Sanatanists are not much against the removal of Untouch- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


127 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 127 

ability as such, as they are against inter-caste dinners and 
marriages. Since it is not the ambition of the League to 
undertake reforms beyond its own scope, it is desirable to make 
it clear that while the League will work by persuasion among 
the caste Hindus to remove every vestige of untouchability, 
the main line of work will be constructive, such as the uplift 
of Depressed Classes educationally, economically and socially, 
which itself will go a great way to remove Untouchability. 
With such a work, even a staunch Sanatanist can have 
nothing but sympathy. And it is for such work mainly that 
the League has been established. Social reforms like the 
abolition of the caste system and inter-dining are kept outside 
the scope of the League.” 

For the convenient prosecution of the programme it was 
proposed that each Province should be divided into a number of 
units and each unit to be in charge of paid workers. A unit may 
or may not be coterminus with a district. It may be formed by 
grouping together two districts or two States. 

The statement also set out a normal Budget for the year. It 
was to be of the following dimensions: — 

“Not less than two-thirds of the expenditure should be 
devoted to actual welfare work, the remaining one-third to 
staff and their allowances. Two paid workers are considered 
the minimum staff and they should be moving about 15 to 


29 days in a month in villages. 

Maintenance allowance for 
two itinerant workers 

30 + 20 = 50 x 12 = 600 

Travelling charges for two itinerant 

workers ... ... ... ... 2 x 10 x 12 = 240 

Miscellaneous expenditure by and 

through the workers ... ... 2 + 10 x 12 = 240 

Welfare work, i.e. cost of school books, scholarships, 2000 

prizes, contributions for wells, if any, and formation 
of Harijan Panchayats. 

TOTAL ... 3,080 


Budget For The Whole Country 

We give below a rough idea of the minimum total amount 
which may have to be spent for the whole of India. The 
scheme is modest enough in view of the gigantic nature of the 
work and it should not be difficult for the public to raise the 
required fund. Every pic contributed to the fund will make 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


128 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

128 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a valuable contribution and therefore we appeal to the public to 
make some sacrifices for the cause. The number of units proposed 
for each province is only a tentative proposal. The final decision, of 
course, will have to be taken by the Provincial Boards themselves. 

“It is calculated that at least the following number of 
units will be required to be worked in different provinces, 
the number of districts and states being shown against each 
province : — 


Name of Province 

No. 

of Dists. 

No. 

of Units 

Assam 


11 


6 

Andhra 


— 


6 

Bengal 


26 


15 

Calcutta City 


1 


3 

Bihar 


16 


16 

Bombay, Bombay City & Suburban District 


1 


3 

Maharashtra 


10 


8 

Gujerat, Baroda, Kathiawar, Cutch and other 




States 5 and States 10 





Central Provinces and Berar (Marathi) . . . 


9 


7 

Central India States 


11 


8 

Delhi Provinces 


1 


2 

Kashmir 


1 


1 

Malabar, Cochin and Travancore 


4 


10 

Mysore & Karnatak Dists. of Bombay & Madras 

8 


10 

Nizam’s Dominion 


14 


10 

Orissa Feudatory States 5 + 26 = 

Punjab Y N.W.S. Province and the 

States 



8 

Punjab Sates 32 + 7 

= 

39 


10 

Rajputana States Ajmer-Merwar State ... 

18 




Br. Dist. 

1 

19 


9 

Sind 


8 


5 

Tamil Nadu 


13 


8 

United Provinces 


48 


24 


Total 



184 

The expenditure for 184 Units would be 





3,000 x 184 


= 

Rs. 

5,52,000 


CENTRAL & PROVINCIAL OFFICES 


Central Office, 1,000 x 12 
Provincial Officer, 4,000 x 12 


= 

Rs. 

= 

Rs. 

Total 

Rs. 

Grand Total 

Rs. 


12,000 

48.000 

60.000 
6,12,000 
6,00,000 


or say, Rs. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK SJ+YS 28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 129 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 129 

This amount will have to be made up both from the 
Central Fund as well as from funds raised by provinces and 
districts. 

It can be seen that a sum of six lakhs of rupees is intended 
to be collected and spent per year in the whole country for 
the removal of Untouchability and ameliorative work of 
Harijans. This programme, particularly if the ameliorative 
work is to be effective, should continue at least for 5 years. 
When spread out over 22 provinces, including States and 
4 crores or 400 lakhs of Harijans in the country, this is a 
small budget indeed.” 

To provide funds for the work of the Sangh Mr. Gandhi 
started an All-India tour which began on November 7, 1988 
and ended on July 29, 1934. Total collection was rupees eight 
lakhs.* As the object of the tour was to arouse enthusiasm 
among the Hindus for the cause of the Untouchables as also 
to collect funds, Mr. Gandhi did most of the tour on foot. Mr. 
Gandhi collected Rs. 8 lakhs. With this amount and the annual 
donation of Mr. Gandhi’s monied friends the Sangh started 
its work. 

The Harijan Sevak Sangh has been going on since September 
1982. It has been held out as a glorious testimony to the agony 
of Mr. Gandhi’s soul for the condition of the Untouchables and 
to the passion he feels for their elevation. The General Secretary 
of the Sangh has invited many Americans to the Home of the 
Sangh in Delhi and shown them round as an unrivalled piece 
of social work that is being done by Mr. Gandhi for the welfare 
of the Untouchables. 

Any welfare work for a down-trodden people must be 
welcomed by all. But this does not mean that it must never 
be criticised. That can hardly be accepted. It would be 
legitimate to inquire what work the Sangh is doing since 
so much is made of it. Any one who has read the Annual 
Reports of the Sangh will see that it follows certain well 
defined and stereotyped lines. In the field of education, the 
Sangh has sought to encourage higher education among the 
Untouchables by instituting scholarships for the Arts, technical 
and professional courses. The Sangh also gives scholarships 
to High School students. The Sangh also maintains Hostels 
for Untouchable students attending colleges and high schools. 
The great part of the educational activities of the Sangh is 
taken up in maintaining separate schools for primary stage 


Harijan, August 3, 1934. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK SJ+YS 28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 130 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

130 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

children, where there were no common schools in the vicinity 
or where common schools were closed to them. 

Next comes the welfare activities of the Sangh. The 
medical aid which the Sangh undertakes to render to the 
Untouchables falls under this head. This is done by itinerant 
workers of the Sangh who go in Harijan quarters to give 
medical aid to the sick and ailing among the Untouchables. 
The Sangh also maintains a few dispensaries for the use of 
the Untouchables. This is a very small activity of the Sangh. 

The more important part of the welfare activity of the 
Sangh relates to water supply. The Sangh does this by 
(1) sinking new wells or installing tube wells and pumps 
for the use of the Untouchables; (2) repairing old ones; and 
(3) persuading Local Governments and Bodies to sink and 
repair wells for the Untouchables. 

The third line of activity undertaken by the Sangh is 
economic. The Sangh seems to run a few industrial schools 
and it is claimed that the industrial schools run by the 
Sangh produced a number of trained artisans who have 
taken to independent living. But according to the reports, 
more successful and substantial work was done by way of 
organizing and supervising co-operative societies among the 
U ntouchables . 


II 

From this summary of its activities an impression may 
be created that the Sangh must be spending quite a lot of 
money on the welfare of the Untouchables. What are the 
facts? It will be recalled that the normal amount of money 
which the Sangh expected to be able to spend on the uplift 
work among the Untouchables was to be about Rs. 6,00,000 
per year. How much has the Sangh been actually spending ? 
The Secretary of the Sangh in his Report issued in May 
1941 says 1 : — 

“During the course of the last 8 years the various branches 
and the central office of the Sangh have spent approximately 
Rs. 24,25,700 and Rs. 3,41,607 respectively, on the Harijan 
work. Looking to the needs of the problem, this sum of 
Rs. 27,67,307 is too insignificant an amount.” 


1. Report, p. 58. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


131 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 131 

On this basis the Sangh’s expenditure comes to about 
Rs. 3,45,888 per year, which is 50 per cent, less than, what 
the Sangh hoped to collect. It will be seen that the Sangh is 
not as big as it is made out to be by its friends. The Sangh 
has been carrying on a very poor existence. A Budget of three 
lakhs per year for a population of 50 millions of Untouchables 
is not a matter on which the Untouchables need be very 
jubilant. Even this much show, the Sangh would not have 
been able to put up if during the two years that they were 
in office the Congress Governments in different Provinces 
had not given large grants to the Sangh. 

The Sangh cannot be blamed for its poor finances. 
The blame lies with the Hindus. The stagnant, if not the 
deteriorating, condition of the Sangh shows how little the 
Hindus care for the welfare of the Untouchables. For political 
purposes they contributed one crore of Rupees which went 
to make up the Tilak Swaraj Fund. For General Welfare 
work they have very recently contributed one crore and 
15 lakhs which will make up the Kasturba Memorial Fund. 
Compared with these the contributions made by the Hindus 
to the Harijan Sevak Sangh are paltry. 

One may differ with the Sangh on the nature of the 
welfare work it does. Much of the work the Sangh does is 
obviously the work which any civilized Government is bound 
to undertake out of public revenues. It may well be asked: 
why should the Sangh ask Government to undertake this 
work and use its funds on projects which Government does 
not do and yet is urgently required to be done? 

This however cannot give rise to feelings of animosity on 
the part of the Untouchables towards the Sangh. It may be 
admitted that such animosity does exist. This circumstance 
and its causes were referred 1 to by a writer in the Indian 
Social Reformer of 14th October 1944. He said : — 

“A deputation of Harijans waited on Gandhiji at Sevagram 
with the request that members of the castes grouped under the 
head of ‘Scheduled Castes’ should be allowed representation 
on the governing body of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. Gandhiji 

1. The occasion for his comments was furnished by the report in the newspapers 
that on September 26, 1944 some Untouchables waited on Mr. Gandhi and urged 
upon him to appoint representatives of the Untouchables on the Governing Body 
of the Harijan Sevak Sangh and Mr. Gandhi refused. The writer is believed to 
be no other than Mr. K. Natarajan. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


132 


132 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is reported to have replied that the Sangh is meant to 
help Harijans and was not a Harijan organization and, 
therefore, their request was inadmissible. At the Round 
Table Conference Gandhiji opposed reservation of seats for 
Harijans on the ground that they were Hindus and should 
not be separated from the general body. Subsequently in the 
Yeravda Pact he was obliged to consent to an allocation of 
seats for them specially, from the Hindu quota. When the 
draft formula conceding this came up for ratification before 
a general meeting in Bombay, over which Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya presided, one of those present pointed 
out to an impatient audience that it was not necessary 
to collect a large fund (as Panditjee suggested) to remove 
from Hindu society the blot of Untouchability and that if 
each one of those present resolved that he or she (a large 
number of women were present) would receive Harijans in 
their homes just like other Hindus, the problem would at 
once cease to exist. A Bombay business magnate turned 
to the intruder and remarked quietly: ‘You have told 
them a home truth. None of them is prepared to follow 
it.’ From the first it has struck me that this has been the 
fundamental weakness of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. What 
is the result ? Nearly every beneficiary of the Sangh is an 
ardent follower of Dr. Ambedkar, which is nothing, but 
for the fact that they share to the full the fanatical and 
bitter hatred of Dr. Ambedkar to the Hindus. I Can give 
several instances to illustrate this statement. But that 
would only make matters worse. I think that this may be 
avoided by associating Harijan gentlemen and women with 
other Hindus in all important bodies, local and central, 
thus giving them the decisive voice in moulding policy. The 
idea of helping Harijans without associating with them, 
is contrary to the spirit of social reform. I was associated 
with the earlier movements for the uplift of Harijans and 
I never found this spirit antagonism aroused among the 
men and women with whom one came in contact. This 
was because the promoters of the movement — I have the 
Depressed Classes Mission prominently in view — were 
by religious faith and social conviction pledged to avoid 
all discrimination in their behaviour to members of the 
Depressed Classes. I think that Gandhiji was not quite 
right when he said that the Harijan Sangh could not 
admit members of the Scheduled Castes. Dr. Ambedkar, 
a friend reminds me, was a member of the Sangh when 
it was formed,” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


133 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 133 

I quote this because it gives me the occasion to explain 
the causes of the hostility and expose the true character of 
the Sangh. 


Ill 

The writer in the Indian Social Reformer pleads that 
Untouchables should be associated with the management of 
the Sangh. His statement might lead people to believe that 
Untouchables were never represented on the Central Board of 
the Sangh. That would be a mistake. The correct position is 
that when the Sangh was started prominent Untouchables in 
substantial numbers were on the Central Board of the Sangh. 
The statement issued by Mr. Birla and Mr. Thakkar on 3rd 
November 1932 gives the names of those who were constituting 
the Central Board. It was announced that: — 

“The Central Board has been constituted with the 

following organising members: — 

Sjt. G. D. Birla, Delhi and Calcutta; Sir Purshotamdas 
Thakurdas, Bombay; Sir Lallubhai Samaldas, Bombay; 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Bombay; Sheth Ambalal Sarabhai, 
Ahmedabad; Dr. B. C. Roy, Calcutta, Lala Shri Ram, Delhi; 

Rao Bahadur M. C. Raja, Madras; Dr. T. S. S. Rajan, 
Trichinopoly; Rao Bahadur Srinivasan, Madras; Mr. A. V. 
Thakkar, General Secretary, Delhi.” 

It will be seen that out of 8 members 3 were drawn from 
the Untouchables. After my retirement from the Board, the 
other two namely Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah and Rao Bahadur 
Srinivasan also retired. I do not know the reasons why they 
dissociated themselves from the Sangh. 

It is right and proper that I should state the reasons why 
I severed my connection with the Sangh. After the Poona 
Pact I proceeded in a spirit of forget and forgive. I accepted 
the bona fides of Mr. Gandhi as I was asked to do by many 
of his friends. It was in that spirit that I accepted a place on 
the Central Board of the Sangh and was looking forward to 
play my part in its activities. In fact, I wanted to discuss with 
Mr. Gandhi the programme of work which I felt the Sangh 
should undertake. Before I could do that, I was called to go 
to London to attend the third Round Table Conference. The 
next best thing I could do was to communicate my views to 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK SJ+YS 2S-9-20 ] 3/YS- 1 4- 1 1-2013 134 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

134 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. A. V. Thakkar, the Secretary of the Sangh. Accordingly 
I wrote the following letter from the steamer: — 

M/N “Victoria,” 

Port Said, 

Nov. 14, 1932. 

Dear Mr. Thakkar, 

I received your wire previous to my departure to 
London, informing me of the acceptance of my suggestion 
regarding the nomination of Rao Bahadur Shrinivasan 
to the Central Board and Mr. D. V. Naik to the Bombay 
Provincial Board, I am glad that this question has been 
amicably settled and that we can now conjointly work 
out the programme of the Anti-Untouchability League. 1 
I wish I had an opportunity to meet the members of the 
Central Board to discuss with them the principles which 
the League should follow in framing its programme of 
work, but unfortunately owing to my having to leave for 
London at a very short notice, I have had to forego that 
opportunity. I am however doing the second best namely 
to convey to you my views in writing for placing them 
before the Board for their consideration. 

In my opinion there can be two distinct methods of 
approaching the task of uplifting the Depressed Classes. 
There is a school, which proceeds on the assumption that the 
fact of the individual belonging to the Depressed Classes is 
bound up with his personal conduct. If he is suffering from 
want and misery it is because he must be vicious and sinful. 
Starting from this hypothesis this School of social workers 
concentrates all its efforts and its resources on fostering 
personal virtue by adopting a programme which includes 
items such as temperance, gymnasium, co-operation, 
libraries, schools, etc., which are calculated to make the 
individual a better and virtuous individual. In my opinion, 
there is also another method of approach to this problem. 

It starts with the hypothesis that the fate of the individual 
is governed by his environment and the circumstances he 
is obliged to live under, and if an individual is suffering 
from want and misery it is because his environment is 
not propitious. I have no doubt that of the two views the 
latter is the more correct, the former may raise a few stray 
individuals above the level of the class to which they belong. 

It cannot lift the class as a whole. My view of the aim of 
the Anti-Untouchability League is that it has come into 
existence not for helping a few individuals at random or a 


1. Harijan Sevak Sangh was the name given to the League at a later stage. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


135 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
A POLITICAL CHARITY 

few selected boys belonging to the Depressed Classes but 
for raising the whole class to a higher level. Consequently, 
I would not like the League to dissipate its energies on a 
programme calculated to foster private virtue. I would like 
the Board to concentrate all its energies on a programme 
that will effect a change in the social environment of the 
Depressed Classes. Having stated in general terms my views, 
I venture to place some concrete proposals for work to be 
undertaken by the League. 

1. A Campaign to secure Civil Rights 

I think the first thing that the League should undertake 
is a campaign all 6ver India to secure to the Depressed 
Classes the enjoyment of their civic rights such as taking 
water from the village wells, entry in village schools, 
admission to village chawdi, use of public conveyance, etc. 
Such a programme if carried into villages will bring about 
the necessary social revolution in the Hindu Society, without 
which it will never be possible for the Depressed Classes 
to get equal social status. The Board must, however, know 
what difficulties it will have to face if this campaign of 
civic rights is to be carried through. Here I can speak from 
experience, because I, as President, know what happened 
when the Depressed Classes Institute and the Social Equality 
League launched such a plan in the Kolaba and the Nasik 
Districts of the Bombay Presidency. First of all, there 
will be riots between the Depressed Classes and the caste 
Hindus which will result in breaking heads and in criminal 
prosecutions of one side or the other. In this struggle, the 
Depressed Classes will suffer badly because the Police and 
the Magistracy will always be against them. There has 
not been a single case in the course of the social struggle 
carried on in these two districts, in which the Police and 
the Magistracy have come to the rescue of the Depressed 
Classes even when justice was on their side. The Police and 
the Magistracy are as corrupt as they could be, but what is 
worse is that they are definitely political in the sense that 
they are out not to see that justice is done but to see that 
the dignity and interests of the caste Hindus as against the 
Depressed Classes are upheld. Secondly, the villages will 
proclaim a complete boycott of the Depressed Classes, the 
moment they see the latter are trying to reach a status of 
equality along with them. You know what harrowing tales 
of harassment, unemployment and starvation, which the 
Depressed Classes repeated before the Starte Committee 
of which you were a member. I therefore do not think it 
necessary to say anything more about the severity of this 


135 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


136 


136 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

weapon and of its dreadful power to bring all efforts of the 
Depressed Classes to rise above their degraded station to 
a standstill. 

I have mentioned only two of the many obstacles which 
the League will have to overcome, if this campaign of 
civic rights is to be successful and the League will have 
to have an army of workers in the rural parts, who will 
encourage the Depressed Classes to fight for their rights 
and who will help them in any legal proceedings arising 
therefrom to a successful issue. I am so much convinced 
by the efficiency of this programme that I have not the 
slightest hesitation in saying that the League ought to look 
upon this as primary in comparison to everything else. It 
is true that this programme involves social disturbance and 
even bloodshed. But I do not think that it can be avoided. 
I know the alternative policy of adopting the line of least 
resistance. I am convinced that it will be ineffective in the 
matter of uprooting untouchability. The silent infiltration 
of rational ideas among the ignorant mass of caste Hindus 
cannot, I am sure, work for the elevation of the Depressed 
Classes. First of all, the caste Hindu like all human beings 
follows his customary conduct in observing untouchability 
towards the Depressed Classes. Ordinarily people do not give 
up their customary mode of behaviour because somebody 
is preaching against it. But when that customary mode of 
behaviour has or is believed to have behind it the sanction 
of religion mere preaching, if it is not resented and resisted, 
will be allowed to waft along the wind without creating any 
effect on the mind. The salvation of the Depressed Classes 
will come only when the Caste Hindu is made to think and 
is forced to feel that he must alter his ways. For that you 
must create a crisis by direct action against his customary 
code of conduct. The crisis will compel him to think and once 
he begins to think he will be more ready to change than 
he is otherwise likely to be. The great defect in the policy 
of least resistance and silent infiltration of rational ideas 
lies in this that they do not compel thought, for they do not 
produce crisis. The direct action in respect of Chawdar Tank 
in Mahad, the Kalaram Temple in Nasik and the Gurwayur 
Temple in Malabar have done in a few days what million 
days of preaching by reformers would never have done. I 
therefore strongly recommend this campaign of direct action 
for securing civic rights of the Depressed Classes for adoption 
by the Anti-Untouchability League. I know the difficulties 
of this campaign, and from such experience as I have of 
it I am convinced that the forces in charge of Law and 
Order must be on our side, if it is to end in success. It is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


137 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
A POLITICAL CHARITY 

because of this that I have deliberately excluded temples 
from its scope and confined it only to public rights of a 
civic nature, the exercise of which I feel Government is 
bound to protect. 

2. Equality of Opportunity 

The second thing I would like the Anti-Untouchability 
League to work for, is to bring about equality of opportunity 
for the Depressed Classes. Much of the misery and poverty 
of the Depressed Classes is due to the absence of equality 
of opportunity which in its turn is due to untouchability. 
I am sure you are aware that the Depressed Classes in 
villages and even in towns cannot sell vegetables, milk or 
butter — ways of earning a living which are open to all and 
sundry. A caste Hindu will buy these things from a non- 
Hindu, but he will not buy them from the Depressed Classes. 
In the matter of enjoyment, his condition is the worst. In 
Government Departments the bar-sinister operates and he 
is denied the place of a constable or even a messenger. In 
industries he fares no better. Like the Negro in America 
he is the last to be employed in days of prosperity and 
the first to be fired in days of adversity. And even when 
he gets a foothold, what are his prospects ? In the Cotton 
Mills in Bombay and Ahmedabad he is confined to the 
lowest paid department where he can earn only Rs. 25 
per month. More paying departments like the weaving 
department are permanently closed to him. Even in the 
low paid departments he cannot rise to the highest rung 
of the ladder. The place of the boss is reserved for the 
caste Hindu while the Depressed Class worker must slave 
as his underdog, no matter how senior or how efficient. 
In departments where the earning depends on piece work, 
he has failed to earn as well as Caste Hindu employees 
because of social discrimination. Depressed Classes women 
working in the Winding and Reeling Departments have come 
to me in hundreds complaining that the Naikins instead of 
distributing the raw material to all employees equally or 
in fair proportion, give all of it to the caste Hindu women 
and leave them in the cold. I have given only a few of 
the instances of the gross inequality of opportunity from 
which the Depressed Classes are suffering mainly at the 
hands of the Hindus. I think it would be fit and proper, 
if the Anti-Untouchability League were to take up this 
question by creating public opinion in condemnation of 
it and establishing bureaus to deal with urgent cases of 
inequality. I would particularly desire the League to tackle 
the problem of opening the Weaving department of the 


137 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


138 


138 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Cotton mills to the Depressed Classes as it is likely to make 
a very large opening for prosperous employment to members 
of the Depressed Classes. Much can be done by private 
firms and companies managed by Hindus by extending their 
patronage to the Depressed Classes and by employing them 
in their offices in various grades and occupations suited to 
the capacities of the applicants. 

3. Social Intercourse 

Lastly, I think the League should attempt to dissolve 
that nausea, which the touchables feel towards the 
Untouchables and which is the reason why the two sections 
have remained so much apart as to constitute separate and 
distinct entities. In my opinion the best way of achieving 
it is to establish closer contact between the two. Only a 
common cycle of participation can help people to overcome 
the strangeness of feeling which one has, when brought into 
contact with the other. Nothing can do this more effectively 
in my opinion than the admission of the Depressed Classes 
to the houses of the caste Hindus as guests or servants. 
The live contact thus established will familiarize both to a 
common and associated life and will pave the way for that 
unity which we are all striving after. I am sorry that many 
caste Hindus who have shown themselves responsive are not 
prepared for this. During those ten days of the Mahatma’s 
fast that shook the Indian world, there were cases in Vile 
Parle and in Mahad where the caste Hindu servants had 
struck work because their masters had abrogated the rules 
of untouchability by fraternising with the Untouchables. I 
expected that they would end the strike and teach a lesson 
to the erring masses by filling the vacancies by employing 
Depressed Classes in their place. Instead of doing that they 
capitulated with the forces of orthodoxy and strengthened 
them. I do not know how far such fair-weather friends of 
the Depressed Classes would be of help to them. People 
in distress can have very little consolation from the fact 
that they have sympathisers, if those sympathisers will do 
nothing more than sympathise, and I may as well tell the 
League that the Depressed Classes will never be satisfied 
of the bona fides of these caste Hindu sympathisers until it 
is proved that they are prepared to go to the same length 
of fighting against their own kith and kin actual warfare 
if it came to that for the sake of the Depressed Classes 
as the Whites of the North did against their own kith 
and Ton, namely, the Whites of the South for the sake 
of the emancipation of the Negro. But this thing apart, I 
think it is necessary that the League should endeavour to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


139 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
A POLITICAL CHARITY 

inculcate upon the mind of the Hindu public the necessity 
of establishing contact and social intercourse between 
the touchables and the untouchables in the way I have 
mentioned. 

4. Agency to be Employed 

The League will hare to employ a very large army of 
workers to carry out its programme. The appointment of 
social workers might perhaps be looked upon as a minor 
question. Speaking for myself, I attach very great importance 
to the selection of a proper agency to be employed in 
this behalf. There can always be found workers to do a 
particular piece of work or any other for the matter of that 
if they are paid for it. I am sure such mercenary workers 
will not serve the purpose of the League. As Tolstoy said: 
“Only those who love can serve.” In my opinion that test 
is more likely to be fulfilled by workers drawn from the 
Depressed Classes. I should therefore like the League to 
bear this aspect of the question in mind in deciding upon 
whom to appoint and when not to appoint. I do not suggest 
that there are not scoundrels among the Depressed Classes 
who have not made social service their last refuge. But 
largely speaking you can be more sure that a worker drawn 
from the Depressed Classes will regard the work as love’s 
labour — a thing which is so essential to the success of the 
League. Secondly, there are agencies which are already 
engaged in same sort of social service without any confines 
as to class or purpose — and may be prepared to supplement 
their activity by taking up the work of Anti-Untouchability 
League in consideration of a grant-in-aid. I am sure this 
hire-purchase system of work — if I may use that expression — 
can produce no lasting good. What is wanted in an agency 
is a singleminded devotion to one task and one task only. 
We want bodies and organisations which have deliberately 
chosen to be narrow-minded in order to be enthusiastic 
about their cause. The work it is to be assigned must be 
assigned to those who would undertake to devote themselves 
exclusively to the work of the Depressed Classes. 

I am afraid I have already trespassed the limits of a letter 
and I do not think I can err further in that direction without 
being tediously long. I had many other things to say but I 
now propose to reserve them for another occasion. Before 
closing this I wish to say just this. It was Balfour I think 
who said-that what could hold the British Empire together 
was love and not law. I think that observation applies equally 
to the Hindu Society. The touchables and the untouchables 
cannot be held together by law — certainly not by any electoral 


139 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


140 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

140 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

law substituting joint electorates for separate electorates. The 
only thing that can hold them together is love. Outside the 
family justice alone in my opinion can open the possibility 
of love, and it should be the duty of the Anti-Untouchability 
League to see that the touchable does, or failing that is made 
to do, justice to the Untouchable. Nothing else in my opinion 
can justify the project or the existence of the League. 

With best wishes and kind regards. 

I am, 

Yours sincerely, 

(Sd.) B. R. Ambedkar. 

F.S. 

I am releasing this to the Press so that the general public 
may know my views and have an opportunity to consider them. 

To 

A. V. Thakkar, Esq., 

General Secretary, 

Anti-Untouchability League, 

Birla House, 

New Delhi. 


IV 

To my great surprise, I found that no attention was paid 
to my proposals. Indeed, my letter was not even acknowledged! 
I felt that there was no use in my remaining in the Sangh. I 
dissociated myself from it. I found that in my absence the aims 
and objects had undergone a complete change. At the meeting 
Held in Cowasjee Jehangir Hall in Bombay on the 30th September 
1932 the aims of the organization were stated to be: — 

“Carrying propaganda against Untouchability and taking 
immediate steps ‘to secure as early as practicable that all 
public wells, dharamshalas, roads, schools, crematoriums, 
burning ghats and all public temples be declared open to the 
Depressed Classes, provided that no compulsion or force shall 
be used and that only peaceful persuasion shall be adopted 
towards this end.’” 

But in the statement issued by Mr. G. D. Birla and Mr. A. V. 
Thakkar on the 3rd November two months after its inauguration 
it was stated : — 

“The League believes that reasonable persons among the 
Sanatanists are not much against the removal of Untouch- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


141 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 141 

ability as such, as they ate against inter-caste dinners and 
marriages. Since it is not the ambition of the League to under- 
take reforms beyond its own scope, it is desirable to make it 
clear that while the League will work by persuasion among 
the caste Hindus to remove every vestige of Untouchability, 
the main line of work will be constructive, such as the uplift 
of Depressed Classes educationally, economically and socially, 
which itself will go a great way to remove untouchability. 
With such a work even a staunch Sanatanist can have 
nothing but sympathy. And it is for such work mainly 
that the League has been established. Social reforms like 
the abolition of the caste system and inter-dining are kept 
outside the scope of the League.” 

Here there was a complete departure from the original 
aims of the organization. Removal of Untouchability had only 
a nominal place in the programme. Constructive work became 
the main part of the work of the Sangh. It is pertinent to 
ask why this change in the aims and objects was made. This 
change in the aims and objects could not have been brought 
about without, the knowledge and consent of Mr. Gandhi. The 
only reason one can see is that the original programme was 
most inconvenient to Mr. Gandhi. Removal of Untouchability 
as a platform was very good, but as a programme of action 
it was bound to have made Mr. Gandhi very unpopular with 
the Hindus. He was not prepared to court such unpopularity. 
He therefore preferred the programme of constructive work 
which had all advantages and no disadvantages. The Hindus 
did not mind it. Mr. Gandhi could pursue it without incurring 
the displeasure of the Hindus. The programme of constructive 
work had no such disadvantage. On the other hand, it had a 
positive advantage to recommend it. It had the possibility of 
destroying the independent movement which the Untouchables 
had built up and which had forced Mr. Gandhi in 1932 to yield 
to its demands by agreeing to the Poona Pact by dangling 
well before them the benefits of the constructive work, a 
consummation which all Congressmen so devoutly wish. It 
could make Untouchables Congressmen and most gracefully 
too. The programme of constructive work had the possibility of 
being converted into a plan to kill Untouchables by kindness. 
This as a matter of fact has happened. The Harijan Sevak 
Sangh is intolerent of any movement on the part of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


142 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

142 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Untouchables which is independent and opposed to the Hindus 
and the Congress and is out to destroy it. Anticipating that 
such would be the consequences of the change in the aims 
and objects, I retired from the Sangh. 

Since the first batch of the Untouchables left the Sangh 
no attempt was made by Mr. Gandhi to appoint other 
Untouchables in their places. Instead, the management of 
the Sangh has been allowed to pass entirely into the hands 
of the Hindus of the Congress persuasion. Indeed, it is now 
the policy of the Sangh to exclude Untouchables from the 
management and higher direction of the Sangh. As will be 
seen from the refusal of Mr. Gandhi to agree to the suggestion 
made by deputation of Untouchables 1 requesting him to 
appoint Untouchables to the managing body. Mr. Gandhi has 
propounded a new doctrine to console the deputations. He 
says: “the Welfare work for the Untouchables is a penance 
which the Hindus have to do. for the sin of Untouchability. 
The money that has been collected has been contributed 
by the Hindus. From both points of view the Hindus alone 
must run the Sangh. Neither ethics nor right would justify 
Untouchables in claiming a seat on the Board of the Sangh.” 
Mr. Gandhi does not realize how greatly he has insulted the 
Untouchables by his doctrine, the ingenuity of which has 
not succeeded in concealing its gross and coarse character. If 
Mr. Gandhi’s point is that the money is collected by the Hindus 
and the Untouchables have therefore no right to say how it 
shall be spent, no self respecting Untouchable will bother him 
arid fortunately those Untouchables who have gone to him 
for such favour are just unemployed loafers who are seeking 
to make politics a source of their livelihood. But Mr. Gandhi 
must realize that what he says is only a justification for the 
change. It does not explain what has been the cause of this 
profound change in the original conception of the Sangh. It 
is pertinent to ask: why at one time he was anxious to have 
Untouchables on the Governing Body of the Sangh and why 
he is determined now to exclude them? 

V 

The writer of the letter in the Indian Social Reformer is 
right when he says the Untouchables felt no hostility towards 

1. The deputation of the Untouchables that waited on Mr. Gandhi is not the 
first of its kind. Others have done so previously with the same result. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


143 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 143 

the Depressed Classes Mission Society which like the Harijan 
Sevak Sangh was also engaged in doing welfare work among 
the Untouchables. Hindus and Untouchables both worked 
together in perfect harmony towards furthering the work of 
the Mission. The writer is not quite correct when he says 
that this was due to the Depressed Classes Mission having 
always taken care to have on its Managing Committee a 
certain number of Untouchables. This is quite true. But the 
reason why there was no hostility between the Mission and 
the Untouchables and why there is between the Untouchables 
and the Sangh is quite different. It lies in the fact that the 
Mission had ho political objective behind its work but the 
Sangh has. 

It is true that the original intention was to keep the 
Sangh scrupulously aloof from politics. It was stated in the 
statement issued on 3rd November 1932 that: — 

“The League may be able to carry on its work on a 
nonparty basis, it has decided not to associate itself with 
politics or religious propaganda of any kind. The heads of 
Provincial as well as Central Executive will, therefore, have 
to be very careful in the selection of their active workers. 
With this object in view it is necessary that all whole-time 
paid workers of the League should not take part in politics 
or in any sectional or religious propaganda.” 

But this pronouncement was respected more in its 
breach than in the observance thereof. It may be that it was 
impossible to resist the temptation of using the Harijan Sevak 
Sangh for bringing the Untouchables into the Congress fold, 
make them accept Congress politics and impress upon them 
Congress ideologies, especially when the sense of gratitude 
for service rendered, no matter how petty, would make them 
receptive for such processes. It may be that it was necessary 
to make the Harijan Sevak Sangh a political manufactory in 
addition to its being a service station for the Untouchables. 
To have equipped the Untouchables for their struggle in life 
and to have left them free to choose their politics would be 
charity pure and simple. But how long would the Hindus 
have supported such a charity ? Not very long. There being 
no sense of sin behind the treatment of Untouchables by the 
Hindus and no cause for repentance or expiation, the charity 
on which the Sangh lives would have dried out. To prevent 
this the Sangh may have felt that to get continued charity it 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


144 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

144 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

must show results i.e. to prove to the Hindus that the 
Untouchables are no longer independent of and opposed to the 
Hindus in the matter of religion and politics. My analysis of 
the causes may not be accurate. But there is no denying the 
fact that the Harijan Sevak Sangh is a political organization 
the aim and object of which are to draw the Untouchables 
into the Congress fold. 

I can give only a few instances which strike me as important. 

The Harijan Sevak Sangh holds Conferences of its workers. 
These Conferences were ostensibly “organized for the purpose 
of examining the progress of work in different linguistic 
provinces and for exchanging ideas and experiences.” One 
such conference was held in Poona in the first week of June 
1939. It was found that this Conference had planned to pass a 
resolution asking Government to change the system of voting 
under the Poona Pact by substituting distributive system for 
cumulative voting. I have already pointed out how after its 
surrender marked by the Poona Pact, the Congress insisted 
upon the adoption of the distributive system of voting and 
how dangerous it was to the Untouchables and how it would 
have nullified the Poona Pact. The Congress failed. What the 
Congress failed to do the Sangh took upon itself to advocate 
knowing full well that it was opposed by the Untouchables. 
A strange resolution for a non-political body ! It is like a 
drunkard with a red nose trying to convince his neighbours 
that he is a teetotaler. The Sangh was prevented from pursuing 
the course by a demonstration of the Untouchables. 

I am in a position to state that the Bombay Branch of the 
Harijan Sevak Sangh had followed the policy of black listing 
some of the Untouchable communities residing in Bombay, 
on account of its Anti-Congress attitude. Students from 
communities which were black listed were refused scholarships 
and other educational aids. The Mahar Community, which 
forms the spearhead of the political movement of the 
Untouchables and has all along fought with the Congress, 
was black listed and Mahar students were generally subjected 
to discrimination unless the student proved that he did not. 
share the Anti- Congress sentiments of the Community. 

The last instance I would refer to has reference to Mr. A. V. 
Thakkar the General Secretary of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. 
Mr. Thakkar is also a member of the Backward Classes Board 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


145 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A POLITICAL CHARITY 145 

of the Bombay Government. It was established in 1929. It meets 
periodically and advises Government on matters affecting the 
Untouchables and other backward Classes. 

Mr. Thakkar brought a resolution in the meeting of the 
Board recommending to Government that scholarships set apart 
by Government for Untouchable boys should not be given to the 
Mahar boys alleging that the Mahar Community had become very 
much advanced in education and was appropriating — or according 
to him misappropriating — the share of Government funds which 
ought to be reserved for other Untouchable Communities. The 
resolution was sent down for investigation of the facts on which 
it was found. The inquiry showed that the facts were wrong and 
that the Mahars instead of being forward were really backward 
in education as compared with other Untouchable Communities. 
The resolution was nothing but a political manoeuvre by no less 
a person than the General Secretary of the Harijan Sevak Sangh 
to punish the Mahars for their Anti-Congress politics. 

What does all this show ? Does it not show that the Harijan 
Sevak Sangh is a charitable organization only in name, and that 
its real aim is to ensnare the Untouchables, to make them the 
camp-followers of the Hindus and the Congress and to scotch 
any movement by them the aim and object of which are to free 
themselves from the social, religious, economic and political 
domination of the Hindus ? Is there any wonder if the Untouchables 
look upon the Harijan Sevak Sangh as an abomination, the object 
of which is to kill them by kindness ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


146 


CHAPTER VI 
A FALSE CLAIM 

I 

The Congress has been loudly and insistently claiming 
that it is the only political organization in India which is 
representative of the people of India. At one time it used to 
claim that it represents the Musalmans also. This it does not 
now do, at any rate not so loudly and insistently. But so far 
as the Untouchables are concerned the Congress maintains 
most vehemently that it does represent them. On the other 
hand, the non-Congress political parties have always denied 
this claim. This is particularly true of the Untouchables 
who have never hesitated to repudiate the Congress claim 
to represent them. 

In this rivalry the Congress has been able to beat down 
the Untouchables and the other non-Congress Parties by the 
sheer strength of the resources in publicity and propaganda. 
The result has been that most foreigners interested in Indian 
affairs have become infected by this propaganda, and have 
come to believe in the validity of the Congress claim. So long 
as the world had to depend upon nothing but propaganda, the 
Congress could very easily fool the foreigner and there was 
no help for those who denied the Congress claim to represent 
all. They had no means of coping with the situation. But 
since the Election of 1937 to the Provincial Legislatures the 
situation has been altered. Instead of depending upon general 
statements backed by propaganda, one can now determine the 
issue in terms of seats and votes which is a more concrete 
measure of appraisement than mere propaganda. 

What do the election returns show ? What is the total 
number of seats captured by the Congress ? What is the total 
number of votes secured by the Congress ? 

First, let us ascertain the number of seats captured by 
the Congress. Soon after the elections had taken place, the 
Congress held a Convention of all those who were elected to 
the Provincial Legislatures on the Congress ticket, which met 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


147 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 147 

in New Delhi on March 19, and 20, 1987. In that connection, 
the Congress issued a bulletin in which their names are given. 
Taking that information as accurate, the following appears to be 
the strength of the Congress in each Provincial Legislature : — 

Table 6 


Congress Strength in Provincial Assemblies 


Province 

Total Strength of 
the Assembly 

Congress Strength in 
the Assembly 

Assam 

108 

35 

Bengal 

250 

60 

Bihar 

152 

95 

Bombay 

175 

85 

C. P. and Berar 

112 

70 

Madras 

215 

159 

Orissa 

60 

36 

Punjab 

175 

18 

Sind 

60 

8 

U.P 

228 

134 

N.W.F.P. 

50 

19 

Total ... 

1,585 

719 


Table 7 


Congress Strength in Provincial Councils 


Province 

Total Strength 

of 

the Council 

Congress 
Strength in 
the Council 

Assam 

18 

Nil 

Bengal 

57 

10 

Bihar 

26 

8 

Bombay 

26 

14 

Madras 

46 

26 

Total ... 

173 

58 


These tables show that taking the two Houses together the 
Congress secured 777 seats out of a total of 1,758. The Congress 
obviously is not a majority party. It did not secure even half the 
number of seats. 

This is the position of the Congress in terms of the number 
of seats. What is the position of the Congress in terms of voting 
strength ? The following figures will show that even in point of 
voting strength the Congress came out as a minority. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


148 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
148 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Table 8 


Abstract of Votes Cast in the Election distributed as 
between Congress and Non-Congress Parties 


Province 

Total Votes 
cast 

Votes cast 
in 

favour of 
Congress 

Votes cast 
in 

favour of 
Non- 
Congress 

Madras 

Assembly . . . 

4,327,734 

2,658,966 

1,668,768 


Council 

33,511 

16,907 

16,604 

Bombay 

Assembly . . . 

3,408,308 

1,568,093 

1,840,215 


Council 

23,730 

9,420 

14,310 

Bengal 

Assembly . . . 

3,475,730 

1,055,900 

2,419,830 


Council 

5,593 

1,489 

4,104 

U.P. 

Assembly . . . 

3,362,736 

1,899.325 

1,463,411 


Council 

9,795 

1,580 

8,215 

Bihar 

Assembly . . . 

1,477,668 

992,642 

485,026 


Council 

4,318 

96 

4,222 

Punjab 

Assembly ... 

1,710,934 

181.-265 

1,529,669 

C. P. 

Assembly . . . 

1,317,461 

678,265 

639,196 

Assam 

_ Assembly ... 

522,332 

129,218 

393,114 


Council 

2,623 

Nil 

2,623 

N.W.F.P. 

Assembly ... 

179,529 

43,845 

135,684 

Orissa 

Assembly . . . 

304,749 

198,680 

106,069 

Sind 

Assembly 

333,589 

18,944 

314,645 

Total 


20,500,340 

9,454,635 

11,045,705 


It is not enough to know these figures. They must be read in 
the light of other circumstances. The first such circumstance is 
the level of the franchise. The other is the relative position of the 
two parties in the election. Without taking these into account it 
would not be possible to understand the full significance of the 
election results. As to franchise, it is very high, and the electorate, 
compared with the total population, is indeed very small. How 
small a part of the total population it formed will be seen from 
the comparative figures given in the following table: — 

Table 9 


Province 

Population (1931) 

Electorate 

Madras ... ... 

47,193,602 

6,145,450 

Bombay and Sind 

26,398,997 

3,249,500 

Bengal ... ... 

51,087,338 

6,695,483 

U.P 

49,614,833 

5,335,309 

Punjab ... ... 

24,018,639 

2,686,094 

Bihar and Orissa 

42,329,583 

2,932,454 

C.P. 

17,990,937 

1,741,364 

Assam ... ... 

9,247,857 

815,341 

N.WJ.P. 

4,684,364 

246,609 

Total 

272,566,150 

29,847,604 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


149 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 149 

Only about ten per cent of the population was given the 
right to vote. The high franchise made the electorate a hive 
of the middle and the intellectual classes, both of which 
were intensely pro-Congress. Coming to the relative position 
of the Congress and the Non-Congress Parties, the following 
points call for special notice. On the Congress side there were 
massed all the sinews of war, money and organization. The 
Non-Congress candidates were without a party chest and had 
no organization. The Congress candidates were the blue boys 
of the public. They were enemies of British Imperialism, out 
to achieve freedom and independence of the country. Gaol 
life had invested the Congress candidates with the halo of 
martyrdom. As a rule no one was selected as a Congress 
candidate who had not gone to gaol. The Non-Congress 
candidates were represented by the congress Press — and as I 
have said there is no other press in India — as the showboys 
of the British, with no record of service to or sacrifice for the 
country, agents of British Imperialism, enemies of the country, 
job-hunters, fellows out to sell the interests of the country 
for a mess of pottage and so on. There was another factor 
which told in favour of the Congress candidates and against 
the Non-Congress candidates. The Congress had boycotted 
the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms of 1920 and the Congress 
candidates had not to answer for any act of commission or 
omission in regard to the administration of the country. The 
Non-Congress candidates on the other hand were drawn from 
those who had worked the Reforms and had to answer for 
many acts of omission and commission, which is the lot of 
all those who have the courage to take upon their shoulders 
the responsibilities of administration. The Non-Congress 
candidates were accused of having made the places dirty and 
the Congress candidates were proclaimed as angels going to 
clean the augean stables. In a situation like this, any one, 
knowing how the dice was loaded in favour of the Congress, 
cannot but feel surprised at the sorry figure the Congress 
cut in the election. With all its resources, prestige and public 
sympathy the Congress should have swept the polls. But it 
did not even get fifty per cent of the seats or the votes. 

Is there any doubt that the Congress claim to represent all 
classes and communities is a hollow claim with no foundation 
in fact ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


150 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

150 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ii 

Let me next proceed to examine the Congress claim to, 
represent the Untouchables. This claim also can now be 
determined by reference to the results of the elections that 
took place in 1937. A correct understanding of the results of 
the electoral contests between Congress and the Untouchables, 
I fear, will not be possible to those who have no knowledge 
of the electoral plan devised to give representation to the 
Untouchables. I therefore feel it necessary to explain in the 
first instance the Indian Electoral system, particularly for the 
benefit of the foreigner. It may be described by reference to the 
four elements of an Electoral System, namely, (1) Electorates 
which is the Indian term for constituencies, (2) Right to vote, 
(3) Right to stand as a candidate for election and (4) Rules for 
determining who is a successful candidate. 

1. There are two sorts of Electorates recognized by the 
Government of India Act, 1935, 

(1) Non-Territorial. 

(2) Territorial. 

2. Non-Territorial Electorates are Electorates which are 
designed to give representation to special interests such 
as Landlords, Chambers of Commerce, Trade Unions, etc. 

3. Territorial Electorates fall into three categories : — 

(i) Separate Territorial Electorates known in their 
abbreviated form as Separate Electorates. 

(ii) General Territorial Electorates. 

(iii) Joint Territorial Electorates with Reserved Seats, 
commonly spoken of as Joint Electorates. 

4. Separate Electorates are Communal Electorates. They are 
designed to give representation to specified Communities, 
namely, Muslims, Indian Christians, Europeans and 
Anglo-Indians. The voters of each of these Communities 
in a given area are grouped into one Electorate, separate 
from the rest. They elect a voter of their Community 
as their representative exclusively by their own 
votes. The governing feature of a separate electorate 
is that in an election through a separate electorate 
only voters of a Community can vote and stand for 
election. If it is a Muslim Electorate the voter and the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


151 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 151 

candidate must be a Musalman; if it is a Christian 
Electorate the voter and the candidate must be a Christian 
and so on. The election is decided by a majority of votes 
cast by voters of the particular community. 

5. A General Electorate is the normal usual form of the 
electorate, an electorate which comprises of voters of all 
communities living in an area but which are outside the 
system of Separate Electorates. It is called a General 
Electorate because it is an electorate in which neither 
community nor religion finds any recognition. It is an 
electorate of the Rest i.e. other than Muslims, Indian 
Christians, Europeans and Anglo-Indians. In a General 
Electorate : — 

(i) No voter who is in a Separate Electorate has a right 
to vote in or stand for election. 

(ii) Every voter who is on its electoral roll has a right 
to vote and to stand for election without reference to 
his caste, creed or community. 

(iii) The result of the election is determined by a simple 
majority of votes cast. 

6. A Joint Electorate is a cross between Separate Electorate 
and the General Electorate. It has some things in common 
with Separate Electorate and the General Electorate. But 
it also differs from both in other particulars. The points 
of agreement and of difference are set out below : — 

(i) Joint Electorate compared with Separate Electorate : 

(1) Joint Electorate is akin to Separate Electorate 
in as much as both aim to earmark a seat for a 
particular community. 

(2) Joint Electorate differs from a Separate Electorate 
in two respects : — 

(a) In a Separate Electorate the right to vote 
in the election is confined to voters of the 
community for which the seat is earmarked, 
while in a Joint Electorate, though the seat 
is earmarked for a particular community, 
in other words though the right to stand 
is confined to a member of a particular 
community, the right to vote in the election 
for that seat is open to other communities 
which make up the General Electorate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


152 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

152 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) In both cases the poll is declared on the 
basis of majority votes. But in the case of 
a separate electorate the majority is and 
must be of the voters belonging to the same 
community as that of the candidate, while 
in the case of a joint electorate majority 
need not be of the same community as that 
of the candidate. 

(ii) Joint Electorate compared with General Electorate : — 

(1) A Joint electorate is akin to a General Electorate 
in as much as in both a voter is free to vote for any 
candidate standing for a general Constituency. 

(2) A Joint Electorate differs from a Separate 
Electorate in two respects : — 

(a) A General Electorate may be a single 
member electorate. But a Joint Electorate 
must at least be a two-member electorate 
one general and one reserved. 

(b) In a General Electorate no seat is earmarked 
for any community. But in a Joint Electorate 
one at least must be reserved. 

7. Special Features of Joint Electorate. 

A Joint Electorate with Reserved Seats is essentially a General 
Electorate with the following distinguishing features: — 

(1) A General Electorate may be a single member 
electorate. But a Joint Electorate must necessarily 
be a plural member Electorate. 

(2) In a General Electorate the seat or seats to be filled 
by Election are open to all, and all communities not 
enclosed in separate electorates are entitled to contest 
and the result of the election is determined by majority 
of the votes polled by the candidates without reference 
to community of the voter or the candidate. But in 
a Joint Electorate at least one seat is reserved for 
some particular community which means that the 
right to stand as a candidate for such reserved seat 
is restricted to members of that community. 

(3) While the right to stand in a Joint Electorate is 
restricted, the right to vote is unrestricted and all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


153 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 153 

voters in the General Electorates, i.e., even voters of 
communities other than the one for which the seat 
is reserved are free to vote for the election of the 
candidate for the Reserved Seat. 

(4) In declaring the result of the election to the reserved 
seat, there is no requirement that the successful 
candidate must have obtained a specified quantum 
of votes of the voters of this community. The rule 
is that the candidate of the community for which 
the seat is reserved if there is only one or if there 
be more than one candidate then the one who polls 
the highest number of votes must be declared to be 
elected even if another candidate belonging to the 
general community has secured a greater number 
of votes than the community’s candidate. 

Such is the Electoral system which obtains in India. The 
system made applicable to the Untouchables is the one referred 
to as the system of Joint Electorates with Reserved Seats and 
described under 7 above. To give effect to the principle of 
reservation for the Untouchables what is done is to pick out a 
requisite number of General Electorates, convert them into plural 
member electorates and reserve in each such electorate one or 
two seats for the Scheduled Castes. Different Provinces have 
different number of such Joint Electorates. Their actual number 
is determined by the number of seats allotted to the Scheduled 
Castes in the Provincial Legislature and by the number of seats 
reserved for them in each Joint Electorate. Attention may also 
be drawn to some features of the plan, which from the point of 
view of results are of crucial character. 

The Joint Electorate is a general electorate. But it must not 
on that account be supposed that it is a constituency consisting 
of the generality of voters. As has already been pointed out, 
the Muslims, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans 
have been given separate electorates and consequently, the 
Muslim, Indian Christian, Anglo-Indian and European voters 
are excluded from a Joint Electorate. The result is that the 
Joint Electorate is a constituency in which the only voters 
who are included are those belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
Hindus, Parsis and Jews. As the Parsis and Jews are negligible 
except in Bombay, the Joint Electorate consists of Hindus and 
Scheduled Castes only. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


154 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

154 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Although the General Electorate selected for reserving a 
seat for the Untouchables may be bigger than a two-member 
constituency and although it is open to reserve more than one 
seat for the Untouchables in one General Electorate, in all 
provinces the general plan is to select a two-member General 
Electorate, and to reserve one seat for the Hindus and one 
seat for the Scheduled Castes. It is only in Bengal there 
are three constituencies in which two seats are reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes. The Joint Electorate is thus a linked 
constituency. Two features of this Joint Electorate should be 
noted: (1) The Hindu voters in a Joint Electorate are almost 
always in a majority, if not in an overwhelming majority and 
the Scheduled Castes voters are almost always in a minority, 
if v not in a hopeless minority. (2) A Hindu voter can vote for 
the election of a Scheduled Caste candidate standing for the 
seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes and a Scheduled Caste 
voter can vote for the election of a Hindu candidate standing 
for the Hindu seat. 

Under the system what are the probabilities ? Will the 
Scheduled Castes be able to elect a Scheduled Caste candidate 
who has their confidence to the seat reserved for them or will 
the Hindus be able to elect a Scheduled Caste candidate who is 
their tool and who has no confidence of the Scheduled Castes ? 
The probabilities will be determined by two considerations: 
(1) by the number of seats reserved for the Hindus and (2) by 
the nature of the political organizations prevailing among the 
Hindus. If there is only one seat reserved for the Hindus and 
if the Hindus are so organized that they can prevent a contest 
for their seat and avoid frittering away their votes then it is 
absolutely certain that the Hindu nominee from the Scheduled 
Castes will win. The reason is that the Hindus who have a 
larger voting strength will find a surplus of votes which they do 
not need for election to their seat and which they can bestow 
upon their nominee from the Scheduled Castes and help him 
to win the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes. The system 
of joint electorate and reserved seats which is in operation is 
a system of two member constituency. The Hindus under the 
Congress are so completely organized that there is no possibility 
of an electoral contest and consequent waste of votes. The 
result is that the system helps the Hindus to win the reserved 
seats and works against the Scheduled Castes. The Hindus 
are greatly aided in this matter by reason of the fact that for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


155 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 155 

winning the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes in a 
Joint Electorate it is not necessary that the majority of 
voters should belong to the Scheduled Castes for whom the 
seat is reserved. 

How these weaknesses in the system of joint electorate 
were exploited by the Congress in the Elections which took 
place in 1937, will be explained later on. For the moment, I 
am only drawing attention to the Electoral plan devised for 
the purpose of giving representation to the Scheduled Castes 
and how vulnerable some of its features are. 

Ill 

We may now proceed to examine the Election Returns. 
It may be well to begin by asking a simple question: What 
do Congressmen mean when they say that the Election of 
1937 shows that the Congress represents the Untouchables ? 
A clarification is necessary, because quite obviously the 
question can have two meanings. It may mean that those 
Untouchable candidates who stood on the Congress ticket for 
seats reserved for the Untouchables were elected as against 
those Untouchable candidates who did not stand on the 
Congress ticket. It may also mean that more votes were cast 
by the Untouchable voters in favour of those Untouchable 
candidates who stood on the Congress ticket than other 
Untouchable candidates. I propose to examine the returns 
from both points of view. 

The results of the Election, in terms of seats won, have 
already been presented. It is not necessary to repeat those 
figures here. It was shown that out of 151 seats the Congress 
won 78. One cannot say that this result of the contest between 
the Congress and the Untouchables is a strong piece of 
evidence : to support the Congress claim that it represents 
the Untouchables. If the Congress got 78 the Untouchables 
got 73. It was a neck to neck race. 

Let us examine the claim of the Congress to represent the 
Untouchables in term of votes cast in favour of the Congress 
Untouchable candidates. The total number of votes cast by 
the Untouchable Voters in the election of 1987 numbered 
1,586,456. 

The following table shows how they were distributed, 
now many were cast in favour of the Congress Untouchable 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


156 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

156 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

candidates and how many in favour of Non-Congress Untouchable 
candidates : 


Table 10 


Province 

Voting by Untouchable Voters 

In favour of 
Congress 

Against 

Congress 

Total of Un- 
touchable Votes 
cast in the 
Election 

United Provinces 

52,909 

79,571 

132,180 

Madras ... 

126,152 

195,464 

321,616 

Bengal ... 

59,646 

624,797 

684,443 

Central Provinces 

19,507 

115,354 

134,861 

Bombay ... 

12,971 

158,076 

171,047 

Bihar ... 

8,654 

22,187 

30,841 

Punjab ... 

Nil 

69,126 

69,126 

Assam ... 

5,320 

22,437 

27,757 

Orissa ... 

5,878 

8,707 

14,585 

Total 

290,737 

1,295,719 

1,586,456 


It is well-known that the number of seats captured by a party 
is not always in proportion to the number of votes cast in favour 
of the party and often a party carries a majority of seats with 
a minority of votes. This is particularly true where the single 
member constituency system prevails as it does in India. The 
real strength is measured by the number of votes secured by the 
party. Applying this test, it is clear that out of 1,586,456 votes 
only 290,737 i.e., eighteen per cent have been cast in favour of 
the Congress. Eighty-two per cent have been against the Congress. 
Can there be any evidence more conclusive against the Congress 
claim to represent the Untouchables ? Congressmen may not accept 
voting strength as a measuring rod. They may continue to base 
the claim of the Congress to represent the Untouchables on the 
ground of seats captured. No sane man will look upon 78 out of 
151 or majority of five as a victory worth talking about. As a 
matter of fact the Congress claim even on the basis of seats is 
futile. For, a further analysis of the Election Returns shows that 
the Congress far from capturing a majority of seats got only a 
minority of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes. 

If the credit side of the Congress is to be real and not bogus, 
then the following deductions must be made from the total of 78 
which the Congress has won: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


157 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A EAT.SE CLAIM 157 

(1) Seats won by the Congress with the help of Hindu 
voters and which if left to be decided by the votes of 
the Untouchables only would have been lost by the 
Congress. 

(2) Seats won by the Congress not by reason of an 
absolute majority but by reason of the splitting of 
the Untouchable votes due to too many Non-Congress 
Untouchable Candidates having stood to contest the 
seat against the Congress Untouchable candidate. 

(3) Seats which, it was in the power of Untouchables to 
win, if they had used their votes in the election to 
the seats reserved for them and not cast them away 
in the election of candidates contesting the general 
or non-reserved seats. 

I cannot see how a fair minded person can object to these 
deductions being made. A candidate whose majority is due 
to votes of persons other than Untouchables has no right to 
say that he is a representative of the Untouchables and the 
Congress cannot claim to represent the Untouchables through 
him merely because he belongs to the Untouchables and 
stood on a Congress ticket. An Untouchable candidate whose 
majority is the result of split in the camp of his opponents 
and who if there had been no split would have lost, cannot 
be taken as a real representative of the Untouchables and 
the Congress cannot claim to represent the Untouchables 
merely because he belongs to the Untouchables and stood 
on the Congress ticket. A candidate for a seat reserved for 
the Untouchables who succeeds in an election in which a 
large majority of the electors have not played their part 
cannot be a representative of the electors merely because 
the seat is an Untouchable seat. Untouchable seats captured 
by such Untouchable candidates must also be deducted 
from the total number of seats won by the Congress. The 
only Untouchable seats which the Congress can claim to 
have won are those which it has won, exclusively by the 
votes of the Untouchable voters. All the rest must be 
deducted. The following table gives the distribution of the 
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and won by the 
Congress and the circumstances responsible for its success. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


158 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
158 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Table 11 


Analysis of Circumstances which helped Congress to 
Win the Seats it has Captured 




Number of Seats won by The Congress 



With 

Without 

Due to 
Splitting 
of 

Scheduled 

Castes 

Votes 

By want of 
interest shown 
by Scheduled 


Province 

Hindu 

Hindu 

Castes in the 

Total 


Votes 

Votes 

Election to 
Scheduled 
Castes Seats 



0) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

United Provinces 

3 

6 

3 

4 

16 

Madras 

5 

15 

4 

2 

26 

Bengal 

— 

4 

— 

2 

6 

Central Provinces 

1 

5 

— 

1 

7 

Bombay 

1 

1 

1 

1 

4 

Bihar 

1 

3 

— 

7 

11 

Punjab 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Assam 

1 

2 

— 

1 

4 

Orissa 

1 

2 

— 

1 

4 

Total ... 

13 

38 

8 

19 

78 


These are the facts revealed by a study of the Election 
Returns. They are incontrovertible and must be accepted. Judged 
by the test of voting the Congress far from representing the 
Untouchables, the Untouchables are proved to have repudiated 
the Congress. Judged by the test of seats, the Congress has only 
won 38 seats out of the total of 151. The account shows that 
73 seats it failed to win, 13 it won by Hindu Votes, 8 as a result of 
split due to too many Untouchables standing against the Congress 
Untouchable candidate and 19 on account of the foolishness of 
the Untouchables in not taking sufficient interest in the election 
to the seats reserved for them. 

The following table specifies the Constituencies where such 
phenomena have occurred. They are classified under three heads 
and shown Province-wise and referred to by their serial number 
as shown in the Appendices. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


159 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 159 


Table 12* 


Provinces 

Analysis of Scheduled Castes Constituencies. 

Serial Numbers 
of Constituencies 
in which 
Congress 
won with Hindu 
Votes 

Serial Numbers 
of Constituencies 
in which Congress 
won because of 
splitting of 
Scheduled Castes 
Votes 

Serial Numbers 
of Constituencies 
in which Congress 
won because the 
Scheduled Castes 
were indifferent 

United Provinces ... 

1, 3 & 4 

8, 9 & 10 

11,13, 14 & 18 

Madras 

1, 22, 23, 24 & 25 

8, 12, 15 & 17 

4 & 21 

Bengal 

Nil 

Nil 

6 & 7 

Central Provinces ... 

6 

Nil 

15 

Bombay 

1 

14 

3 

Bihar 

11 

Nil 

2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 & 13 

Punjab 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Assam 

1 

Nil 

4 

Orissa 

6 

Nil 

2 


The claim that the Congress represents the Untouchables is 
thus a false claim from beginning to end. It is a myth which in 
the light of the results of the election stands completely exploded. 


The results of the election reveal other interesting facts which 
are summarised in the following two tables : 

Table 13 

Election to Scheduled Castes Seats 


Provinces 

Contested 

Uncontested 

Total 

United Provinces 

15 

5 

20 

Madras 

26 

4 

30 

Bengal ... 

28 

2 

30 

Central Provinces 

19 

1 

20 

Bombay 

14 

1 

15 

Bihar 

6 

9 

15 

Punjab 

6 

2 

8 

Assam 

6 

1 

7 

Orissa ... 

4 

2 

6 

Total 

124 

27 

151 


* For details, see Appendix II passim. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


160 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
160 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Table 14 


Scheduled Castes Seats won by the Congress 


Provinces 

On Contest 

Without 

Contest 

Total 

United Provinces 

14 

2 

16 

Madras 

24 

2 

26 

Bengal 

6 

Nil 

6 

Central Provinces 

6 

1 

7 

Bombay 

3 

1 

4 

Bihar 

4 

7 

11 

Punjab 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Assam 

3 

1 

4 

Orissa 

4 

Nil 

4 

Total 

64 

14 

78 


Table 13 shows what keen interest the Untouchables have 
taken in the election to the seats reserved for them. Out of 151 
as many as 121 were contested. This disproves the allegation that 
used to be made that it was no use giving political rights to the 
Untouchables as they had neither political education nor political 
consciousness. Table 14 shows that the Untouchables far from 
looking upon the Congress as their friend and ally have regarded 
it as their political enemy No. 1. They have very seldom allowed 
the entry of the Congress in the election to the seat reserved 
for the Untouchables to go unchallenged. In most of the cases 
where the Congress had put up an Untouchable candidate on 
the Congress ticket for a seat reserved for the Untouchables, the 
Untouchables did not meekly surrender the seat to the Congress 
but came forward to contest the election by putting up their own 
candidate on a Non-Congress ticket. Out of the 78 candidates put 
up by the Congress for the Scheduled Castes seats as many as 
64 were contested. 


Table 15 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


161 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 161 



Total 

20 

30 

25* 

20 

15 

00 

CD 


15 

146 

CO 












05 

£ 

CO 

CD 

■w 

CO 

<3 

"a 

CD 

Above * 
50 

Nil 

Nil 

14 

CO 

Nil 

(N 

Nil 

<M 

Nil 

21 

46—50 

Nil 

i—l 

Nil 

1—1 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

<M 

03 £ 
v, £ 

° £ 
.o ^ 

41—45 

l— 1 1 

i— 1 

i—l 

1—1 

Nil 


Nil 


Nil 

oo 

ies classified according to the rat 
o every 100 of General i.e. Hindu 

36—40 

Nil 

i—l 

i—l 

1—1 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

CO 

31—35 

i— 1 

CO 

CO 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

<N 

Nil 

Nil 

05 

26—30 

<N 

CO 

1—1 

i—l 

<N 

oq 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

1—1 

1—1 

21—25 

CD 

10 

CO 

(N 

<N 

i—l 

(N 

Nil 

i—l 

27 

S3 

0) 

a 

CO 

S3 

CJ 

16—20 

=D 

CD 

Nil 

i—l 

(N 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

CD 

oo 

1—1 

CD 

S 

1 

11—15 

l> 

LO 

Nil 

ID 

ID 

i—l 

Nil 

i—l 

CO 

27 

10 and 
Below 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

ID 


i—l 

<N 

CO 

ID 

20 


o 

.g 

s 

o 




0 

‘3 

£ 


T3 

cC 


a 

be 

d 

<D 


o 


o3 

S 



Q) 

_> 

* 


c3 

o 


Constituencies have two seats reserved for Scheduled Castes which makes up the total of 30 Seats reserved for the Scheduled 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


162 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

162 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IV 

To say that the elections of 1937 do not prove that 
the Congress was victorious over the Untouchables in the 
electoral fight is an understatement. In a real sense the 
Untouchables triumphed over the Congress. If not many are 
found to admit this, their inability or unwillingness to do so 
must be attributed to their ignorance of the difficulties which 
the Untouchables have had to face in their contest with the 
Congress. These difficulties were very real and very great. 
It is worthwhile to detail them so that people may know 
the courage and tenacity with which the Untouchables have 
fought to prove that they are independent of the Congress 
and that the Congress does not represent them. 

These difficulties can be classified under two heads (1) 
Organizational and (2) Electoral. 

Under the first head special mention may be made of 
two : — 

The first was the difference in the relative degree of 
resources at the command of the Congress and of the 
Untouchables. That the Congress is the richest political party 
goes without saying. No estimate has so far been made of 
the money the Congress spent in the elections of 1937. If an 
investigation was made it would be found that the money it 
spent in advertisement, in conveyance and in canvassing for 
the candidates who stood on its ticket was simply colossal. All 
these resources were placed by the Congress at the service 
of those Untouchables who stood on the Congress ticket. 
Not one millionth part of these resources were available 
to those Untouchable candidates who stood against the 
Congress. Some of them had even to borrow money to pay 
their deposits. They fought their elections without the help 
of advertisement, canvassing or conveyance. 

The second is the existence of a party machine on the side 
of the Congress and the complete absence of it on the side 
of the Untouchables. The party machine as every one knows 
constitutes the real strength of the Congress. The credit for 
the creation of a party machine must be given to Mr. Gandhi. 
It has been in existence for the last 20 years and with the 
resources it possesses the Congress has kept the machine well 
oiled and in perfect order always ready to be put in motion by 
merely pressing the button. It is a vast machine which covers 
every town and every village in the country. There is no area in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


163 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 163 

which there is no agent of the Congress to operate this machine. 
The Untouchables who stood on the Congress ticket had their 
electioneering done for them by this party machine of the 
Congress. Those Untouchables who stood against the Congress 
had no such party machine to help them. The scheme of 
separate representation was first introduced in Indian politics 
in the year 1909. The benefit of it was however given only to 
one community, namely, the Muslims. In 1920 the constitution 
was revised. In this revised constitution it was extended to the 
Non-Brahmins. The Untouchables were again left out. They 
were consoled with representation with one or two seats in 
the various Provincial Legislatures filled by nomination. It is 
for the first time in 1935 that they got the franchise and the 
right to representation through election. It is obvious that not 
having had any franchise the Untouchables had felt no need to 
set up a party machine of their own as there were no elections 
to be fought. They hardly had any time to organize themselves 
and to set up a party machine when suddenly in 1937 they 
were called upon to fight the elections. The fight between the 
Congress and the Untouchables was a fight between an army 
and a crowd. 

The electoral difficulties in the way of the Untouchables were 
equally great. The first electoral difficulty arose from the unequal 
voting strength between the Hindus and the Untouchables in 
those General Electorates in which seats are reserved for the 
Untouchables. The following table contains figures showing the 
relative voting strength of the two. 

This table shows how in the General Electorates the 
Scheduled Castes voters are outnumbered by the Hindu voters. 
Special attention should be paid to the proportion in which 
they are outnumbered by the Hindus. As the figures in the 
table show, in 20 constituencies the proportion of Scheduled 
Castes voters to Hindu voters is 10 to 100, in 27 constituencies 
between 11 and 15 to 100, in 18 constituencies between 15 and 
20 to 100, in 27 constituencies between 21 and 25 to 100 and 
in 11 constituencies between 20 and 30 to 100. These instances 
will show how overwhelming is the majority of Hindu voters 
and by what a substantial margin the Hindus can overpower 
the Scheduled Castes voters. In this connection it must also 
be remembered that every Scheduled Caste Constituency 
is a Joint Electorate in which both classes of voters — those 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and those belonging to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


164 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

164 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Hindus — can vote for the Scheduled Castes seat and compete 
to capture it. In this game the relative disproportion in voting 
strength of the two becomes of immense importance. For success 
in election in such a linked constituency primarily depends upon 
relative voting strength of the competing groups. 

The second electoral difficulty arose out of the number of the 
seats fixed for the general constituencies in which seats were 
reserved for the Untouchables. The following table shows the 
system adopted in the different provinces. 

Table 16 


Classification of General Constituencies in which 
Seats for Untouchables are Reserved 


Province 

No. of Seats 
Reserved for 
Untouchables 

No. of 

Constituencies 
with 2 Seats 

No. of 

Constituencies 
with 3 Seats 

No. of 

Constituencies 
with 4 Seats 

Madras 

30 

30 

Nil 

Nil 

Bombay 

15 

Nil 

6 

9 

Bengal 

30 

20 

5 

Nil 

United Provinces 

20 

20 

Nil 

Nil 

Punjab 

8 

8 

Nil 

Nil 

Bihar 

15 

15 

Nil 

Nil 

Central Provinces 

20 

20 

Nil 

Nil 

Assam 

7 

6 

1 

Nil 

Orissa 

6 

6 

Nil 

Nil 

Total ... 

151 

125 

12 

9 


This table shows that out of 151 General Constituencies 
required to be declared as reserved for the Scheduled Castes as 
many as 180 were two-member constituencies in which one seat 
was reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the other was kept as 
a general seat. It is quite possible that many will not realize the 
electoral danger that is involved to the Untouchables in this two- 
member constituency system. But the danger is very real. How real 
it is, will become clear if it was considered along with the relative 
voting strength of the Hindus and the Untouchables in the General 
constituency to which attention has already been drawn. Where 
the constituency is a plural constituency of — say three or four 
members — one reserved for the Scheduled Castes and two or three 
left for the general community, the relatively higher voting strength 
of the Hindus is not so much a matter of danger as it is when 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


165 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CLAIM 165 

under the two-member constituency the Hindus have only one 
candidate to elect. With more candidates to elect the voting 
strength of the Hindus is split as they become engaged in 
fighting out the election of their candidates to the general seat 
and there is no surplus votes left with them, with the result 
that their excessive voting strength in the constituency does 
not become a menace to the Scheduled Castes. But, when they 
have only one seat to win, the chances of their votes being 
frittered away are remote. Under an organized party system 
such as that established by the Congress, they are nil. The 
excess of unused voting strength which they are thus able to 
retain becomes surplus and unnecessary for them, and which 
they are quite free to use in supporting a Scheduled Caste 
candidate of their choice, standing on their ticket as against 
another Scheduled Caste candidate who is independent and 
who is not prepared to be their tool. What havoc the Hindus 
played with their surplus votes is clear from the result of the 
elections. 

When one considers the method of voting and the number 
of seats fixed and the distribution of the voting strength in the 
general constituencies one feels whether any better electoral 
system for deceiving the Untouchables could have been devised. 
The Joint Electorates to which the Scheduled Castes are tied are 
like the Rotten Boroughs which existed in England before the 
Reform Act of 1832. Under the Rotten Borough, the candidate 
elected was in fact nominated by the boss who controlled the 
Borough. Similarly, under the system of Joint Electorates the 
Scheduled Caste candidate who is elected to the Legislature is 
virtually nominated by the Hindus. That is the reason why Mr. 
Gandhi is so keenly devoted to the system of Joint Electorates. 

One hears a great deal about the Muslim League having 
grown from strength to strength. But few realize how sheltered 
the Muslim League is by reason of the system of separate 
electorates. The Muslims are secure from the menace and 
mischief of the Congress. Not so are the Untouchables. They 
axe open to the full blast of the Congress money, Congress votes 
and Congress propaganda. That the Untouchables overcame all 
these difficulties without resources, without a party machine 
and in spite of all electoral difficulties shows their triumph over 
the Congress and their desire to maintain their independent 
existence. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


166 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
166 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


CHAPTER VII 

A FALSE CHARGE 

Are Untouchables the Tools of the British ? 

As I have said before, the Congress since the time it came 
under the auspices of Mr. Gandhi underwent a complete 
transformation. One of these transformations is noteworthy, 
for it is this which has made the Congress so famous and 
which has enabled it to capture the imagination of the people. 
Before Mr. Gandhi’s time it did nothing more than meet 
annually at different places in India and pass certain and 
sometimes the same resolutions touching some flaw in the 
British Administration of India. After Mr. Gandhi took charge 
of the Congress in 1919, it became a party of action, or, as 
Congressmen like to put it, the Congress forged sanctions — a 
thing never thought of before. The sanctions, which make 
up the Congress armoury and which it has put into action 
one time or another are : (1) Non-co-operation ; (2) Boycott; 
(3) Civil Disobedience and (4) Fast. The aim of non-co- 
operation was to make government useless by refusal to 
recognise or resort to Government schools, colleges, courts and 
to make it impossible by refusing to engage in Government 
service. Boycott was a weapon, the aim of which was to 
coerce individuals not prepared to follow the dictates of the 
Congress. It had two edges, social or economic. The social edge 
cut off all social intercourse even withdrawing the services 
of barbers, washermen, butchers, grocers, merchants, etc., 
in short, making life of the culprit impossible in every way. 
The economic edge cut off all business relations, such as 
buying and selling of goods. Its objective was the merchant 
class selling foreign goods. Civil Disobedience was intended to 
give a direct blow aimed at the British Government. It was a 
deliberate breach of law with a view to court imprisonment, fill 
gaols and thereby discredit Government. It is practised either 
as mass civil disobedience or individual civil disobedience. 
Unfortunately fasting on a mass scale has not been resorted 
to by Congressmen. Fasting has only been an individual 
activity. Unfortunately fasting unto death has also not been 
practised by Congressmen. It has always been for a term. 
It is a weapon particularly reserved by Mr. Gandhi for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


167 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 167 

himself. Even he uses it for a term. These are the four weapons 
which the Congress forged to give sanction to its demand for 
India’s freedom. 

Having forged the sanctions, the Congress has gone on to 
give demonstrations of the use of these sanctions. Between 1920 
and 1942, the country has witnessed demonstrations staged 
by Congressmen of one form or the other of these sanctions. 
The din and dust they raised filled the air and drew crowds 
to witness them. They have come to be described as “Fight for 
Freedom.” What has been the use of such sanctions is a subject 
which demands serious consideration. But this is not the place 
for it. One must remain content with the observation that the 
old Congress could not have done worse. The use of sanctions 
has really been a tragedy. Swaraj is as far as it has been, 
but the reckless use of sanctions has made partition of India 
starker, surer and nearer. While it is not possible to discuss 
the gains resulting from the use of sanctions, the fact must 
be mentioned that this “Fight for Freedom” has been carried 
on mostly by the Hindus. It is only once that the Musalmans 
took part in it and that was during the shortlived Khilafat 
agitation. They soon got out of it. The other communities, 
particularly the Untouchables, never took part in it. A few 
stray individuals may have joined it for personal gain. But 
the community as such has stood out. This was particularly 
noticeable in the last campaign of the “Fight for Freedom,” 
which followed the ‘Quit India’ resolution passed by the 
Congress in August 1942. 

This is a glaring fact especially to a foreigner who comes 
to India and witnesses how more than half the population 
non-co-operates with the Congress in this “Fight for Freedom.” 
Quite naturally he feels stupefied by this strange phenomenon. 
He asks : Why are the Muslims, Christians and Untouchables 
not participating in the “Fight for Freedom ?” and turns to 
the Congress for an explanation. The Congress has a ready- 
made answer. It is that the Untouchables are the tools of 
British Imperialism and that is why they do not join the 
“Fight for Freedom.” The echo of this charge was heard 
from the mouth of many foreigners whom one came across 
during the war. What is most disconcerting is the experience 
that most of these foreigners seemed to have accepted the 
allegation as being true. The simplicity and plausibility of 
the argument could be the only reason which can account for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


168 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

168 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

such an easy conversion. It serves a double purpose. It enables 
the Congress to account for a strange phenomenon and it 
gives an explanation to which circumstances lend an apparent 
plausibility. 

Had it not been for the fact that even influential foreigners 
have been infected by this idea, one would hardly bestir 
himself to take notice of such malicious propaganda. For the 
explanation given by the Congress for the non-participation 
by the Untouchables in what is called “the Fight for Freedom” 
is an absurd explanation. It is an explanation which only a 
knave can venture to offer and which none but a fool can be 
expected to accept as satisfactory. But as it is almost certain 
that in the events that are coming, what foreigners think about 
India’s problems will be a matter of some moment, I think it 
necessary to explain the correct situation and allow no room for 
such erroneous notions about the Untouchables to take roots 
in their mind especially when there can be no difficulty in 
proving that it is a false charge against the Untouchables and 
to prove that if the Untouchables have not joined the “Fight 
for Freedom” it is not because they are the tools of the British 
Imperialism but because they fear that freedom of India will 
establish Hindu domination which is sure to close to them and 
for ever all prospect of life, liberty and pursuit of happiness 
and that they will be made the hewers of wood and drawers 
of water. 

That the Untouchables should have refused to join the 
Congress in the “Fight for Freedom” is in itself a proof positive 
that their reason for non-co-operation with the Congress cannot 
be the puerile one suggested by the Congress. It must be 
something real and substantial. What is it ? The reason which 
has led the Untouchables to non-co-operate with the Congress 
has been popularly expressed by them when they say that 
they do not wish to be placed under Hindu Raj in which the 
governing class would be the Bania and the Brahamin with 
low class Hindus as their policemen, all of whom have been the 
hereditary enemies of the Untouchables. This language is held 
to offend against good taste. That may be so. But it must not 
be supposed that because such slogans are offensive in their 
tone they are devoid of sense or that the outlook which they 
typify and the ideals which they embody have no compelling 
force or that they cannot be made to wear the garb of a true 
and respectable political philosophy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


169 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 169 

Translated in the language of political science, what do 
these slogans mean ? They mean that the Untouchables 
are not opposed to freedom from British Imperialism. But 
they refuse to be content with mere freedom from British 
Imperialism. What they insist upon is that free India is not 
enough. Free India should be made safe for democracy. Starting 
with this aim, they say that on account of the peculiar social 
formation in India there are minority communities pitted 
against a Hindu Communal Majority, that if no provisions 
are made in the constitution to cut the fangs of the Hindu 
Communal Majority, India will not be safe for democracy. The 
Untouchables therefore insist on devising a constitution which 
will take note of the special circumstances of India and contain 
safeguards which will prevent this Hindu Communal Majority 
in Indian society from, getting possession of political power to 
suppress and oppress the Untouchables and which will directly 
invest the Untouchables with at least a modicum of political 
power to prevent their suppression and exploitation, and to 
enable them at least to hold their own, in their struggle for 
existence against the Communal Majority. In short, what the 
Untouchables want are safeguards in the constitution itself 
which will prevent the tyranny of a Hindu Communal Majority 
from coming into being. 

The Congress on the other hand regards the freedom of 
India from British Imperialism to be the be-all and end-all 
of Indian nationalism. Nothing more, it thinks, is necessary 
for the welfare of the Indian people in a free India. As to 
the question of a constitution for a free India, the Congress 
simply does not look upon it as a problem. Asked, what about 
the constitution of a free India ? The Congress reply is that it 
will be a democracy. What sort of democracy would it be ? The 
Congress answer is that it will be based on adult franchise. 
Will there be any other safeguard, besides adult suffrage for 
preventing the tyranny of a Hindu Communal Majority ? The 
Congress reply is emphatically in the negative. Asked, why 
this opposition to safeguards ? the Congress says that it is a 
vivisection of the nation, — an argument the picturesqueness 
of which is intended to cover its stupidity and which has its 
origin in the genius of Mr. Gandhi, and for which the high 
class Hindus, who stand to lose by these safeguards, feel so 
grateful to him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


170 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

170 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Untouchables refuse to accept this silly sophism. 
They say that Indian social life has to be reckoned in terms 
of communities. There is no escape. Communities are such 
hard facts of Indian social life that it would be wrong to 
accept that communal impulse and communal prejudice do 
not dominate the relations of the communities. The social 
psychology of the Hindu Communal Majority is dominated by 
the dogma which recognizes not merely inequality but graded 
inequality as the rule governing the inter-relationship among 
the various communities. This dogma of graded inequality 
is absolutely inimical to liberty and fraternity. It cannot be 
believed that this graded inequality will vanish or that the 
Hindus will strive to abolish it. That is impossible. This graded 
inequality is not accidental or incidental. It is the religion of 
the Hindus. It is the official doctrine of Hinduism. It is sacred 
and no Hindu can think of doing away with it. The Hindu 
Communal Majority with its religion of graded inequality is 
not therefore a passing phase. It is a permanent fact and 
a menace for ever. In making a constitution for India the 
existence of a standing Communal Majority cannot be ignored 
and the problem of devising safeguards so as to reconcile it 
with political democracy must be faced. That is the reasoning 
of the Untouchables. 

The constitutional safeguards which the Untouchables 
have been demanding are detailed in the Resolutions recently 
passed by the Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled 
Castes Federation and which are printed in Appendix XI. For 
purposes of argument I take three of them, (i) Guaranteed 
minimum representation in the Legislature; (ii) Guaranteed 
minimum representation in the Executive and (iii) Guaranteed 
minimum representation in the Public Services. These demands 
are ridiculed by the Congress as communalism and the 
leaders of the Untouchables are represented as job hunters. 
The Congress places its opposition to these guarantees on 
the high pedestal of nationalism, of which it holds itself as 
the guardian angel. The foreigner may find it difficult to see 
the absurdity of the Congress argument against safeguards. 
But if he were to take into account the purposes for which 
these guarantees are sought, he will find that the attempt of 
the Congress to represent them as a piece of communalism 
is arrant nonsense. 

The purpose of these guarantees demanded by the 
Untouchables is not to fill the Legislature, the Executive and the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


171 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 171 

Administration by the representatives of the Untouchables. 
These guarantees are really floorings below which the 
Untouchables will not fall under the crushing pressure of 
the Hindu Communal Majority. They are intended to keep 
the Hindu Communal Majority within bounds. For, if there 
were no such guarantees to the Untouchables, the result will 
be that the Hindu Communal Majority will not only capture 
the Legislature, the Executive and the Administration, but 
the Legislature, the Executive and the Administration will be 
over-run by the Hindu Communal Majority and these powerful 
organs of the State, instead of protecting the minorities, will 
become the tools of the Hindu Communal Majority doing its 
biddings. 

In the light of this explanation there ought to be no difficulty 
for any outsider of average intelligence in understanding the 
issues between the Congress and the Untouchables. In the first 
place, he ought to be able to realize that the issue between 
them is created by the former refusing to recognize that in 
the existence of a Communal Majority the relies a great 
menace to political democracy and the latter maintaining the 
contrary and insisting that the constitution should contain 
positive provisions to curb this menace. In other words, the 
Untouchables are anxious to make India safe for democracy, 
while the Congress, if it is not opposed to democracy, is 
certainly opposed to creating conditions which will make 
democracy real. 

In the second place, the foreigner should be able to see 
that this demand by the Untouchables for safeguards is not 
a novel demand. His understanding will be facilitated if he 
were to regard these safeguards as another name for checks 
and balances and to bear in mind that there is no constitution 
which does not contain such checks and balances to protect 
political democracy from being subverted and to note how the 
constitution of the U.S.A. is full of such checks and balances 
which are embodied in clauses relating to Fundamental Rights 
and Separation of Powers. If he does this, he need not feel 
puzzled if the safeguards demanded by the Untouchables take 
a different form than they do in other countries. For, the 
nature of safeguards must differ with the nature of the forces 
which constitute a menace to political democracy and as these 
forces in India are of a different character, the safeguards 
must necessarily take a different form. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


172 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

172 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In the third place, the foreigner should have no difficulty in 
realizing that if anybody is communal it is the Congress and not 
the Untouchables, and that whatever the philosophic grounds 
advanced by the Congress the real motive of the Congress in 
opposing the demand for constitutional guarantees is to keep 
the political field a free pasture for the Hindu Majority. He 
should be able to see, though the Congress does not openly say 
so, how natural it is for the Congress to be communal. The 
Hindu Communal Majority is the back-bone of the Congress. 
It is made up of the Hindus and is fed by the Hindus. It is 
this Majority which constitutes the clientele of the Congress 
and the Congress, therefore, is bound to protect the rights of 
its clients. If he realizes this, he will not be deceived by the 
arguments of the Congress that it is opposing these demands 
in the name of nationalism. On the other hand, he will realize 
that the Congress is deceiving the world by using nationalism 
as a cloak for a free field for rank communalism. 

Lastly, he will know why the representative character 
of the Congress has become an issue of such importance in 
Indian politics. He will realize that nobody would have cared 
to bother about the representative character of the Congress 
and to inquire, whom it represents and whom it does not, if the 
Congress were not to arrogate to itself the right to say what 
should be the constitution of a free India. But as it does, its 
right to speak in the name of the country forms a vital issue 
and those who do not accept this have no alternative but to 
challenge it. 


II 

With all this, foreigners have said — “Why not join the 
Congress in the ‘Fight for Freedom’ ? ; why make agreement on 
constitutional safeguards a condition precedent to cooperation 
with the Congress ? After all, safeguards can come only after 
freedom is won.” A foreigner who has followed the foregoing 
discussion as to matters which divide the Congress can be left 
to understand why the Untouchables have not thought it safe 
to co-operate with the Congress in this “Fight for Freedom.” 
But there may be some who may not be able to imagine them 
and who would like to know what they are. Rather than leave 
them to find wrong reasons it is better to take the trouble to 
let them have the right ones. The reasons are various. Only 
the most important are set out below. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


173 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 173 

The first reason is founded in commonsense. The Untouchables 
say: “What harm is there in demanding from the Congress an 
agreement in advance ? What is lost, if a guarantee is given 
by the Congress in advance ?” They argue that if the Congress 
agreed to this demand for safeguards in advance it will have a 
double effect. In the first place, it will give an assurance to the 
Untouchables who entertain so much dread as to what their lot 
would be under a Hindu Communal Majority. Secondly, such an 
assurance would go a long way in inducing the Untouchables to 
co-operate with the Congress. After all, why are the Untouchables 
non-co-operating ? Because, they are afraid that if this freedom is 
achieved it will enable the Hindu Majority once again to enslave 
them. Why not remove this fear if it can be done at so small a 
cost, namely, by an agreement in advance ? 

The second reason is founded in experience. The Untouchables 
say that the experience of the world does not justify the hope that 
when the “Fight for Freedom” ends, the stronger elements have 
shown the generosity to give security to the weaker elements. 

Many examples of this betrayal could be cited. The most 
notorious one relates to the betrayal of the Negroes in the United 
States after the Civil War. Speaking of the part played by the 
Negroes in the Civil War Mr. Herbert Apthekar says 1 : 

“One hundred and twenty-five thousand Negroes from the 
slave states served in the Federal armies. They, together with 
the eighty thousand from the North, fought in four hundred 
and fifty battles, with an inspiring and inspired courage that 
was of the utmost importance in bringing about the collapse 
of the Confederacy and the abolition of slavery. 

“Here were over two hundred thousand armed Negro 
men fighting within a state built upon and dedicated to the 
proposition that the Negro was, if at all a human being an 
innately and ineradicably inferior one, fit only to be a slave. 

* * * 

“And the Negro soldiers of the Republic fought 
notwithstanding shameful discriminations and disadvantages. 
White soldiers received thirteen dollars a month. 
Negroes received but seven dollars (until July 14, 
1864, when the pay was equalized, retroactively to 
January 1, 1864); there were enlistment bounties for 
white recruits, none for Negroes (until June 15, 1864); 
and there was no possibility for advancement into the 
1. The Negro in the Civil War, pp. 35-40, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


174 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

174 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ranks of commissioned officers for Negroes.... The Confederacy 
never recognised captured Negro soldiers who had been 
slaves as prisoners of war, and did not accord this status 
to captured free Negroes until October 1864. The Negroes 
were either killed, returned to slavery, or confined at hard 
labour. 

•k -k ic 

“Here were these scores of thousands of hitherto enslaved 
and oppressed masses, armed, and sent forth into their 
own country, whose every creek and knoll was known to 
them, to maintain their newly obtained freedom, to prove 
their manhood and to liberate their own people, their own 
parents and children and wives, from a slavery that they 
know only too well.... And let it always be remembered that 
in the war to save the republic thirty-seven thousand Negro 
soldiers were killed in action.’’ 

What happened to the Negroes after the Civil War was 
over ? In the first flush of victory, the Republicans, who 
waged the war for saving the Union and obtained the help 
of the Negroes to win it, carried the Thirteenth Amendment 
to the Constitution. Under it the Negroes ceased to be slaves 
in the legal sense of the term. But did the Negroes get any 
right to participate in the Government as voters or officials ? 
The Republicans did take some action in order to make the 
Southern States accept that the Negroes were to be treated 
as the political equals of the Whites. This was done by the 
Fourteenth Amendment which conferred citizenship, State as 
well as Federal, on all persons including the Negroes born or 
naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof, forbade legislation by a State abridging the privileges 
or immunities of a citizen of the United States, and provided 
for reducing the representation in the Congress of any State 
in proportion to the number of its citizens excluded from the 
suffrage. The Southern States had no intention to respect the 
Fourteenth Amendment. All except Tennessee had rejected 
the amendment and had set up governments of the White 
inhabitants. The Republicans then proceeded (March 2, 1867) to 
pass the so-called Reconstruction Act (a bill to provide efficient 
governments for the insurrectionary States) designed to create 
legitimate governments in the States not yet readmitted to 
the Union (ignoring the governments set up by the White 
inhabitants), and to determine the conditions proper for 
their readmission. By this Act these States, that is the whole 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


175 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 175 

seceding South except Tennessee, were divided into five 
military districts, each to be governed by a Brigadier- 
General of the Federal Army, until such time as (1) a State 
convention had framed a new constitution, (2) the Fourteenth 
Amendment had been ratified and (3) the States had been 
duly readmitted. The Republicans carried another amendment 
called the Fifteenth Amendment, forbidding the voting right 
of citizen to be denied or abridged on account of race, colour 
or previous condition of servitude which also became by 
similar acceptance part of the Constitution and binding on 
all the States. 

The Whites in the South had no intention to admit the 
Negroes to equal citizenship. Disfranchisement of the Negro 
proceeded apace. It was undertaken as a solemn duty both by 
the State Governments of the South as well as by the Whites 
of the Southern States. To evade the Fifteenth Amendment 
the State Governments spent their ingenuity in framing 
franchise laws which denied the Negroes the right to vote 
on grounds other than race or colour. Most of them decided 
upon the grandfather clause 1 which effectively excluded the 
Negroes but fully included the Whites. On the people’s side 
the process was carried out by the Ku Klux Klan. The Klan 
was in its origin a secret combination formed in Tennessee 
by youths for purposes of amusement. It was transferred into 
an organization to suppress the Negroes and prevent them 
from exercising their political rights. It started committing 
outrages upon Negroes, and (less frequently) upon Whites 
supposed to be in sympathy with the Negroes, in the rural 
South. These gang-men were never discovered. This shows 
that the whole of the White population of the South supported 
the Klan men. No open resistance to the Federal troops 
was attempted ; but neither their activity nor the penal 
laws passed by the Congress were effective in checking the 
flogging, house-burnings, and murders which during these 
years disgraced some districts. 

The purposes of the Southern States and the Southern 
Whites were facilitated by the decisions of the Supreme Court 
of the United States. The Supreme Court held that the State 
laws disfranchising the Negroes were valid notwithstanding 
the Fifteenth Amendment because the disfranchisement was 
not based on race and colour. Similarly the Supreme Court held 

1. Grandfather clause is so-called because it restricted the right to vote to a 
person whose grandfather had enjoyed it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


176 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

176 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that if the activities of the Ku Klux Klan prevented the Negro 
from exercising his electoral rights there was no redress: 
for the Fifteenth Amendment, while it prevented the States 
from interfering with the electoral rights, did not prevent 
interference by private bodies. 

What did the Republicans do ? Instead of amending the 
Constitution to give better and more effective guarantees to 
the Negroes, they agreed to recognize the Southern States 
and admit them to the Union, to grant general amnesty 
to the rebels and to withdraw the troops stationed therein 
leaving the Negroes to the tender mercy of their masters. 
As Mr. Apthekar says 1 : 

“But the heoric fight of the Negro people and their 
allies for democracy, land and civil rights in the South was 
defeated chiefly as a result of shameful betrayal by the 
industrial and financial bourgeoise of the North. In 1877, 
the latter came to an understanding with the reactionary 
plantocracy of the South. Working through the reactionary 
wing of the Republican Party, the Northern big bourgeoise 
sold out the Revolution by giving the old slave oligarchy 
a free hand (home rule) in the Southern States. This 
‘gentleman’s agreement’ meant disenfranchisement for the 
Negro, sharecropping peonage, lynch terrorism, and the 
loss of civil liberties and educational opportunities.” 

The story of the betrayal is not complete. It is necessary 
to add that if the Republicans were to carry their party 
opposition with the Democrats into the South, the Negro 
could still be saved from damnation. For it is the opinion of 
those who know that if the Whites of the South were divided 
into Republicans and Democrats as they are in the North 
there is hardly a State in the South which would not be 
largely controlled by the Negro voters. Even the Republicans 
will not do. The Republicans seem to have entered into a 
compact with the Democrats not to canvass for the votes of 
the Negroes. Indeed, the Republican Party in the South does 
not exist. It does not exist because it is afraid of having to 
take sides with the Negroes. 

The Untouchables cannot forget the fate of the Negroes. 
It is to prevent such treachery that the Untouchables have 
taken the attitude they have with regard to this “Fight for 
Freedom.” What is wrong in this ? Are they doing anything 
1. The Negro in the Civil War, pp. 45-46. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


177 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 177 

more than follow the advice of Burke, who has said that 
it is better to be accused of timidity than to be ruined by 
overconfident security. 

The third argument is that there is no justification for the 
Congress to say that the “Fight for Freedom” must come first 
and the agreement about constitutional safeguards afterwards. 
The Untouchables feel that having regard to the attitude of 
the British Government to India’s right to freedom, this fight, 
which the Congress loves so much, is uncalled for, at any 
rate, it is putting the cart before the horse. The attitude of 
the British towards India’s claim for freedom has since the 
Mutiny of 1857 undergone a complete change. There was 
a time when the British Government held the view which 
was a complete negation of India’s claim for freedom. It was 
proclaimed by Lawrence whose statue in Calcutta has the 
motto : “The British conquered India by the sword and they 
will hold it by sword.” This attitude is dead and buried and 
it is no exaggeration to say that every Englishman today is 
ashamed of it. This stage was followed by another in which the 
argument of the British Government against India’s freedom 
was the alleged incapacity of Indians for Parliamentary 
institutions. It began with Lord Ripon’s regime which was 
followed by an attempt to give political training to Indians, 
first in the field of Local Self-Government, and then under 
the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms in the field of Provincial 
Government. We have now entered the third or the present 
stage. British Government is now ashamed to say that they 
will hold India by the sword. It no longer says that Indians 
have no capacity to run Parliamentary institutions. The 
British Government admits India’s right to freedom, even to 
independence, if Indians so desire. The British Government 
admits the right of Indians to frame their own constitution. 
There can be no greater proof of this new angle of vision than 
the Cripps Proposals. The condition precedent laid down by 
the British Government for India’s freedom is that Indians 
must produce a constitution which has the concurrence of the 
important elements in the national life of the country. Such is 
the stage we have reached. The Untouchables cannot therefore 
understand why the Congress, instead of trying to achieve 
agreement among Indians, should keep on talking in terms 
of a “Fight for Freedom” and maligning the Untouchables in 
not joining in it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


178 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

178 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

III 

Why does the Congress oppose the proposal of the 
British Government ? It seeks to justify its opposition on 
two grounds. It says that the condition prescribed by the 
British Government puts a veto on freedom of India in the 
hands of the Untouchables. This is a stupid argument and 
for two reasons. In the first place, the Untouchables in India 
have never made impossible demands. They have not even 
made unreasonable demands. They do not say as Carson 
did to Redmond: “Damn your safeguards. We don’t wish 
to be ruled by you.” The Untouchables are quite prepared 
to submit themselves to the rule of the Hindu Majority, 
notwithstanding the unsocial and the undemocratic character 
of its ethics, provided the constitution gives them reasonable 
safeguards. To say, that the Untouchables will exercise 
a veto on India’s freedom by raising impossible demands 
is thus a gross libel, for which there is not the slightest 
justification. Assuming the fear is well-founded, the Congress 
is not altogether without a remedy. For it is still open to the 
Congress to say that if there is no agreement between the 
Hindus and the Untouchables the dispute should be referred 
to an International Board of Arbitration. If the Congress 
took this stand, I am sure, neither the British Government 
nor the Untouchables will have the slightest objection to it. 
But when, instead of making an honest and sincere attempt 
to bring about an agreed constitution, the Congress goes on 
launching its campaigns for achieving freedom — not without 
occasional rests and retreats — the only conclusion, which 
the Untouchables can draw, is that the Congress wants to 
coerce the British Government to transfer its power or to use 
Mr. Gandhi’s phrase, “hand over the keys to the Congress,” 
without being obliged to agree to the safeguards demanded 
by the Untouchables. In short, what the Congress wants is 
a free India with full, unrestricted freedom to the Hindus in 
a free India to dispose of the Untouchables in any way they 
liked. No wonder the Untouchables have refused to take part 
in such a dishonest agitation, elevated though it may be by 
such high sounding name as “Fight for Freedom” ! 

The other ground urged by the Congress for not taking up 
the question of bringing about an agreement is that the British 
Government is not honest, and that notwithstanding its 
declarations it will not transfer power even if Indians agreed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


179 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A FALSE CHARGE 179 

upon a constitution, and that ultimately Indians will have 
to struggle with the British in order to wrest power from 
their hands. The reply of the Untouchables is that they see 
no reason why Indians should start, with such complete 
distrust of the British intentions. After all, the British 
Government has moved in the direction of fulfilling Indian 
aspirations and is moving. If it is slow in moving it is due 
to Indians being content with small things. Right from the 
conquest of India by the British upto 1886, Indians never 
cared who ruled them nor how they were ruled. They were 
content to live without troubling themselves about these 
questions. In 1886 the Congress was organized and for the 
first time Indians began to take interest in the government 
of India. But even the Congress upto 1910 was content in 
agitating for good Government only. It was in 1910 that 
the Congress first demanded Self-Government. When in 
1919 the Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms were on the anvil, 
Indians had an occasion to state the scope of their demand 
for Self-Government. What is known as the Memorandum of 
the Nineteen denned the aspirations of the Indians as they 
stood in 1917. Any one who knows it will remember that the 
best and the most radical Indians were content only with 
Dyarchy in the Provinces. Even this was regarded as a big 
jump by some Indian leaders such as Sir Dinshaw Watcha 
and Mr. Samarath 1 . In 1930 notwithstanding the Congress 
Resolution insisting on Independence, Mr. Gandhi at the 
R. T. C. was prepared 2 to be content with Provincial autonomy. 
The British granted more than that. If from 1939 there has 
been a halt, it is mainly because Indians are not agreed on 
the sort of constitution they want for their country. 

The Untouchables think that the stage, when the British 
were sitting upon the freedom of India, as the snake in the 
fable is said to sit on a treasure, not allowing anyone to come 
near it, is gone long past. India’s Freedom is like property 
held by a Receiver. The British Government has placed itself 

1. Mr. Montagu in his Indian Diary records that when they waited on him 
to discuss the question of political reforms they said “Give us the power to 
pass resolutions, to influence Government; we will use it in a spirit of sweet 
reasonableness, but we are not fit for responsible Government.” — p. 147. 

2. This part of the story of what happened at the Round Table Conference 
has not been told. But everybody present at the Round Table Conference knows 
how Mr. Gandhi was won over to agree to Provincial autonomy. If the 1935 
Government of India Act contains some elements of responsibility at the centre 
the credit goes to the representatives of the Non-Congress parties at the R. T. C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


180 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

180 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the position of a Receiver. As soon as the dispute is over and 
the right kind of constitution is settled, it has bound it self to 
hand over the property to its rightful owners, namely, Indians. 
The Untouchables ask: why not take advantage of this ? why not 
adopt the straight and honest course of arriving at an agreement 
among the important elements in the country and then make 
a joint application for the release of the property ? That the 
Congress does not want to follow this line of action shows, say 
the Untouchables, that the Congress “Fight for Freedom” is 
nothing more than mere tactics, the object of which is to by- 
pass the necessity of an agreed constitution demanded by the 
Untouchables and made a condition precedent by the British 
Government for the grant of freedom. The Untouchables do not 
say that they are out to underwrite the declarations made by the 
British Government, they do not say that if Indians are agreed 
it must necessarily be a case of “knock and it will open : ask and 
it shall be given unto you.” They admit that the British may not 
act up to the declarations they have made. It may be that even 
when an agreed constitution is produced, they may not act up to 
their promises, and a fight for freedom may become necessary. 
The Untouchables do not overlook these possibilities. But what 
they do say is that the Indians have not put the British to the 
test. They can’t be put to test unless they are presented with an 
agreed constitution. So long as the Congress does not adopt this 
course as the first — though it may not be last — line of action, 
the Untouchables feel that the Congress is not honest in its 
dealings with them, not even to the country. Who can say that 
the Untouchables have not sufficient justification for refusing to 
participate in the Congress “Fight for Freedom”? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


181 


CHAPTER VIII 

THE REAL ISSUE 

Aren’t The Untouchables A Separate Element ? 

I 

What is the fundamental issue in the controversy between 
the Congress and the Untouchables ? As I understand the 
matter, the fundamental issue is: Are the Untouchables a 
separate element in the national life of India or are they not ? 

This is the real issue in the controversy and it is on 
this issue that the Congress and the Untouchables have 
taken opposite sides. The answer of the Untouchables is yes. 
They say, they are distinct and separate from the Hindus. 
The Congress on the other hand says ‘No’ and asserts that 
the Untouchables are a chip of the Hindu block. This is 
the attitude of the parties to the issue. The attitude of the 
British Government was made clear by Lord Linlithgow 1 
in his statements as Viceroy and Governor-General of 
India in which he declared in quite explicit terms that the 
Untouchables were a separate element in the national life 
of India. Many people who regard the issue of constitutional 
safeguards as the fundamental issue will feel surprised 
that I should regard as fundamental an issue so apparently 
different from what they regard as fundamental. Really 
speaking there is no difference. It all depends upon what 
one regards as the proximate and what as ultimate. Others 
regard the question of constitutional safeguards as ultimate. 
I regard as proximate. What I have stated as fundamental 
I regard as ultimate from which the proximate follows, as 
the conclusion does from the premise in a logical syllogism. 
It may be as well for me to state why I have thought it 
necessary to make this difference. The evolution of the Indian 
Constitution appears to me to have established a sort of a 
logical syllogism. The major premise in the syllogism is that 
where there exists an element in the national life of India, 
which is definable as a separate and distinct element it is 
entitled to constitutional safeguards. An element, making 
a claim for constitutional safeguards, must show that it is 
1. See Appendix VI, Items 9 and 12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


182 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

182 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

definable as separate and distinct from the rest. If it shows 
that it is separate and distinct, its right to constitutional 
safeguards is held admissible. 

That is how the provisions for constitutional safeguards 
for Muslims, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians, Europeans and 
Sikhs have come into being. It is true that the constitution of 
India has not been framed in the light of principles. It has 
grown in an haphazard manner, more in answer to exigencies 
than in accordance with principles. Nevertheless, this silent 
postulate, if not a principle to which I have referred, seems to 
be working throughout. The right of a group to constitutional 
safeguards has come to be treated as consequential. It is 
deemed to follow automatically when the fundamental condition 
is satisfied, namely that they do constitute a separate and a 
distinct element in the national life of India. In dealing with 
this controversy, one must deal with it as one is required to 
do with a syllogism. In a syllogism both are fundamental, the 
conclusion as well as the premise and to close the argument 
it is not enough to deal with the conclusion and omit to 
examine the premise. Looking at the question from this angle 
I think I ought not to close the case of the Untouchables with 
no more than a discussion of the constitutional safeguards. I 
feel that I ought to deal also with the premise, the ultimate, 
or the fundamental proposition, from which the constitutional 
safeguards seem to follow, if not as a matter of course at least 
as a matter of precedent. 

It will thus be seen that the decision I have taken to give 
a separate treatment to the ultimate as distinguished from the 
proximate proposition is not without justification. It also seems 
to be necessary to deal with it separately and substantially, 
because the Congress seems to be fully aware of the fact that this 
is the fundamental issue and knows that once it concedes that 
the Untouchables are a separate element it cannot prevent them 
from succeeding in their claim for constitutional safeguards. 
If the Congress has come forward to contest this proposition 
it is because it thinks that it is the first trench and if it fails 
to maintain it, it cannot save the situation. 

II 

It must be a matter of considerable surprise to those who 
know the conditions in India that the Congress should come 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


183 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 183 

forward to controvert what is incontrovertible, namely, that 
the Untouchables are separate from the Hindus. But since the 
Congress has chosen to do so, I must deal with the issue as 
best as I can. 

The grounds advanced by the Untouchables that they are 
separate from the Hindus are not difficult to comprehend. Nor do 
they require a long and an elaborate statement. The statement 
of their case can be fully covered by a simple question. In what 
sense are they Hindus ? In the first place, the word ‘Hindu’ is 
used in various senses and one must know in what sense it is 
used before one can give a proper answer to the question. It is 
used in a territorial sense. Everyone who is an inhabitant of 
Hindustan is a Hindu. In that sense it can certainly be claimed 
that the Untouchables are Hindus. But so are the Muslims, 
Christians, Sikhs, Jews, Parsis, etc. The second sense in which 
the word ‘Hindu’ is used is in a religious sense. Before one can 
draw any conclusion, it is necessary to separate the dogmas of 
Hinduism from the cults of Hinduism. Whether the Untouchables 
are Hindus in the religious sense of the word depends upon 
whether one adopts as his tests the dogmas or the cults. If the 
tests of Hinduism are the dogmas of Caste and Untouchability 
then every Untouchable would repudiate Hinduism and the 
assertion that he is a Hindu. If the test applied is the acceptance 
of a cult such as the worship of Rama, Krishna, Vishnu and 
Shiva and other Gods arid Goddesses recognized by Hinduism 
the Untouchables may be claimed to be Hindus. The Congress as 
usual maintains a body of agents from among the Untouchables 
to shout when need be that the Untouchables are Hindus and 
that they will die as Hindus. But even these paid agents will 
not agree to be counted as Hindus if they are asked to proclaim 
themselves as Hindus, if Hinduism means belief in caste and 
Untouchability. 

One more point must be stressed. On the foregoing analysis 
the Untouchable may be classed as a Hindu if the word Hindu 
is used in the religious but in the limited sense of a follower of 
a recognized cult. Even here, there is a necessity for giving a 
warning against concluding that the Hindu and the Untouchable 
have a common religion. The fact is that even as followers 
of recognized cults they cannot be said to have a common 
religion. The exact and appropriate expression would be to say 
that they have a similar religion. A common religion means 
a common cycle of participation. Now, in the observances of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


184 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

184 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the cults there is no such common cycle of participation. The 
Hindus and the Untouchables practise their cults in segregation 
so that notwithstanding the similarity of their cults they remain 
as separate as two aliens do. Neither of these two senses of 
the word ‘Hindu’ can yield any result which can be of help in 
determining the political question, which alone can justify the 
discussion. 

The only test which can be of use is its social sense as 
indicating a member of the Hindu Society. Can an Untouchable 
be held to be part of the Hindu Society ? Is there any human tie 
that binds them to the rest of the Hindus ? There is none. There 
is no connubium. There is no commensalism. There is not even 
the right to touch, much less to associate. Instead, the mere touch 
is enough to cause pollution to a Hindu. The whole tradition of 
the Hindus is to recognize the Untouchable as a separate element 
and insist upon it as a fact. The traditional terminology of the 
Hindus to distinguish Hindus and Untouchables furnishes the 
best evidence in favour of the contention of the Untouchables. 
According to this traditional terminology, Hindus are called 
Savarnas and the Untouchables are called Avarnas. It speaks 
of the Hindus as Chaturvarnikas and of the Untouchables 
as Panchamas. Such a terminology could not have come into 
existence if separation had not become so prominent and its 
observance so necessary as to require coining of special terms 
to give expression to the fact. 

There is thus hardly any substance in the Congress argument 
that the Untouchables are Hindus and that they cannot therefore 
demand the same political rights as the Muslims and others can. 
While the argument from tradition is a good and valid argument 
to prove that the Untouchables are not Hindus, it may appear to 
some to be a weak one. I do not wish to leave the field without 
directly meeting the Congress argument. For this purpose, I will 
grant that the Untouchables are Hindus by religion. But the 
question is : Does it matter if they are Hindus ? Can it come 
in the way of their being recognized as a separate element in 
the national life of India ? It is difficult to understand how the 
mere fact that they might be called Hindus by religion in such 
a limited sense can be the basis of an argument that they are 
an integral part of the Hindu society. 

Admitting for the sake of argument that they are Hindus 
by religion, can it mean anything more than what I have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


185 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 185 

said — namely that they worship the same Gods and Goddesses 
as the rest of the Hindus, they go to the same places of 
pilgrimage, hold the same supernatural beliefs and regard 
the same stones, trees, mountains as sacred as the rest of the 
Hindus do ? Is this enough to conclude that the Untouchables 
and the Hindus are parts of one single community ? If that be 
the logic behind the contention of the Congress then, what- 
about the Belgians, Dutch, Norwegians, Swedes, Germans, 
French, Italians, Slavs, etc.? Are they not all Christians ? 
Do they not all worship the same God ? Do they not all 
accept Jesus as their Saviour ? Have they not the same 
religious beliefs ? Obviously, there is a complete religious 
unity between all of them in thought, worship and beliefs. 
Yet, who can dispute that the French, Germans and Italians 
and the rest are not a single community ? Take another case, 
that of the Whites and the Negroes in the U.S.A. They too 
have a common religion. Both are Christians. Can any one 
say that the two on that account form a single community ? 
Take a third case, that of the Indian Christians, Europeans 
and Anglo-Indians. They profess and follow the same religion. 
Yet it is admitted that they do not form one single Christian 
community. Take the case of the Sikhs. There are Sikhs, 
Mazbi Sikhs and Ramdasia Sikhs. All profess Sikhism. But 
it is accepted that they do not form one community. In the 
light of these illustrations it is obvious that the argument 
of the Congress is full of fallacies. 

The first fallacy of the Congress lies in its failure to realize 
that the fundamental issue for settling the question whether 
to grant or not to grant constitutional safeguards is union 
versus separation of a social group in the population. Religion 
is only a circumstance from which unity or separation may 
be inferred. The Congress does not seem to have understood 
that the Musalmans and the Indian Christians have been 
given separate political recognition not because they are 
Musalmans or Christians but fundamentally because they 
form in fact separate elements from the Hindus. 

The second fallacy of the Congress lies in its attempt to prove 
that where there is a common religion social union must be 
presumed. It is on the basis of this reasoning that the Congress 
hopes to win. Unfortunately for the Congress, it cannot. For 
the facts are strongly against making a conclusive inference. If 
religion was a circumstance from which social union was made 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


186 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

186 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the only permissible inference then the fact that the Italians, 
French, Germans and Slavs in Europe, the Negroes and the 
Whites in the U.S.A. and the Indian Christians, Europeans, 
Anglo-Indians in India do not form a single community although 
they all profess the same religion is enough to negative such 
a contention. The pity of the matter is that the Congress is 
so completely enamoured of its argument based on religion as 
an unifying factor, that it has failed to realize that there is no 
concomittance between the two and that there are cases where 
there is no separation although religions are separate, that 
there are cases where separation exists in spite of a common 
religion and what is worst, separation exists because religion 
prescribes it. 

To give a quietus to the Congress argument, it may be 
desirable to give one illustration of each of these cases. Of the 
first case the best and the easiest illustration I can think of 
is that of the Sikhs and the Hindus. They differ in religion. 
But they are not socially separate. They dine together; they 
marry together; they live together. In a Hindu family one 
son may be a Sikh, another a Hindu. Religious difference 
does not break the social nexus. Of the second, the case of 
the Italians, French, Germans in Europe and Whites and 
Negroes in America are as good illustrations as one would 
want. This happens where religion is a binding force but is 
not powerful enough to withstand other forces tending to 
divide such as the sentiment of race. Hindus and Hinduism 
are the best and perhaps the only illustrations of the third 
case, where separation is the effect of religion itself. That 
there can be such a case, Hindus at any rate need not require 
to be told. For, it is well known that Hinduism preaches 
separation instead of union. To be a Hindu means not to mix, 
to be separate in everything. The language commonly used 
that Hinduism upholds Caste and Untouchability perhaps 
disguises and conceals its genius. The real genius of Hinduism 
is to divide. This is beyond dispute. For, what do Caste and 
Untouchability stand for ? Obviously for separation. For Caste 
is another name for separation and untouchability typifies the 
extremist form of separation of community from community. 
It is also beyond dispute that Caste and Untouchability are 
not innocuous dogmas to be compared with other dogmas 
relating to the condition of the soul after death. They are 
parts of the code of conduct which every Hindu is bound to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


187 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 187 

observe during his life on earth. Caste and Untouchability far 
from being mere dogmas are among the foremost observances 
prescribed by Hinduism. It is not enough for a Hindu to 
believe in the dogmas of Caste and Untouchability. He must 
also observe Caste, and Untouchability, in the conduct of his 
daily life. 

The separation, which Hinduism has brought about, 
between the Hindus and the Untouchables by its dogma of 
Untouchability is not a mere imaginary line of separation, such 
as the one which the Pope once drew in a quarrel between 
the Portuguese and their rivals for Colonial possessions; it is 
not like the colour line which has length but no breadth and 
which one may observe or one may not observe ; it is not like 
the race line, which involves distinction but no discrimination. 
It has both depth and width. Factually the Hindus and the 
Untouchables are divided by a fence made of barbed wire. 
Notionally it is cordon sanitaire which the Untouchables have 
never been allowed to cross and can never hope to cross. 

To put the matter in general terms, Hinduism and social 
union are incompatible. By its very genius Hinduism believes 
in social separation which is another name for social disunity 
and even creates social separation. If Hindus wish to be one 
they will have to discard Hinduism. They cannot be one without 
violating Hinduism. Hinduism is the greatest obstacle to Hindu 
Unity. Hinduism cannot create that longing to belong which is 
the basis of ah social unity. On the contrary Hinduism creates 
an eagerness to separate. 

The Congress does not seem to realize that the argument it 
is using goes against itself. Far from supporting the Congress 
contention, it is the best and the most effective argument that 
can be advanced to prove the contention of the Untouchables. 
For, if any conclusion is to be drawn from the hypothesis that 
the Untouchables are Hindus it is that Hinduism has always 
insisted both in principle and in practice that the Untouchables 
are not to be recognized a chip of the Hindu block but are 
to be treated as a separate element and segregated from the 
Hindus. 

If therefore the Untouchables say that they are a separate 
element, nobody can accuse them of having invented a new 
theory for the sake of political advantages. They are merely 
pointing out what the facts are and how these facts are the 
heritage of Hinduism itself. The Congress cannot honestly 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


188 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

188 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and convincingly use Hinduism as an argument for refusing to 
recognise the Untouchables as a separate element. If it does, 
it is only because it is actuated by selfish motives. It knows 
that the recognition of the Untouchables as an element in the 
national life of India, as distinct and separate from the Hindus, 
must result in the apportionment of places in the Executive, the 
Legislature, and in the Public Services between the Untouchables 
and the Hindus and thus limit the share of the Hindus. The 
Congress does not like that the Hindus should be deprived of 
the share of the Untouchables which the Hindus are in the 
habit of appropriating to themselves. That is the real reason 
why the Congress refuses to recognize that the Untouchables 
are a separate element in the national life of India. 

The second argument of the Congress is that the political 
recognition of the Untouchables as a separate element in the 
national life of India should not be permitted on the ground 
that it will perpetuate the separation between the Untouchables 
and the Hindus. 

This is hardly an argument worth consideration. It is the 
weakest of its kind and shows that the Congress has nothing 
better to advance. Besides contradicting its previous argument, 
it is entirely misconceived. 

If there is a real separation between the Hindus and the 
Untouchables and if there is the danger of discrimination 
being practised by the Hindus against the Untouchables then 
the Untouchables must receive political recognition and must 
be given political safeguards to protect themselves against 
the tyranny of the Hindus. The possibility of a better future 
cannot be used as an argument to prevent the Untouchables 
from securing the means of protecting themselves against the 
tyranny of the present. 

In the second place, this argument can be used only by 
those who believe in the social fusion of the Hindus and the 
Untouchables and are actively engaged in pursuing means and 
methods which will bring about such a fusion. Congressmen have 
often been heard to say that the problem of the Untouchables 
is social and political. But the point is, are Congressmen 
sincere when they say that it is a social question ? Or do they 
use it as an excuse with a view to avoid the consequences 
of having to share political power with the Untouchables ? 
And, if they are sincere in holding that it is a social 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


189 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 189 

question, what proof is there of their sincerity in this matter ? 
Have Congressmen sponsored social Reform among Hindus ? 
Have they carried on a crusade in favour of inter-dining and 
intermarriages ? What is the record of Congressmen in the 
field of Social Reform ? 


Ill 

It might be well to state what view the Untouchables took 
of the problem of Untouchables. Until the advent of the British, 
the Untouchables were content to remain Untouchables. It 
was a destiny preordained by the Hindu God and enforced 
by the Hindu State. As such there was no escape from it. 
Fortunately or unfortunately, the East India Company needed 
soldiers for their army in India and it could find none but the 
Untouchables. The East India Company’s army consisted, at 
any rate in the early part of its history, of the Untouchables 
and although the Untouchables are now included among the 
non-martial classes and are therefore excluded from the Army, 
it is with the help of an army composed of Untouchables that 
the British conquered India. In the army of the East India 
Company there prevailed the system of compulsory education 
for Indian soldiers and their children both male and female. 
The education received by the Untouchables in the army while 
it was open to them gave them one advantage which they 
never had before. It gave them a new vision and a new value. 
They became conscious that the low esteem in which they had 
been held was not an inescapable destiny but was a stigma 
imposed on their personality by the cunning contrivances of 
the priest. They felt the shame of it as they had never done 
before and were determined to get rid of it. They too in the 
beginning thought their problem was social and struggled along 
the social lines for its solution. This was quite natural. For 
they saw that the outward marks of their social inferiority 
were prohibition of interdining and intermarriage between 
the Untouchables and the Hindus. They naturally concluded 
that for the removal of their stigma what was necessary was 
to establish social intercourse with the Hindus on terms of 
equality which in its turn meant the abolition of rules against 
interdining and intermarriage. In other words, first programme 
of action which the Untouchables launched out for their 
salvation after they became aware of their servile position 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


190 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

190 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was to bring about Social Equality among all those, who come 
within the fold of Hinduism by insisting upon the abolition of 
the Caste System. 

In this, the Untouchables found an ally in a section of the 
Hindus. Like the Untouchables, the Hindus also by the contact 
with the British had come to realize that their social system 
was very defective and was the parent of many social evils. 
They too desired to launch forth a movement of social Reform. 
It began with Raja Ram Mohan Roy in Bengal and from there 
had spread all over India and ultimately culminated in the 
formation of the Indian Social Reform Conference with its slogan 
of Social Reform before Political Reform. The Untouchables 
followed the Social Reform Conference and stood behind it as 
a body and gave it their full support. As every one knows the 
Social Reform Conference is dead and buried and forgotten. 
Who killed it ? The Congress. The Congress with its slogans 
“Politics First, Politics Last,” “Politics by Each, Politics by 
All” regarded the Social Reform Conference as its rival. It 
denied the validity of the creed of the Conference that social 
reform was a necessary percursor of political reform. Under a 
constant and steady fire from the Congress platform and from 
individual Congress leaders, the Social Reform Conference was 
burnt down and reduced to ashes. When the Untouchables lost 
all hope of their salvation through social reform, they were 
forced to seek political means for protecting themselves. Now 
for Congressmen to turn round and say that the problem is 
social is nothing but hypocrisy. 

It is wrong to say that the problem of the Untouchables 
is a social problem. For, it is quite unlike the problems of 
dowry, widow remarriage, age of consent, etc., which are 
illustrations of what are properly called social problems. 
Essentially, it is a problem of quite a different nature in as 
much as it is a problem of securing to a minority liberty and 
equality of opportunity at the hands of a hostile majority which 
believes in the denial of liberty and equal opportunity to the 
minority and conspires to enforce its policy on the minority. 
Viewed in this light, the problem of the Untouchables is 
fundamentally a political problem. Granting however for the 
sake of argument that it is a social problem, it is difficult 
to understand why political recognition of and political 
safeguards for the security of the Untouchables should retard 
their social unification with the Hindus if there is a genuine 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


191 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 191 

desire to set in motion processes which will bring about such 
a result. Congressmen appear to be arguing with no definite 
conception in their mind. They don’t seem to have a clear idea 
of the inter-relation between political and social factors. This 
is well illustrated by its opposition to separate electorates and 
its preference to joint electorates. The process of reasoning 
is worth attention. In a joint electorate the Hindu votes for 
an Untouchable and the Untouchable votes for the Hindu. 
This builds up social solidarity. In a separate electorate the 
Hindu votes for a Hindu and an Untouchable votes for an 
Untouchable. This prevents social solidarity. This is not the 
point of view from which the Untouchables look at the question 
of electorates. Their point of view is which of the two will 
enable the Untouchables to get an Untouchable of their choice 
elected. But I am interested in scrutinizing the Congress 
argument. I do not wish to enlarge upon and complicate the 
argument. The reasoning of the Congress appears to be correct. 
But it is only a superficial view of the matter. These elections 
take place once in five years. It may well be asked how can 
social solidarity between the Hindus and the Untouchables 
be advanced by one day devoted to joint voting if for the rest 
of the five years they are leading severely separate lives. 
Similarly, it may well be asked how can one day devoted 
to separate voting in the course of five years make greater 
separation than what already exists or contrary-wise how 
can one day in five years devoted to separate voting prevent 
those who wish to work for union from carrying out their 
purposes. To make it concrete how can separate electorate 
for the Untouchables prevent intermarriage or inter-dining 
being introduced between them and the Hindus ? Only a 
congenital idiot will say that they can. It is therefore puerile 
to say that the political recognition of the Untouchables as a 
separate element and granting them constitutional safeguards 
will perpetuate separation between them and the Hindus if 
the Hindus desire to put an end to it. 

IV 

There are other floating arguments against the claim 
of the Untouchables for political safeguards which must 
also be examined. One such argument is that there are 
social divisions everywhere, not merely in India but also in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


192 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

192 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Europe; but they are not taken into account by the people 
of Europe in framing their constitutions. Why should they 
be taken into account in India ? The thesis is general. But 
it may be extended to such a length that even the claim of 
the Untouchables may be enveloped by it. As such I prefer 
to state why I think it is unsound. 

In making my comments I propose to make a distinction 
between the statement and the argument founded on it and 
deal with them separately. The statement is good up to a 
point. In so far as it alleges that every society consists of 
groups it cannot be challenged. For even in European or 
American society there are groups associated together in 
various ways and for various purposes. Some are like the 
kindred closely bound together by blood or language. Some 
are of the nature of social classes differentiated on the 
basis of rank and status. Others are religious associations 
upholding particular dogmas, not to mention, political parties 
and industrial corporations, criminal gangs and so on in 
an endless variety with differing aims and bound together 
some loosely some closely by differing degrees of affinity. 
But when the statement goes beyond and says that the 
castes in India are not different from group and classes in 
Europe and America it is nothing but an arrant nonsense. 
The groups and classes of Europe may be the same as the 
caste in India to look at. But fundamentally was are quite 
different. The chief distinguishing feature is the isolation 
and exclusiveness which are the hall-marks of the castes in 
India and which are maintained as matter not of routine but 
of faith none of which characteristics is to be found in the 
group or the class system of Europe or America. 

Turning to the thesis the social organization of India being 
different from, what it is in Europe and America it follows 
that while Europe and America need not take into account 
the facts and circumstances of their social organization in 
framing their constitution, India cannot omit to take account 
of her Caste and Untouchability. For a fuller understanding 
of the matter I may explain why Europe need not and why 
India must. The danger to a society organized in groups is that 
each group develops what are called “is own interests” and 
the question of forging constitutional safeguards arises from 
the necessity of counteracting the mischief that such interest 
might cause to others outside it. Where there is a possibility of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


193 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 193 

counteracting the mischief by non-political means there is no 
necessity for forging constitutional safeguards. If, on the other 
hand, non-political means of counteracting it do not exist then 
constitutional means must be forged. In Europe the possibility 
of counteracting mischief arising from a group seeking to 
maintain “its own interest” does exist. It exists because of 
the absence of isolation and exclusiveness among the various 
groups which allows free scope for interaction with the result 
that the dominant purpose of a group to stand out for its 
own interests and always seek to protect them as something 
violate and sacred gives way to a broadening and socialization 
of its aims and purposes. This endosmosis between groups 
in Europe affects dispositions and produces a society which 
can be depended upon for community of thought, harmony of 
purposes and unity of action. But the case of India is, totally 
different. The caste in India is exclusive and isolated. There is 
no interaction and no modification of aims and objects. What a 
caste or a combination of castes regard “as their own interest” 
as against other castes remains as sacred and inviolate as ever. 
The fact that they mingle and co-operate does not alter their 
character. These acts of co-operation are mechanical and not 
social. Individuals use one another so as to get desired results, 
without reference to the emotional arid intellectual disposition. 
The fact that they give and take orders modify actions and 
results. But it does not affect their dispositions. That being 
the case, the Indian constitution must provide safeguards to 
prevent castes with “their own interests” from doing mischief 
to other helpless castes. 

There is another distinguishing feature of the Indian caste 
system which justifies why the Indian Constitution must take 
account of it and provide against mischief arising from it. 
Every society consists of groups. But it must be recognized 
that the mutual relations of the groups are not the same 
everywhere. In one society groups may be only non-social in 
their attitude towards one another. But in another they may be 
anti-social. Where the spirit which actuates the various social 
groups is only non-social their existence may not be taken 
into account in framing a constitution. There is no cause for 
danger in a group which is only non-social. But where a group 
is actuated by an anti-social spirit towards another and to 
which alien is synonymous with enemy the fact must be taken 
into account in framing the constitution and the class which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


194 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

194 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

has been the victim of anti- social spirit must be given protection 
by proper safeguards. In India the castes are not merely non- 
social. Often they are anti-social. This is particularly true 
of the Hindus towards the Untouchables. A few facts will 
suffice to show how anti-social the Hindus are towards the 
Untouchables. For instance, the Hindus will not allow the 
Untouchables to take water from a well. The Hindus will not 
allow the Untouchables entry in schools. The Hindus will not 
allow the Untouchables to travel in buses. The Hindus will 
not allow the Untouchables to travel in the same railway 
compartment. The Hindus will not allow Untouchables to 
wear clean clothes. The Hindus will not allow Untouchables 
to wear jewellery. The Hindus will not allow Untouchables 
to put tiles on the roofs of their houses. The Hindus will 
not tolerate Untouchables to own land. The Hindus will not 
allow Untouchables to keep cattle. The Hindus will not allow 
an Untouchable to sit when Hindu is standing. They are not 
isolated acts of a few bad men among the Hindus. They are 
the emanations of the permanent anti-social attitude of the 
Hindu community against the Untouchables . 1 

It is unnecessary to carry the matter further. It is enough 
to say that the thesis is full of fallacies and it would be a 
most shameful piece of chicanery if it was used as a ground 
for opposing the demand of the Untouchables for constitutional 
safeguards. 


V 

There is another floating argument one sometimes comes 
across. The basis of the argument is that Untouchability is 
a vanishing thing and therefore there is no use recognizing 
the Untouchables as a separate element in the national life 
of India. Everything is vanishing and there is nothing that 
is permanent in human history. The point may be considered 
when Untouchability has gone root and branch. Until that 
state arrives, it is unnecessary to pay any regard to it. We 
must all hope for the disappearance of Untouchability. But 
we must be careful not to be misled by people who boast of 
being incorrigible optimists. An optimist is a good companion 

1. For details, see my forthcoming volume — ‘ What The Hindus Have Dons To Us’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


195 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 195 

to cheer up when one is in a state of depression. But he is 
not always a truthful witness of facts. 

This argument is no argument at all. But since some 
people may be allured by it I wish to expose it and to show 
how futile it is. Those who raise this point do not seem to 
make a distinction between Untouchability as a touch-me- 
not-ism and Untouchability as a mental attitude manifesting 
itself in social discrimination. The two are quite different. It 
may be that Untouchability as a touch-me-not-ism may be 
gradually vanishing in towns, although I am doubtful if this 
is happening in any appreciable degree. But I am quite certain 
Untouchability as a propensity on the part of the Hindus to 
discriminate against the Untouchables will not vanish either 
in towns or in villages within an imaginable distance of time. 
Not only Untouchability as a discriminating propensity will 
not disappear but Untouchability as touch-me-not-ism will 
not disappear within a measurable distance of time in the 
vast number of villages in which the vast number of Hindus 
live and will continue to live. You cannot untwist a two- 
thousand-year-twist of the human mind and turn it in the 
opposite direction. 

I am quite aware that there are some protagonists of 
Hinduism who say that Hinduism is a very adaptable religion, 
that it can adjust itself to everything and absorb anything. I 
do not think many people would regard such a capacity in a 
religion as a virtue to be proud of just as no one would think 
highly of a child because it has developed the capacity to eat 
dung, and digest it. But that is another matter. It is quite 
true that Hinduism can adjust itself. The best example of its 
adjust ability is the literary production called Allahupanishad 
which the Brahmins of the time of Akbar produced to give a 
place to his Dine-Ilahi within Hinduism and to recognize it 
as the Seventh system of Hindu philosophy. It is true that 
Hinduism can absorb many things. The beef-eating Hinduism 
(or strictly speaking Brahmanism which is the proper name of 
Hinduism in its earlier stage) absorbed the non-violence theory 
of Buddhism and became a religion of vegetarianism. But there 
is one thing which Hinduism has never been able to do — namely 
to adjust itself to absorb the Untouchables or to remove the 
bar of Untouchability. There have been many reformers who, 
long before Mr. Gandhi came on the scene, tried to remove the 
stain of Untouchability. But they have all failed. The reason 
for their failure appears to me to be very simple. Hindus 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


196 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

196 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have nothing to fear from the Untouchables, nor have they 
anything to gain by the abolition of Untouchability. Hindus 
gave up beef-eating because they were afraid that otherwise 
Buddhism would overpower Hinduism. Hindus wrote Allah- 
upanishad because they had everything to gain by helping 
Akbar to establish a new religion. The author gained money 
by pleasing the Emperor and by lending aid to establish a 
religion which promised less tyranny and oppression to the 
Hindus than Islam held out. Neither of these considerations 
exist for the most sanguine among the Untouchables to 
expect that the Hindus will readily put an end to this curse 
of Untouchability. 

Not only have the Hindus nothing to fear and nothing 
to gain, they have in fact much to lose by the abolition 
of Untouchability. The system of Untouchability is a gold 
mine to the Hindus. In it the 240 millions of Hindus have 
60 millions of Untouchables to serve as their retinue to 
enable the Hindus to maintain pomp and ceremony and to 
cultivate a feeling of pride and dignity befitting a master 
class which cannot be fostered and sustained unless there is 
beneath it a servile class to look down upon. In it the 240 
millions of Hindus have 60 millions of Untouchables to be 
used as forced labour and because of their state of complete 
destitution and helplessness can be compelled to work on 
a mere pittance and sometimes on nothing at all. In it the 
240 millions of Hindus have 60 millions of Untouchables 
to do the dirty work of scavengers and sweepers which the 
Hindu is debarred by his religion to do and which must be 
done for the Hindus by non-Hindus who could be no others 
than Untouchables. In it the 240 millions of Hindus have 
60 millions of Untouchables who can be kept to lower jobs 
and prevented from entering into competition for higher jobs 
which are preserved for the Hindus. In it the 240 millions of 
Hindus have 60 millions of Untouchables who can be used 
as shock-absorbers in slumps and deadweights in booms, for 
in slumps it is the Untouchable who is fired first and the 
Hindu is fired last and in booms the Hindu is employed first 
and the Untouchable is employed last. 

Most people believe that Untouchability is a religious 
system. That is true. But it is a mistake to suppose that it is 
only a religious system. Untouchability is more than a religious 
system. It is also an economic system which is worse than 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


197 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE REAL ISSUE 197 

slavery. In slavery the master at any rate had the responsibility 
to feed, clothe and house the slave and keep him in good, 
condition lest the market value of the slave should decrease. 
But in the system of Untouchability the Hindu takes no 
responsibility for the maintenance of the Untouchable. As an 
economic system it permits exploitation without obligation. 
Untouchability is not only a system of unmitigated economic 
exploitation, but it is also a system of uncontrolled economic 
exploitation. That is because there is no independent public 
opinion to condemn it and there is no impartial machinery 
of administration to restrain it. There is no appeal to public 
opinion, for whatever public opinion there is it is the opinion 
of the Hindus who belong to the exploiting class and as such 
favour exploitation. There is no check from the police or the 
judiciary for the simple reason that they are all drawn from 
the Hindus, and take the side of the Exploiters. 

Those who believe that Untouchability will soon vanish do 
not seem to have paid attention to the economic advantages 
which it gives to the Hindus. Untouchable cannot do anything 
to get rid of his untouchability. It does not arise out of any 
personal fault on his part. Untouchability is an attitude of 
the Hindu. For Untouchability to vanish, it is the Hindu who 
must change. Will he change ? 

Has a Hindu any conscience? Is he ever known to have 
been fired with a righteous indignation against a moral 
wrong ? Assuming he does change so much as to regard 
Untouchability a moral wrong, assuming he is awakened to 
the sense of putting himself right with God and Man, will he 
agree to give up the economic and social advantages which 
Untouchability gives ? History, I am afraid, will not justify 
the conclusion that a Hindu has a quick conscience or if he 
has it is, so active as to charge him with moral indignation 
and drive him to undertake a crusade to eradicate the wrong- 
History shows that where ethics and economics come in conflict 
victory is always with economics. Vested interests have never 
been known to have willingly divested themselves unless 
there was sufficient force to compel them. The Untouchables 
cannot hope to generate any compelling force. They are poor 
and they are scattered. They can be easily suppressed should 
they raise their head. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


198 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

198 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On this analysis, Swaraj would make Hindus more powerful 
and Untouchables more helpless and it is quite possible that 
having regard to the economic advantages which it gives to the 
Hindus, Swaraj, instead of putting an end to Untouchability, 
may extend its life. That Untouchability is vanishing is therefore 
only wishful thinking and a calculated untruth. It would be most 
stupid — if not criminal — to take it into account in considering 
the demands of the Untouchables for constitutional safeguards 
and ignore the hard facts of the present and their certainty to 
continue in the indefinite future. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


199 


CHAPTER IX 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 
Let Not Tyranny Have Freedom to Enslave 

I 

It is a matter of common experience that barring a few 
exceptions, almost all foreigners who show interest in Indian 
political affairs take the side of the Congress. This quite 
naturally puzzles and annoys the other political parties in the 
country, such as the Muslim League claiming to represent the 
Musalmans, the Justice Party — now in a state of suspended 
animation but still — claiming to speak in the name of the 
non-Brahmins and the All India Scheduled Castes Federation 
claiming to represent the Untouchables, all of whom have 
been appealing to the foreigner for support but to whom the 
foreigner is not even prepared to give a sympathetic hearing. 
Why does the foreigner support the Congress and not the 
other political parties in India ? Two reasons are usually 
assigned by the foreigner for his behaviour. One reason 
assigned by him for supporting the Congress is because he 
believes that the Congress is the only representative body of 
Indians and can speak in the name of India and even for the 
Untouchables. Is he right in his belief? Two circumstances 
are mainly responsible for giving rise to such a belief. 

The first and foremost circumstance for the spread of 
this view is the propaganda by the Indian Press in favour 
of the Congress. The Press in India is an accomplice of the 
Congress, believes in the dogma that the Congress is never 
wrong and acts on the principle of not giving any publicity 
to any news which is inconsistent with Congress prestige 
or Congress ideology. It is largely due to the Press in India 
that this cry of the Congress, that it represents all, has been 
so ceaselessly advertised, with the result that the people in 
England and America know one thing and only one thing, 
namely that the Congress is the only representative body 
in India. 

The second circumstance why the world outside believes that 
the Congress is the only organization which represents India, 
including even the Untouchables, is because of the absence of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


200 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

200 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

propaganda on behalf of the Untouchables to advertise 
their case against the Congress claim. There are various 
explanations for this failure on the part of the Untouchables. 
They have no Press and the Congress Press is closed to them. 
It is determined not to give them the slightest publicity. They 
cannot have their own Press. It is obvious that no paper can 
survive without advertisement revenue. Advertisement revenue 
can come only from business and in India all business, both 
big and small is attached to the Congress and will not favour 
any Non-Congress organ. The staff of the Associated Press of 
India, which is the main news distributing agency in India, is 
entirely drawn from Madras Brahmins — indeed the whole of 
the Press in India is in their hands and who for well-known 
reasons are entirely pro-Congress and will not allow any news 
hostile to the Congress to get publicity. These are reasons 
beyond the control of the Untouchables. But to a large extent 
their failure to do propaganda is also due to absence of will 
to do propaganda. This absence of will arises from a patriotic 
motive not to do anything which will damage the cause of the 
country in the eyes of the world outside. There are two different 
aspects to the politics of India which may be distinguished 
as foreign politics and constitutional politics. India’s foreign 
politics relate to India’s freedom from British Imperialism while 
the constitutional politics of India centre round the nature of 
a constitution for a free India. They are really separate. But 
the Untouchables fear that though the two aspects of India’s 
politics are separable, the foreigner who counts in this matter, 
and whose misunderstanding has to be guarded against, is not 
only not capable of separating them but is very likely to mistake 
a quarrel over constitutional politics for a disagreement over 
the ultimate purposes of India’s foreign politics. This is why 
the Untouchables have preferred to remain silent and allowed 
the Congress propaganda to go unchallenged. Congressmen will 
not admit the patriotic motives of the Untouchables in keeping 
silent over Congress propaganda which is directed against 
them. The fact, however, remains that their silence and desire 
to avoid open challenge has been a material cause which has 
brought about the general belief that the Congress represents 
all, even the Untouchables. 

Though regrettable, it was excusable for a foreigner to be 
carried away by propaganda at a time when the representative 
character of the Congress was not put to test in an election. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


201 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 201 

But the matter has now been put to test in the elections 
that took place in 1937. With the results of the elections 
available to check the position, there is no justification for 
any one to rest his judgment regarding the representative 
character of the Congress, on propaganda. What the election 
results show has already been set out in an earlier part of 
the book, both generally and also in particular regard to the 
Untouchables. It may, therefore, be trusted that the foreigners, 
who have these facts before them, will not hereafter accept the 
propagandist view that the Congress represents all, including 
the Untouchables, as they did in the past, and will realize 
that other parties besides the Congress and particularly the 
Untouchables, have something different to say on the political 
problem of India. 

The second reason why the foreigner assigns his support 
to the Congress is because of his belief that the Congress 
is fighting for the freedom of India. He sees Congressmen 
engaged in a conflict with the British Government, launching 
campaigns of civil disobedience, breaking laws made by a 
Foreign Government, organizing movements for non-payment 
of taxes, courting prison, preaching non-co-operation with 
Government, refusing offices and exhibiting themselves in 
other ways as men out to sacrifice themselves for the freedom 
of the country. He sees other political parties standing aloof. 
From this, he concludes that the Congress is a body struggling 
for the freedom of the country and as a lover of freedom feels 
bound to support a body carrying on a “Fight for Freedom.” I 
have explained elsewhere why other political parties have not 
joined in the Fight for Freedom. Here I propose to deal with 
another aspect of the question, namely, for whose freedom is 
the Congress fighting ? 


II 

In taking the side of the Congress as an organization 
“Fighting for Freedom,” the foreigner does not stop to make 
a distinction between the freedom of a country and the 
freedom of the people in the country. In not stopping to 
make this distinction, the foreigner, it must be said, far from 
understanding the matter, is allowing himself to be misled, if 
not deceived. For words such as society, nation and country 
are just amorphous, if not ambiguous, terms. There is no gain- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


202 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

202 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

saying that ‘Nation’ though one word means many classes. 
Philosophically it may be possible to consider a nation as a 
unit but sociologically it cannot but be regarded as consisting 
of many classes and the freedom of the nation if it is to be 
a reality must vouchsafe the freedom of the different classes 
comprised in it, particularly those who are treated as the servile 
classes. Consequently, it is foolish to take solace in the fact 
that because the Congress is fighting for the freedom of India, 
it is, therefore, fighting for the freedom of the people of India 
and of the lowest of the low. 

The question whether the Congress is fighting for freedom 
has very little importance as compared to the question for 
whose freedom is the Congress fighting. This is a pertinent 
and necessary inquiry and it would be wrong for any lover of 
freedom to support the Congress without pursuing the matter 
and finding out what the truth is. But the foreigner who takes 
the side of the Congress does not care even to raise such a 
question. Why is the foreigner so indifferent to so important 
a question ? So far as I am able to judge, the reason for 
such indifference is to be found in the wrong notions of self- 
government and democracy which are prevalent in the West 
and which form the stock-in-trade of the foreigner who takes 
interest in Indian Politics. 

It is propounded by Western writers on Politics that all 
that is necessary for the realization of self-government is the 
existence among a people of what Grote called constitutional 
morality. By constitutional morality is meant 1 habits of 
“paramount reverence for the form of the constitution, 
enforcing obedience to the authorities acting under and within 
those forms, yet combined with the habit of open speech, of 
action subject only to definite legal control, and unrestrained 
censure of those very authorities as to all their public acts — 
combined, too, with a perfect confidence in the bosom of 
every citizen, admits the bitterness of party contest, that the 
forms of constitution will be not less sacred in the eyes of 
his opponents than in his own.” If in a populace these habits 
are present, then according to Western writers on Politics, 
self-government can be a reality and nothing further need be 
considered. Similarly, Western writers on democracy believe 
that what is necessary for the realization of the ideal of demo- 
1 Grote History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 347 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


203 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 203 

cracy, namely, government by the people, of the people and for 
the people, is the establishment of universal adult suffrage. 
Other means have been suggested such as recall, plebiscite and 
short parliaments and in some countries they have been brought 
into operation. But in a majority of countries nothing more than 
adult suffrage is deemed to be necessary. 

I have no hesitation in saying that both these notions 
are fallacious and grossly misleading. If democracy and self- 
government have, failed everywhere, it is largely due to these 
wrong notions. Habits of constitutional morality may be essential 
for the maintenance of a constitutional form of government. But 
the maintenance of a constitutional form of Government is not 
the same thing as a self-government by the people. Similarly, 
it may be granted that adult suffrage can produce government 
of the people in the logical sense of the phrase, i.e. in contrast 
to the government of a king. But it cannot by itself be said to 
bring about a democratic government, in the sense of government 
by the people and for the people. 

These views of Western writers on politics regarding 
democracy and self-government are erroneous for very many 
reasons. In the first place, they omit to take into account the 
incontrovertible fact that in every country there is a governing 
class grown up by force of historical circumstances, which is 
destined to rule, which does rule and to whom adult suffrage 
and constitutional morality are no bar against reaching places 
of power and authority and to whom the servile classes, by 
reason of the fact that they regard the members of the governing 
classes as their natural leaders, volunteer to elect as rulers. 
Secondly, they fail to realize that the existence of a governing 
class is inconsistent with democracy and self-government and 
that given the fact that where the governing class retains its 
power to govern, it is wrong to say that democracy and self- 
government exist unless democracy and self-government are 
regarded as mere matters of form. Thirdly, they do not seem 
to be aware that self-government and democracy become real 
not when a constitution based on adult suffrage comes into 
existence but when the governing class loses its power to capture 
the power to govern. Fourthly, they seem to overlook the fact 
that while in some countries the servile classes may succeed 
in ousting the governing class from the seat of authority with 
nothing more than adult suffrage, in other countries the govern- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


204 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

204 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ing class may be so well entrenched that the servile classes 
will need other safeguards besides adult suffrage to achieve 
the same end. Lastly, they seem to pay no heed to the fact 
that given the existence of the Governing class what matters, 
most in the consideration of any scheme of democracy and 
self-government is the social outlook and social philosophy of 
the governing class, for so long as the governing class retains 
its means to capture the power to govern, the freedom and the 
well-being of the servile classes must depend upon the social 
outlook, the social conscience of the governing class and its 
philosophy of life. 

The recognition of the existence of a governing class as 
a fundamental and a crucial fact confronting democracy and 
self-government is the only safe and realistic approach to 
those who wish for democracy and self-government to come 
into their own. It is a fatal blunder to omit to take account of 
it in coming to a conclusion as to whether in a free country 
freedom, will be the privilege of the governing class only or 
it will be the possession of all. In my view, therefore, what 
the foreigner who chooses to side with the Congress should 
ask is not whether the Congress is fighting for freedom. He 
should ask : For whose freedom is the Congress fighting ? Is it 
fighting for the freedom of the governing class in India or is 
it fighting for the freedom of the people of India ? If he finds 
that the Congress is fighting for the freedom of the governing 
class, he should ask Congressmen: Is the governing class in 
India fit to govern ? This is the least he can do before siding 
with the Congress. 

What are the answers which Congressmen have to give to 
these questions ? I do not know. But I can give what I think 
are the only true answers to these questions. 

Ill 

To start with it is well to know who constitute the governing 
class in India. The governing class in India consists principally 
of the Brahmins. It is strange that the present-day Brahmins 
repudiate the allegation that they belong to the governing class 
though at one time they described themselves as Bhudevas 
(Gods on Earth). What can this volte face be due to ? Is it due 
to a guilty conscience born out of the realization that they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


205 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 205 

have committed criminal breach of the trust imposed upon the 
intellectual sections in every community by the sacred law of 
humanity not to serve the interest of their own class but to 
safeguard the interest of all and therefore dare not stand before 
the bar of the world ? Or is it due to their sense of modesty ? 
It is unnecessary to stop to speculate as to which is the truth. 

That the Brahmins are a governing class is hardly open to 
question. There are two tests one could apply. First is the sentiment 
of the people and the second is the control of administration. I 
am sure there cannot be better and more decisive tests than 
these two. As to the first, there cannot be any doubt. Taking the 
attitude of the people, the person of the Brahmin is sacred. In 
ancient time, he could not be hanged no matter what offence he 
committed. As a sacred person he had immunities and privileges 
which were denied to the servile class. He was entitled to first 
fruits. In Malabar, where the Sambandham marriage prevails, 
the servile classes such as the Nairs regard it an honour to 
have their females kept as mistresses by Brahmins. Even kings 
invited Brahmins 1 to deflower their queens on prima noctis. There 

1 The Traveller Ludovico Di Varthema who came to India in the middle of the 
16th century and visited Malabar says : 

“It is proper and at the same time a pleasant thing to know who these Brahmins 
are. You must know that they are the chief persons of the faith, as priests are 
among us. And when the king takes a wife he selects the most worthy and the 
most honoured of these Brahmins and makes him sleep the first night with his 
wife, in order that he may deflower her. Do not imagine that the Brahmin goes 
willingly to perform this operation. The king is obliged to pay him four hundred 
to five hundred ducats. The king only and no other person in Calicut adopts this 
practice.” — Voyages of Varthema (Hakluyat Society), Vol. I, p. 141. 

Other Travellers tell that the practice was widespread. Hamilton in his Account 
of the East Indies says : 

“When the Samorin marries, he must not cohabit with his bride till the 
Nambourie (Nambudri) or chief priest, has enjoyed her, and if he pleases he 
may have three nights of her company, because the first fruits of her nuptials 
must be a holy oblation to the God she worships and some of the nobles are so 
complacent as to allow the clergy the same tribute; but the common people cannot 
have that compliment paid to them, but are forced to supply the priests places 
themselves.” — Vol. I, p. 308. 

Buchanan in his Narrative refers to the practice in the following terms : 

“The ladies of the Tamuri family are generally impregnated by Nambudries ; 
although if they choose they may employ the higher ranks of Nairs; but the sacred 
character of the Nambudries always procures them a preference.” — Pinkerton’s 
Voyages, Vol. VIII, p. 734. 

Mr. C.A. Innes, J.C.S., Editor of the Gazetteer of Malabar and Anjengo issued 
under the authority of the Government of Madras says : 

“Another institution found amongst all the classes following the marukak- 
kattayam system, as well as amongst many of those who observe makkattayam, 
is that known as “Tali-tying wedding” which has been described as “the 
most peculiar, distinctive and unique” among Malayali marriage customs. Its 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


206 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

206 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was a time when no person of the servile class could take his food 
without drinking the water in which the toes of the Brahmins 
were washed. Sir P. C. Ray once described how in his childhood, 
rows of children belonging to the servile classes used to stand 
for hours together in the morning on the roadside in Calcutta 
with cups of water in their hands waiting for a Brahmin to pass 
ready to wash his feet and take it to their parents waiting to sip 
it before taking their food. Under the British Government and by 
reason of its equalitarian jurisprudence these rights, immunities 
and privileges of the Brahmins have ceased to exist. Nonetheless 
the advantages they gave still remain and the Brahmin is still 
pre-eminent and sacred in the eyes of the servile classes and is 
still addressed by them as ‘Swami’ which means ‘Lord.’ 

The second test gives an equally positive result. To take only 
the Madras Presidency by way of illustration. Consider Table 17 
(see page 207). It shows the distribution of gazetted posts between 
the Brahmins and other communities in the year 1943. 

Similar data from other Provinces could also be adduced 
to support this conclusion. But it is unnecessary to labour the 
point. Whether the Brahmins claim themselves to be members 
of the governing class or not, the facts that they control the 
administration and that their supremacy is accepted by the servile 
classes, are enough to establish the point. 

History shows that the Brahmin has always had other 
classes as his allies to whom he was ready to accord the status 
of a governing class provided they were prepared to work 
with him in subordinate co-operation. In ancient and medieval 
times he made such an alliance with the Kshatriyas or the 
warrior class and the two ruled the masses, indeed ground 
them down, the Brahmin with his pen and the Kshatriya with 
his sword. At present, the Brahmin has made an alliance with 
the Vaishya class called Banias. The shifting of this alliance 
from Kshatriya to Bania is natural. In these days of corn- 

essence is the tying of a tali (a small piece of gold or other metal, like a locket, 
on a string) on a girl’s neck before she attains the age of puberty. This is done 
by a man of the same or of a higher caste (the usages of different classes differ), 
and it is only after it has been done that the girl is at liberty to contract a 
sambandham. It seems to be generally considered that the ceremony was intended 
to confer on the tali tier or manavalan (bridegroom) a right to cohabit with the 
girl; and by some the origin of the ceremony is found in the claim of the Bhu-devas 
or “Earth-Gods,” (that is the Brahmins), and on a lower plane of Kshatriyas or 
ruling classes, to the first-fruits of lower caste womanhood, a right akin to the 
mediaeval droit de seigneurie .” — Vol. I, p. 101. 


Table 1 7 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


207 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 207 


£ 


8 

9 

si 

<3 






9 


.g "S3 


£ > o 


< § 


^ & 
-o 

I 


<N 


00 

00 


o 

00 


10 

ID 

CD 


00 


(N ^ 

CD rH 


^ tsT 

£ | 
s*. ^ 

£ Q 

rs 

°£ 


§P 

to 

S3 

o 


.g < 

o CO 

S3, -w 

3 e 
< § 


CO 

CD 


CM 

>D 


2 

"S3 

I 


o 

00 

(N 


O l> 02 

id o> co 

t> ^ 


S’ 


• o 

& 

3 


^3 


s CO 
° -S3 

6 co 

4~ to 

\ § 


. ,6 "e _ 

^ CO S' 

■m ^ 2 CM 

s 0 N -P d 

og 


o 

<M 

X 


o 

(Ji 


o 

ID 


id 

<N 


$0 Q 
O *72 

■Ki fO 

S3 Q, 
*> Jj 

K ^ 
£ ^ 


3 ■ 


CO 

-S3 
S3 « 
■2 ^ 


O 

(N 


CJ 


g 

a 

43 

cd 

Sh 

CQ 


43 

O 


3 

cd 

'D 

cd 

B 

B 

cd 

43 

3 


O 


CD 

o 




o co ^ 

^ 00 <N 

CO 


q o to 

co uo 

x 



<N 

o> 


t> 

i— i 

ID 

CO 


<N 




o o 

<N to 
CD 


(N O 
<N ID 


X ID 
<N 


CO 

G 


a 

43 


43 




cd 


CO 


Sh 

CO 

£ 


PQ 

CO 

g 


a 


'd 


o 

6 

S3 


z 

73 

6 


T3 

Sh 

cd 

r bfl 


cd 

£ 

Sh 

O 

£ 

44 

CJ 

cd 

S3 

< 

CO 

o 

4M 

£ 

4m 

P3 

S3 

cd 

d 

a 


<D 

g 

CJ 

‘+3 

cd 

a 

o 

B 

'b 

’co 

O 

o 

43 

<5 


£ 

cd 

Sh 

a 

Q) 

43 


CQ 

o 

£ 

+j 

o 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


208 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

208 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

merce money is more important than sword. That is one reason 
for this change in party alignment. The second reason is the need 
for money to run the political machine. Money can come only from 
the Bania. It is the Bania who is financing the Congress largely 
because Mr. Gandhi is a Bania and also because he has realized 
that money invested in Politics gives large dividends. Those 
who have any doubts in the matter might do well to read what 
Mr. Gandhi told Mr. Louis Fisher on June 6, 1942. Reports 
Fisher 1 : — 

“I said I had several questions to ask him about the 
Congress Party. Very highly placed Britishers, I recalled, 
had told me that Congress was in the hands of big business 
and that Gandhi was supported by the Bombay millowners 
who gave him as much money as he wanted. ‘What truth is 
there in these assertions,’ I asked.” 

‘“Unfortunately, they are true,’ he declared simply, 
‘Congress hasn’t enough money to conduct its work. We 
thought in the beginning to collect four annas (about eight 
cents) from each member per year and operate on that. But 
it hasn’t worked.’” 

“‘What proportion of the Congress budget,’ I asked, ‘is 
covered by rich Indians ?’” 

“‘Practically all of it,’ he stated. ‘In this ashram, for 
instance, we could live much more poorly than we do and 
spend less money. But we do not and the money comes from 
our rich friends.’” 

For this reason, it is impossible for the Brahmin to exclude 
the Bania from the position of a governing class. In fact, he has 
established not merely a working but a cordial alliance with the 
Bania. The result is that the governing class in India today is 
a Brahmin-Bania instead of Brahmin-Kshatriya combine as it 
used to be. 

The existence of the Governing class does not cover the whole 
story. What is significant is that the members of the governing 
class in India are quite conscious of the fact that they do belong 
to the governing class and that they alone are destined to rule. 
The late Mr. Tilak could never forget that he was a Brahmin 
and belonged to the governing class. The same is reported to 
be the case about Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru 2 and his sister 

1 A Week with Gandhi (1943), p. 41. 

2 Mr. Pattabhi Sitaramaya in his introduction to the Life of Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru by Mr. Y.G. Krishnamurti, says Pandit Nehru is very conscious of the 
fact that he is a Brahmin. This will shock many who are under the impression 
that Pandit Nehru is a Socialist and does not believe in caste. But Mr. Pattabhi 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


209 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 209 

Mrs. Vijaya Laxmi Pandit. Nor is Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel 
free from the feeling that he belongs to the governing class. 
Mr. Tilak is held out as the father of the Swaraj movement. 
Pandit Nehru and Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel are the leading 
members of the Congress High Command. Not only are they 
conscious of the fact that they belong to the governing class but 
some of them hold that the servile classes are a contemptible 
people, who must remain servile and who must never aspire 
to rule. Indeed, they have felt no shame and no remorse in 
giving public expression to such views. In 1918, when the Non- 
Brahmins and the Backward Classes had started an agitation 
for separate representation in the Legislature, Mr. Tilak in a 
public meeting held in Sholapur said he did not understand 
why the oil pressers, tobacco shopkeepers, washermen, 
etc. — that was his description of the Non-Brahmins and the 
Backward Classes — should want to go into the Legislature. 
In his opinion, their business was to obey the laws and not 
to aspire for power to make laws. In 1942, Lord Linlithgow 
invited 52 important Indians representing different sections 
of the people to discuss what steps could be taken to make 
the Central Government more popular with a view to enlist 
the sympathy and co-operation of all Indians in war effort. 
Among those that were invited were members belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes. Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel could not bear 
the idea that the Viceroy should have invited such a crowd of 
mean men. Soon after the event, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel made 
a speech in Ahmedabad and said 3 : — 

“The Viceroy sent for the leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
he sent for the leaders of the Muslim League, and he sent 
for Ghanchis (oil pressers), Mochis (cobblers) and the rest.” 

Although Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel in his malicious and 
stinging words referred only to Ghanchis and Mochis, his speech 
is indicative of the general contempt in which the governing 
class and the members of the Congress High Command hold 

Sitaramaya ought to know what he is saying. Not only is Pandit Nehru conscious 
of the fact that he is a Brahmin but his sister Mrs. Vijaya Laxmi Pandit, also 
seems to be conscious that she is a Brahmin. It is said that at the All-India 
Women’s Conference held in Delhi in December 1940, the question of not declaring 
one’s caste in the Census Return was discussed. Mrs. Pandit disapproved of the 
idea and said she did not see any reason why she should not be proud of her 
Brahmin blood and declare herself as a Brahmin at the Census — See Sense and 
Nonsense in Politics ” Serial No. XII by Mr. J.E. Sanjana in the Rast Rahabar (a 
Bombay Gujarathi Weekly), 14th January ‘45. 

3 Quoted by Mr. Sanjana in Sense and Nonsense in Politics. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


210 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

210 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the servile classes of this country. Further illustrations of 
this attitude of the governing class and the Congress High 
Command can be found from incidents that have taken 
place in the election campaigns. They are so relevant and 
so revealing that a special mention must be made of them. 

Ever since 1919 when Mr. Gandhi captured the Congress, 
Congressmen have looked upon the boycott of Legislature 
as one of the sanctions for making the British Government 
concede the demand for Swaraj. Under this policy, every time 
there was an election in which the Congress decided not to 
take part, the Congress would not only refuse to put candidates 
on the Congress ticket but would carry on propaganda against 
any Hindu proposing to stand for election as an independent 
candidate. One need not quarrel over the merits of such a 
policy. But what were the means adopted, by the Congress 
to prevent Hindus standing on an independent ticket? The 
means adopted were to make the legislatures objects of 
contempt. Accordingly, the Congress in various Provinces 
started processions carrying placards saying “who will go in the 
Legislatures ? Only barbers, cobblers, potters and sweepers.” 
In the processions one man would utter the question as part 
of the slogan and the whole crowd would repeat as answer 
the second part of the slogan. When Congressmen found that 
this was not enough to deter persons from standing for the 
elections, they decided to adopt sterner measures. Believing 
that respectable people would not be prepared to stand for 
election if they felt certain that they would have to sit with 
barbers, potters and sweepers, etc. in the legislatures, the 
Congress actually went to the extent of putting up candidates 
from these despised communities on the Congress ticket and 
got them elected. A few illustrations of this outrageous conduct 
of the Congress may be mentioned. In the 1920 election, 
the Congress elected a cobbler 1 in the Central Provinces 
Legislature. In the 1930 election, they elected in the Central 
Provinces two cobblers 2 , one milkman 3 and one barber 4 and 
in the Punjab one sweeper 5 . In 1934, the Congress elected a 
potter 6 to the Central Legislature. It might be said that this 

1 Faguwa Rohidas. 

2 Guru Gosain Agamdas and Balaraj Jaiswar. 

3 Chunnu. 

4 Arjunlal 

6 Bansi Lai Chaudhari. 

G Bhagat Chandi Mai Gola. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


211 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 211 

is old history. Let me correct such an impression by referring 
to what happened in 1943, in the Municipal Elections in 
Andheri — a suburb of Bombay. The Congress put up a barber 
to bring the Municipality in contempt. 

What an enormity ? The Sinn Fein in Ireland boycotted 
the British Parliament. But did they make such hideous 
use of their own countrymen for effecting their purposes ? 
The campaign of boycott of legislature which took place in 
1930 is of particular interest. The elections to the Provincial 
Legislatures in 1930 in which these instances occurred 
coincided with Mr. Gandhi’s Salt satyagraha campaign 
of 1930!! I hope that the future (the official historian 
Dr. Pattabhi Sitamayya has failed to do so) historian of 
Congress while recording how Mr. Gandhi decided to serve 
notice on the Viceroy, Lord Irwin, presenting him with a 
list of demands to be con ceded before a certain date and on 
failure by the Viceroy in this behalf, how Mr. Gandhi decided 
to launch a campaign of civil disobedience, how Mr. Gandhi 
elected an Englishman to carry his notice, how Mr. Gandhi 
selected Salt Act as a target for attack, how he selected Dandi 
as a scene of battle, how he decided to put himself at the 
head of the campaign, how he marched out from his Ashram 
in Ahmedabad with all pomp and ceremony, how the women 
of Ahmedabad came out with Arthi and applied tilak (saffron 
mark) to his forehead wishing him victory, how Mr. Gandhi 
assured them by saying that Gujarat alone will win Swaraj 
for India, how Mr. Gandhi proclaimed his determination by 
saying that he will not return to Ahmedabad until he has 
won Swaraj, will not fail to record that while on the one hand 
Congressmen were engaged in fighting for Swaraj which they 
said they wanted to win in the name and for the masses, on 
the other hand and in the very year they were committing 
the worst outrages, upon the very masses by exhibiting them 
publicly as objects of contempt to be shunned and avoided. 

Such is the mentality of the governing classes in India 
towards the servile classes. 


IV 

What is to be the fate of the servile classes of India under 
this governing class ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


212 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

212 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Congress promises to do wonders for the servile classes — 
the Congress speaks of masses, it ought really to speak of 
them as the servile classes held in bondage by the governing 
classes — when Swaraj comes. It says that it would like to make 
revolutionary changes but it has no power to make them and it 
must wait for Swaraj. It is this glib talk which goes to deceive 
the gullible foreigner. Leaving aside the boast and bluster which 
lie behind the statement, one may ask what really can happen 
if India does become a sovereign and an independent state ? 
One thing is certain. The governing class will not disappear by 
the magic wand of Swaraj. It will remain as it is and having 
been freed from the incubus of British Imperialism will acquire 
greater strength and vigour. It will capture power as the 
governing classes in every country do. In short, Swaraj will not 
be government by the people but it will be a government run by 
the governing class and in the absence of Government by the 
people, government for the people will be what the governing 
class will choose to make of it. 

What will the governing class do when India becomes a 
sovereign and independent state ? Some hope that they will 
undertake reform of tenancy laws, enlarge factory legislation, 
extend primary education, introduce prohibition and train 
people to ply charkha, construct roads and canals, improve 
currency, regulate weights and measures, open dispensaries 
and undertake other measures to ameliorate the condition 
of the servile classes. No one from the servile class can be 
very enthusiastic about such a programme. In the first place, 
there is nothing very great in it. In the world of today, no 
governing, class can omit to undertake reforms which are 
necessary to maintain society in a civilized state. Personally, I 
have grave doubts about the governing class in India coming 
forward to carry out even such a modest programme of social 
amelioration. Most people forget that what leads the Congress 
today to mouth such a programme is the desire to show that 
the Congress is better than the British Bureaucracy. But once 
the bureaucracy is liquidated, will there be the same incentive 
to better the lot of the masses ? I entertain very grave doubts 
on the point. Apart from this, is social amelioration the be 
all and end-all of Swaraj ? Speaking for the servile classes, I 
have no doubt that what they expect to happen in a sovereign 
and free India is a complete destruction of Brahmanism as a 
philosophy of life and as a social order. If I may say so, the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


213 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 213 

servile classes do not care for social amelioration. The want 
and poverty which has been their lot is nothing to them as 
compared to the insult and indignity which they have to bear 
as a result of the vicious social order. Not bread but honour, is 
what they want. The question therefore is : Will the governing 
classes in India having captured the machinery of the State, 
undertake a programme for the reform of the social order as 
distinguished from a programme of social amelioration ? 

The statement by Congressmen that Congress can do 
wonders if only India was a sovereign and an independent 
State, supposing that it is an honest aspiration and not mere 
propaganda, proceeds on the assumption that for a man to do 
what he wants, nothing more is necessary than power. Such 
a belief is not only pitiable but is really a dangerous illusion. 
Those who are inclined to cherish such an illusion forget that 
there are serious limitations on sovereignty, no matter how 
absolute it is. None has described these limitations in more 
telling language than Dicey. In his Law of the Constitution, 
he says: — 

“The actual exercise of authority by any sovereign 
whatever, and notably by Parliament, is bounded or controlled 
by two limitations. Of these the one is an external, the other 
is an internal limitation. 

“The external limit to the real power of a sovereign 
consists in the possibility or certainty that his subjects or a 
large number of them, will disobey or resist his laws. 

“This limitation exists even under the most despotic 
monarchies. A Roman Emperor, or a French King during the 
middle of the eighteenth century, was (as is the Russian Czar 
at the present day) in strictness a “sovereign” in the legal 
sense of that term. He had absolute legislative authority. 
Any law made by him was binding, and there was no power 
in the empire or kingdom which could annul such law... But 
it would be an error to suppose that the most absolute ruler 
who ever existed could in reality make or change every law 
at his pleasure... 

“The authority, that is to say, even of a despot, depends 
upon the readiness of his subjects or of some portion of his 
subjects to obey his behests; and this readiness to obey, 
must always be in reality limited. This is shown by the most 
notorious facts of history. None of the early Caesars could at 
their pleasure have subverted the worship of fundamental 
institutions of the Roman world,.. The Sultan could not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


214 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

214 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

abolish Mahommedanism. Louis the Fourteenth at the 
height of his power could revoke the Edict of Nantes, but he 
would have found it impossible to establish the supremacy 
of Protestantism, and for the same reason which prevented 
James the Second from establishing the supremacy of Roman 
Catholicism.... What is true of the power of a despot or of the 
authority of a constituent assembly is specially true of the 
sovereignty of Parliament; it is limited on every side by the 
possibility of popular resistance. Parliament might legally 
establish an Episcopal Church in Scotland; Parliament might 
legally tax the Colonies ; Parliament might without any 
breach of law change the succession to the throne or abolish 
the monarchy; but everyone knows that in the present state 
of the world the British Parliament will do none of these 
things. In each case widespread resistance would result from 
legislation which, though legally valid, is in fact beyond the 
stretch of Parliamentary power. 

k k k 

“The internal limit to the exercise of sovereignty arises 
from the nature of the sovereign power itself. Even a despot 
exercises his powers in accordance with his character, which 
is itself moulded by the circumstances under which he lives, 
including under that head the moral feelings of the time and 
the society to which he belongs. The Sultan could not if he 
would, change the religion of the Mahommedan world, but 
if he could do so it is in the very highest degree improbable 
that the head of Mahommedanism should wish to overthrow 
the religion of Mahomet; the internal check on the exercise 
of the Sultan’s power is at least as strong as the external 
limitation. People sometimes ask the idle question why the 
Pope does not introduce this or that reform ? The true answer 
is that a revolutionist is not the kind of man who becomes 
a Pope, and that the man who becomes a Pope has no wish 
to be a revolutionist..” 

None can gainsay the truth of what Dicey has said. 
What the governing class may do depends not so much upon 
the degree of its sovereignty as upon what Dicey calls the 
external and internal limitations in sovereignty. Of these 
two, if the failure to do good arises out of the external 
limitations, nobody need blame the governing class. The fear 
of external limitations blocking progress need not cause much 
apprehension. For it is the internal limitations of the governing 
class that have a greater determining force than the external 
limitations. Progress depends more upon internal limitations 
of the governing class than upon external limitations. What 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


215 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 215 

are the factors which determine these internal limitations ? 
The internal limitations are born out of the outlook, traditions, 
vested interests and the social philosophy of the governing 
class. The purpose of this discussion is to warn the foreigner 
that before believing what the Congress proposes to do for 
the servile classes, he should make it a point to ask: What is 
the outlook of the governing class ? What are its traditions ? 
What is its social philosophy ? 

To take the Brahmins first. Historically they have been the 
most inveterate enemy of the servile classes (Shudras and the 
Untouchables) who together constitute about 80 per cent of 
the total Hindu population. If the common man belonging to 
the servile classes in India is today so fallen, so degraded, so 
devoid of hope and ambition, it is entirely due to the Brahmins 
and their philosophy. The cardinal principles of this philosophy 
of Brahmanism are five: (1) graded inequality between the 
different classes ; (2) complete disarmament of the Shudras and 
the Untouchables; (3) complete prohibition of the education of 
the Shudras and the Untouchables ; (4) ban on the Shudras 
and the Untouchables occupying places of power and authority; 

(5) ban on the Shudras and the Untouchables acquiring property. 

(6) complete subjugation and suppression of women. Inequality 
is the official doctrine of Brahmanism and the suppression of 
the lower classes aspiring to equality has been looked upon by 
them and carried out by them, without remorse as their bounden 
duty. There are countries where education did not spread beyond 
a few. But India is the only country where the intellectual 
class, namely, the Brahmins not only made education their 
monopoly but declared acquisition of education by the lower 
classes, a crime punishable by cutting off of the tongue or 
by the pouring of molten lead in the ear of the offender. The 
Congress politicians complain that the British are ruling India 
by a wholesale disarmament of the people of India. But they 
forget that disarmament of the Shudras and the Untouchables 
was the rule of law promulgated by the Brahmins. Indeed, so 
strongly did the Brahmins believe in the disarmament of the 
Shudras and the Untouchables that when they revised the law 
to enable the Brahmins to arm themselves for the protection of 
their own privileges, they maintained the ban on the Shudras 
and the Untouchables as it was without lessening its rigour. 
If the large majority of people of India appear today to be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


216 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

216 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

thoroughly emasculated, spiritless, with no manliness, it is 
the result of the Brahmanic policy of wholesale disarmament 
to which they have been subjected for the untold ages. There 
is no social evil and no social wrong to which the Brahmin 
does not give his support. Man’s inhumanity to man, such 
as the feeling of caste, untouchability, unapproachability and 
unseeability is a religion to him. It would, however, be a 
mistake to suppose that only the wrongs of man are a religion 
to him. For the Brahmin has given his support to the worst 
wrongs that women have suffered from in any part of the 
world. Widows were burnt alive as sattees. The Brahmin gave 
his fullest support to Sattee, the burning alive of a widow. 
Widows were not allowed to remarry. The Brahmin upheld 
the doctrine. Girls were required to be married before 8 and 
the husband had the right to consummate the marriage at 
any time thereafter, whether she had reached puberty or not 
did not matter. The Brahmin gave the doctrine his strongest 
support. The record of the Brahmins as law givers for the 
Shudras, for the Untouchables and for women is the blackest 
as compared with the record of the intellectual classes in other 
parts of the world. For no intellectual class has prostituted 
its intelligence to invent a philosophy to keep his uneducated 
countrymen in a perpetual state of ignorance and poverty 
as the Brahmins have done in India. Every Brahmin today 
believes in this philosophy of Brahmanism propounded by his 
forefathers. He is an alien element in the Hindu Society. The 
Brahmin vis-a-vis Shudras and the Untouchables as foreign 
as the German is to the French, as the Jew is to the Gentile 
or as the White is to the Negro. There is a real gulf between 
him and the lower classes of Shudras and Untouchables. He 
is not only alien to them but he is also hostile to them. In 
relationship with them, there is no room for conscience and 
there is no call for justice. 

The Bania is the worst parasitic class known to history. 
In him the vice of money-making is unredeemed by culture or 
conscience. He is like an undertaker who prospers when there 
is an epidemic. The only difference between the undertaker and 
the Bania is that the undertaker does not create an epidemic 
while the Bania does. He does not use his money for production. 
He uses it to create poverty and more poverty by lending 
money for unproductive purposes. He lives on interest and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


217 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 217 

as he is told by his religion that money lending is the occupation 
prescribed to him by Manu, he looks upon it as both right and 
righteous. With the help and assistance of the Brahmin judge 
who is read to decree his suits, he is able to carry on his trade. 
Interest, interest on interest, he adds on and on and thereby 
draws families perpetually into his net: Pay him as much as a 
debtor may, he is always in debt. With no conscience, there is no 
fraud, and no chicanery that he will not commit. His grip over 
the nation is complete. The whole of poor, starving, illiterate 
India is mortgaged to the Bania. 

To sum up, the Brahmin enslaves the mind and the Bania 
enslaves the body. Between them, they divide the spoils which 
belong to the governing classes. Can anyone who realizes what 
the outlook, tradition and social philosophy of the governing class 
in India, is believe that under the Congress regime, a sovereign 
and independent India will be different from the India we have 
today ? 


V 

If the Congress is honest and sincere in its professions as the 
champion and the guardian of the servile classes the Congress 
may well be called upon to show what steps it took to destroy 
the power of the governing class. It is repeated from housetops 
that the Congress swept the polls in the elections that took place 
in 1937. Overlooking the hyperbole, a question could legitimately 
be asked: It is true that the Congress won the victory but which 
is the class among the Indian people which carried the trophy ? 
Unfortunately, no Indian publicist has as yet undertaken to 
compile an Indian counterpart of Dodd’s Parliamentary Manual. 
Consequently, it is difficult to have precise particulars regarding 
the caste, occupation, education and social status of members of 
the legislature elected on the Congress ticket. The matter is so 
important that I thought of collecting the necessary information 
on these points relating to members of the Provincial Legislatures 
elected in 1937 on the Congress ticket. I did not succeed in 
getting precise information about every member. There are many 
whom I have had to leave as unclassified. But the information I 
have been able to gather throws a glaring light upon victory of 
the Congress and shows what it means to the people of India in 
terms of their freedom and their well-being. 

Table 18 (see page 219) shows the proportion of Brahmins 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 218 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

218 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and Non-Brahmins and the Scheduled Castes that were elected 
to the Provincial Legislative Assemblies on the Congress Ticket. 

Those who do not know how small is the proportion of the 
Brahmins to the total population of Hindus may not be able 
to realize the representation which the Brahmins have secured 
in the Congress Election. But those who know it will realize 
that in proportion to their numbers the Brahmins have secured 
overwhelming representation. 

What degree of representation did the Congress give to the 
propertied classes, such as Banias, businessmen and landlords ? 
Table 19 (see page 220) shows how many Banias, businessmen 
and landlords were elected on the Congress ticket. 

Here again the representation secured by the Banias, 
landlords and businessmen standing on the Congress ticket is 
overwhelming. Is there any doubt that the Congress instead 
of warring against the governing class actually helped the 
governing class to capture political power ? There is one other 
feature of the Congress victory in the election which needs 
to be exposed. It relates to the composition of the Congress 
ministries 1 . 

Tables 20 and 21 (see pages 221 and 223) give an idea of 
the position of the Brahmins in the Congress Ministries in 
Provinces in which the Congress had obtained a majority. 

In all the Hindu Provinces, the Prime Ministers were 
Brahmins. In all Hindu Provinces if the Non-Hindu ministers 
were excluded, the Cabinets were wholly composed of Brahmins. 
This was particularly so in United Provinces, the Province to 
which Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru belongs. 

Is there any doubt that the Brahmins form the governing 
class in India ? Is there any doubt that the Congress’ fight for 
Freedom is for the freedom of the governing class ? Is there 
any doubt that the Congress is the governing class and the 
governing class is the Congress ? Is there any doubt that when 
Swaraj came in 1937 in the form of Provincial autonomy, the 
Congress shamelessly put the governing class in places of 
power and authority ? 

To be true to facts it is an understatement to say that the 
Congress put the governing classes into places of power and 
authority. It did more than that. Here again, so strange has 
been the result that people will not believe what the Congress 


Indian Information for July 15, 1939. 


Classification of Congress Members of Provincial Assemblies by Castes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


219 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 219 



Classification of the Congress Members of the Provincial Legislatures in terms of Occupation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


220 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
220 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Total 

33 

54 

98 

70 

159 

36 

Not 

Stated 

02 


14 

LQ 

36 

1 

Nil 

CO 

16 

i— 1 

00 

CO 

i—l 

Money 

Lenders 

1 

1 



l— 1 

i—l 

w 43 







B -S 
ft- & 

1 

<N 

CO 


(N 


Business- 

men 

1—1 

U0 

CD 

10 

18 


Land- 

lords 

(N 

16 

56 

25 

45 

17 

Medical 

Practi- 

tioners 

(N 



(N 

oq 

l—l 

Lawyers 

16 

02 

14 

20 

52 

00 


Oh 


cd 

bn 

£ 

© 

CQ 


cd 

s 


o 


T3 

cd 


cd 

CO 

co 

o 


Composition of the Cahinds in the Congress Provinces 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


221 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 
A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 


§ ^ 
§ 


-O 

CJ 


a 

K2 


Scheduled 

Castes 

Nil 

1—1 

Nil 

Nil 

1—1 

o- 

Nil 

CO 

S3 








Non 

Brahtm 

C— 

c^- 

(N 

i—I 

CO 

e- 

Nil 

CO 

Si 

s 








o- 

c^- 

CO 

CO 

CO 

c^- 


0 

Js. 

CQ 








Total 

lO 

CO 

uo 



CO 



o a 
. ^3 

g .5 

< tq 

.O 

£ 


O .jc 

5 a 
£ IS 
6 


PQ 


4= 

Co 

SH 

PQ 


A 

d 

%-i 

PQ 


Co 


PQ 


4= 

c3 

Sh 

PQ 


A 

ctf 

PQ 


Co 

s 


^5 

& 

Xi 

a 

o 

PQ 


O 


T3 

& 


T5 

0) 

+J 

•a 


221 


*This table represents the position as it stood in May 1939 and as reported in the Issue of July 15, 1939 of the Indian Information. 
Question mark indicates inability to classify whether Brahmin or non-Brahmin. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


222 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

222 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

did unless they see the facts. The fact is that the Congress 
High Command in selecting a candidate had a definite policy 
namely in the case of Brahmins, to give preference to a 
candidate who had the highest educational qualifications and 
in the case of the Non-Brahmins and the Scheduled Castes, to 
give preference to a candidate who had the lowest educational 
qualification. Let those who have any doubts in the matter 
consider the facts summarized in Table 22 (see page 224.) 

It is obvious that in the case of the Brahmins the relative 
proportion of graduates to non-graduates is far higher than 
what it is in the case of the Non-Brahmins and the Scheduled 
Castes. The difference in terms of graduates and non-graduates 
does not really reveal the correct situation. To put it correctly, 
the Brahmin graduates were seasoned politicians of high repute 
while the Non-Brahmin graduates were raw graduates with 
the career of second class politicians to recommend them. 

Why did the Congress select the best educated Brahmms 
as its candidates for election ? Why did the Congress select 
the least educated Non-Brahmins and Scheduled Castes as 
its candidates for election ? To this question I can see only 
one answer. It was to prevent the Non-Brahmins in the 
Congress from forming a ministry. The Congress seems to 
have deliberately preferred an uneducated Non-Brahmin 
to an educated one because from the point of view of the 
governing class, the uneducated Non-Brahmin has two 
definite advantages over an educated non-Brahmin. In the 
first place, he is likely to be more grateful to the Congress 
High Command for having got him elected than an educated 
Non-Brahmin is likely to be, and would not be ready to revolt 
against the Congress Ministry, formed by the governing 
classes, by joining hands with the educated Non-Brahmins 
in the Congress Party should the latter aspire to form a 
government of their own against the government of the 
governing classes. In the second place, if more undergraduates 
or more raw Non-Brahmin graduates were selected, it was 
with the purpose to prevent the Non-Brahmins in the Congress 
from forming a competent and alternative Ministry to the 
detriment of the governing class. The Non-Brahmins in the 
Congress do not know how the Congress has deceived them, 
and how in drawing them inside the Congress, the Congress 
was making a concealed attempt to permanently entrench 
the governing classes in places of power and authority. 


Classification of Parliamentary Secretaries in Congress Provinces 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


223 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 



223 


'Compiled from Indian Information Issue of July 15, 1939. Question mark indicates inability to classify whether Brahmin or non-Brahmin. 


Classification of Brahmin and Non-Brahmin Congress Partymen by Literacy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


224 


224 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


T3 

•KJ 

Q 


I 


l> | CO CO I <N 


i-H | i-H(M^CC002C'-CD^t>^ 


CO O IO 


00 CO T* <N <N 


Q 

a 

0 

4 

a 

1 


Q 

a 

"Q 

8 

4 

o 


lO lO 


CO 

<N 


£ 


lO t> CO i-H 02 

ih oq co co 


02 -sf I 00 O CO 

1 CO lO 1 CO 02 <N 


1-1 o U0 
1-1 (N 


d 


a 

O 


o3 

o 


o3 

o 


o3 

o 


o 



44 


rS 

'0 

0 


3 

"0 

cc 

3 

T3 

co 

3 

T3 

T3 

M 

g 

a 

03 

4 

PQ 

g 

a 

03 

4 

PQ 

3 

T3 

g 

a 

C4 

4 

PQ 

0 

3 

g 

a 

c4 

4 

PQ 

0 

3 

T3 

g 

a 

03 

4 

PQ 

0 

3 

T3 

4 

o3 

£ 

g 

a 

44 


4= 


0 



0 

4= 


0 

44 


0 

44 

44 

03 

4 

PQ 

S4 

o 

£ 

03 

4 

PQ 

S4 

o 

£ 

4-H 

0 

s 

d 

4 

PQ 

£4 

o 

£ 

44 

0 

m 

03 

4 

PQ 

£4 

o 

£ 

4m 

0 

C/2 

03 

4 

PQ 

£4 

o 

£ 

44 

0 

m 

0 

o3 

PQ 

03 

4 

PQ 


44 

a 

4 

PQ 

£ 

o 

£ 


o3 

O 

'xs 

0 

3 




o co 
5- CO 


03 

bJD 

0 

PQ 


c3 

s 


■> 

O 


3 

0 

o 


T5 

03 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


225 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 225 

VI 

It would be instructive to compare the attitude of the 
governing class in India with the attitude taken by the 
governing class in other countries in times of national crisis 
such as we are passing through in India today. In France, 
when the Revolution broke out and demanded equality the 
governing class in France voluntarily came forward to give up 
its powers and its privileges and to merge itself in the mass 
of the nation. This is clear from what happened when the 
States General called. The Commons got 600 representatives 
while the clergy and the Nobles got 800 each. The question 
arose how were the 1,200 members to sit, debate and vote. 
The Commons insisted upon the union of all the three estates 
in one Chamber and ‘vote by head.’ It was impossible to 
expect the clergy and the Nobles to accept this position. For 
it meant the surrender of their most ancient and valuable 
privileges. Yet a good part of them agreed to the demand 
of the Commons and gave France a constitution based upon 
liberty, equality and fraternity. 

The attitude of the governing classes in Japan during 
the period between 1855 to 1870 — a period in which the 
Japanese people were transformed from a feudal society into 
a modern nation — was even more patriotic than the attitude 
of the governing classes in France. As students of Japanese 
history 1 know, there were four classes in Japanese Society 
(1) The Damiyos, (2) The Samurai, (8) The Hemin or the 
Common folk and (4) The Eta or the outcastes standing one 
above the other in an order of graded inequality. At the 
bottom were the Eta numbering a good many thousands. 
Above the Eta were the Hemin numbering about 25/83 
millions. Over them were the Samurai who numbered about 
2 millions and who had the power of life and death over the 
Hemin. At the apex were the Damiyos or the Feudal Barons 
who exercised sway over the rest of the three classes and 
who numbered only 300. The Damiyos and the Samurai 
realized that it was impossible to transform this feudal 
society with its class composition and class rights into a 
modem nation with equality of citizenship. Accordingly the 
Damiyos charged with the spirit of nationalism and anxious 
not to stand in the way of national unity, came forward 
to surrender their privileges and to merge themselves 
1 See Romance of Japan by James A.B. Scherer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


226 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

226 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the common mass of people. In a memorial submitted to 
the Emperor on the 5th March 1869 they said: 1 

“The Place where we live is the Emperor’s land. The 
food that we eat is grown by the Emperor’s men. How then 
can we claim any property as our own ? We now reverently 
offer up our possessions and also our followers (Samurai as 
well as ‘common folk’) with the prayer that the Emperor will 
take good measures for rewarding those to whom reward 
is due, and for fining such as do not deserve reward. Let 
imperial orders be issued for altering and remodelling the 
territories of the various clans. Let the civil and penal 
codes, the military laws down to the rules, for uniforms 
and for the construction of engines of war, all proceed from 
the Emperor. Let all affairs of the Empire, both great and 
small, be referred to him.” 

How does the governing class in India compare in this behalf 
with the governing class in Japan ? Just the opposite. The 
governing class in India has no such intention of making any 
sacrifice on the altar of Indian Freedom. Instead of surrendering 
its privileges in the name of nationalism, the governing class 
in India is using or misusing the slogan of nationalism to 
maintain its privileges. Whenever the servile classes ask for 
reservations in the Legislatures, in the Executive and in public 
services, the governing class raises the cry of ‘nationalism in 
danger.’ People are told that if we are to achieve national 
freedom, we must maintain national unity, that all questions 
regarding reservations in the Legislatures, Executives and the 
public services are inimical to national unity and therefore 
for anyone interested in national freedom it is a sin to stand 
out for such reservations and create dissensions. That is the 
attitude of the governing class. It stands in glaring contrast 
with that of the governing class in Japan. Far from sacrificing 
its privileges for nationalism, it is exploiting nationalism to 
preserve them. 

The governing class in India does not merely refuse to 
surrender its power and authority; it never loses an opportunity 
to pour ridicule on the political demands of the servile classes. 
Some 2 members of the governing classes have gone to the 

1 Ibid, p. 233. 

2 The parody written by Dr. R.P. Paranjpe appeared in a magazine called 
Gujarathi Punch for May 1926 under the heading “A Peep into the Future.” 
As a specimen of this class of writing by members of the governing class it is 
worth perusal. It is a satire based on certain incidents which are imagined to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


227 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 227 

length of composing lampoons and parodies in order to make 
the demand of the servile classes appear absurd and ridiculous. 
The most colourful of such parodies was the one written by 
Dr. R. P. Paranjpe, new Indian High Commissioner for Australia. 
It is difficult to understand how so advanced a Liberal like 
Dr. Paranjpe should entertain such views. 

have occurred under the principle of communal reservations. As the magazine is 
not easily available, I reproduce it below : — 

‘A Peep Into The Future’ 

The following extracts are taken from reports of Commissions, records of police 
courts cases, judicial trials, Council Proceedings, Administration Reports, etc., 
issued between the year 1930-50 and are published for the exclusive benefit of 
the readers of the Gujarati Punch. 

I 

Report of the Royal Commission on the Government of India, 1930 : 

We have given our closest consideration to the representations made on behalf 
of several communities in India. Taking the figures of the last Census as our 
basis we can only give an approximate satisfaction to all the claims made before 
us, for it is not possible to give an absolutely accurate solution to the problem of 
constructing a machinery of Government unless every single person in the country 
is made a member thereof, as the numbers of the several communities do not 
possess a common measure. We lay down the number 2375 as the fundamental 
number in the constitution and this number is divided into parts attached to the 
several communities as shown in the schedule attached to our report. The claims 
of each community will henceforward be represented by its proper number, and 
all appointments, memberships of various bodies, and in fact everything in the 
country will be awarded according to the proportion given in the schedule wherever 
possible. The Viceroy’s Executive Council will consist of 475 members selected as 
far as may be according to one-fifth the numbers belonging to each community 
and three members will hold office for one year so that each community will have 
attained its exact share of membership in five years. There will be 125 Judges 
in each High Court, each judge holding office for one year, though according to 
this arrangement, each section will have obtained its exact share only after the 
lapse of 19 years. The number of other kinds of appointments will be determined 
on the same basis for the accurate adjustment of all claims. 

To allow for the proper functioning of all bodies with these numbers as many 
existing Government buildings as may be necessary may be pulled down and 
rebuilt so as to be of the proper size. 

II 

(Notification of the Government of India, 1932) 

In accordance with the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1931, His 
Majesty the King Emperor has been pleased to appoint the following 475 gentlemen 
as members of the Executive Council of the Governor General: 

267. Matadin Bamdin (caste Barber) member in charge of the Surgical Branch 
of the Medical Department. 

372. Allabux Peerbux (Mahomedan Camel driver) in charge of the camel 
transport division of the Army Department. 

433. Bamaswamy (caste, Andhra Sweeper) in charge of the road cleaning 
branch of the P.W.D. 

437. Jagannath Bhattacharya (Kulin Brahmin Priest) in charge of the domestic 
section of the Registration Department. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


228 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
228 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


These lampoons and parodies give the impression that the 
members of the servile classes are perverse if not idiotic in 
making such demands and the governing classes in opposing 
the demands of the servile classes are seeking to maintain 
in India an efficient body politic by insisting that every place 
of power and authority should be filled by none but the best 

IV 

{Letter to all Local Governments, 1934) 

In response to a resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly, with which the 
Government of India are in full agreement, I am directed to say that henceforward 
every appointment under Government should go by rotation to each community 
irrespective of the merits of the applicants. 

V 

(Notification in the Bombay Government Gazette, 1934) 

The Government of Bombay will proceed to make the following appointments 
in December. The applicants for the several appointments should belong to the 
castes mentioned against each according to the rotation fixed by Government 
Order No. ... dated November 30th, 1934. 

1. Chief Engineer for Irrigation (Sind) : Kunbi from North Kanara. 

2. Professor of Sanskrit, Elphinstone College, Bombay : Baluchi Pathan 
from Sind. 

3. Commandant of His Excellency’s Bodyguard: Marwari from North Gujarat. 

4. Consulting Architect to Government: Wadari (wandering gypsy) from 
the Deccan. 

5. Director of Islamic culture : Karhada Brahmin. 

6. Professor of Anatomy : (Grant Medical College) Mahomedan Butcher. 

7. Superintendent of Yeravda Jail: Ghantichor. 

8. Two organizers of prohibition : Dharala (Kaira District Bhil) (Panch 
Mahals). 


VI 

(Report of a Case from the High Court, 1935) 

A.B. (caste Teli) was charged with the cold- blooded murder of his father while 
he was asleep. The judge summing up against the accused, the jury brought in 
a verdict of guilty. Before passing sentence the judge asked the pleader for the 
accused if he had to say anything. The pleader, Mr. Bomanji, said he agreed 
with the verdict but that according to Law the accused could not be sentenced 
at all, much less sentenced to death, as during the current year seven Telia 
had already been convicted and sentenced two of them with death, that several 
other communities had not yet reached their quota of convictions as given in the 
Government of India Act, while the Telia had already reached theirs. His Lordship 
accepted the contention of the defence pleader and acquitted the accused. 

VII 

(Extract from the ‘Indian Daily Mail’, 1936) 

Annaji Ramchandra (Chitpavan Brahmin) was found wandering in the streets 
of Poona with a long knife attacking whomsoever he met. When brought up 
before the Magistrate he was shown by the police to have been recently let off 
from the Mental Hospital. The Superintendent of the Hospital in his evidence 
said that Annaji had been in the hospital as a dangerous insane for three years, 
but as there was the quota for the Chitpavanas and as the inmates belonging 
to other communities had not finished their year-quotas he could not keep 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


229 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 229 

man available. Nobody will have any quarrel with the abstract 
principle that nothing should be done whereby the best shall 
be superseded by one who is only better and the better by one 
who is merely good and the good by one who is bad. But the 
argument completely fails to carry conviction when in practice 
one finds that having regard to the historical circumstances 
of India every time the ‘best man’ is chosen he turns out 
to be a man from the governing class. This may be alright 
from the point of view of the governing class. But can it be 
alright from the point of view of the servile class ? Could ‘best’ 
German be the ‘best’ for the French ? Could the ‘best’ Turk 
be ‘best’ for the Greeks ? Could the ‘best’ Pole be regarded 

him any longer and show any special favouritism to the Chitpavans and he 
had therefore let him off according to Government Order No. ... in the Medical 
Department. The Magistrate ordered Annaji to be discharged. 

VIII 

( Extract from the Report of the Administration of Jails in the Bombay 
Presidency, 1937) 

In spite of every precaution the numbers in the jails did not correspond to 
the quotas fixed for each community. The Superintendent had already asked for 
instructions from Government with a view to remedying the discrepancy. 

Resolution of Government: Government view with serious displeasure this grave 
dereliction of duty on the part of the I.G. of prisons. Immediate steps should be 
taken to arrest and put in jail as many members of the various communities 
as are required to bring their quotas up to the proper level. If enough persons 
required cannot be caught, a sufficient number of inmates should be let off to 
bring down all to the same level. 

IX 

( Proceedings of the Legislative Council, 1940) 

Mr. Chennappa asked: Has the attention of Government been called to the 
fact that class list of the recent M.A. Examination in Pali do not show the proper 
quota for mang-garudis ? 

The Hon. Mr. Damu Shroff (Minister of Education) : The University Registrar 
reports that no candidate from among Mang-garudis offered himself for examination. 

Mr. Chennappa : Will Government be pleased to stop this examination until 
such a candidate offers himself and if the University disobeys the order of 
Government to take away the University grant and amend the University Act ? 

The Hon. Member: Government will be pleased to consider the suggestion 
favourably. (Cheers). 

X 

( Extract from ‘ The Times of India,’ 1942) 

The Coroner Mr was suddenly called last evening to inquire into the 

death of Ramji Sonu at the J.J. Hospital as the result of a surgical operation. 
Dr. Tanu Pandav (Caste Barber) deposed that he had conducted the operation. 
He wished to open an abscess in the abdomen but his knife pierced the heart 
and the patient expired. Asked whether he had ever carried out any operation 
of this nature before, he said that he was appointed as the principal surgeon to 
the hospital only one day before as it was then the turn of his community and 
that he had never held a surgical instrument in his hand before except a razor 
for shaving. The jury returned a verdict of death by misadventure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


230 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

230 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘best’ by the Jews ? There can hardly be any doubt as to the 
correct answer to these questions. Class qualifications can 
never be ignored. Man is not a mere machine. He is a human 
being with feelings of sympathy for some and antipathy for 
others. This is even true of the ‘best’ man. He too is charged 
with the feelings of class sympathies and class antipathies. 
Having regard to these considerations the ‘best’ man from the 
governing class may well turn out to be the worst from the 
point of view of the servile classes. The difference between 
the governing classes and the servile classes in the matter of 
their attitudes towards each other is the same as the attitude 
a person of one nation has for that of another nation. Persons 
of the governing class in parodying the demands of the servile 
classes seem to forget that the difference between the governing 
class and the servile class in India is of the same nature as 
the difference between French and Germans, Turks and Greeks 
or Poles and Jews and the reasons why one will not tolerate 
the government of the other although it may be of the ‘best’ 
men are the same in both cases. 

The governing class in their attempt to ridicule the demand 
also forget by what means it has built up their power. Let 
them refer to their own Manu Smriti and they will find that 
the ways they got their power were very much the same as the 
imaginary resolutions suggested by Dr. Paranjpe. A reference to 
Manu Smriti will show that the view that Brahmins, the chief 
and the leading element in the governing class, acquired their 
political power not by force of intellect — intellect is nobody’s 
monopoly — but by sheer communalism. According to the Laws 
Manu Smriti the post of the Purohit, King’s Chaplain and 
Lord Chancellor, the posts of the Chief Justice and Judges 
of the High Court and the posts of Ministers to the Crown 
were all reserved for the Brahmins. Even for the post of the 
Commander-in-Chief the Brahmin was recommended as a 
fit and a proper person though it was not in terms reserved 
for him. All the strategic posts having been reserved for the 
Brahmins it goes without saying that all ministerial posts 
came to be reserved for the Brahmins. This is not all. The 
Brahmin was not content with reserving places of profit 
and power for his class. He knew that mere reservation will 
not do. He must prevent rivals shooting up from other non- 
Brahmin communities equally qualified to hold the posts 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


231 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 231 

and agitate and blow up the system of reservations. In addition 
to reserving all executive posts in the State for Brahmins a 
law was made whereby education was made the monopoly and 
privilege of Brahmins. As has already been pointed out the law 
made it a crime for the Shudra, i.e. the lower orders of Hindu 
Society to acquire learning, the infringement of which was 
followed by not only heavy but cruel and inhuman punishment 
such as cutting the tongue of the criminal and filling his ear 
with hot molten lead. Congressmen cannot escape by saying 
that these privileges no longer exist. They must admit that 
while the privileges have gone the advantages derived from 
their continuance over several centuries have remained. Nor 
can Congressmen honestly turn down the demands of the 
servile classes as Communalism knowing full well that a worst 
form of communalism had been the recognized means adopted 
by the Brahmins for acquiring power and that if the servile 
classes are to-day driven to ask for safeguards it is because 
the Brahmins in order to maintain their privileges passed 
laws which made it a crime for them to acquire learning 
or property. Surely what the servile classes are demanding 
is not half so bad as was done by the Brahmins for their 
own aggrandisement and for the perpetuation of their own 
domination. 

In the light of what has been said, it will be found that 
the Fight for Freedom led by the governing class is, from the 
point of view of the servile classes, a selfish, if not a sham, 
struggle. The freedom which the governing class in India is 
struggling for is freedom to rule the servile classes. What it 
wants is the freedom for the master race to rule the subject 
race which is nothing but the Nazi or Nietchian doctrine of 
freedom for superman to rule the common man. 

VIII 

The foreigner who wishes to know the what and wherefor 
of Indian politics and desires to make a contribution to the 
solution of the problems arising out of it must know the basic 
considerations which he behind Indian politics. If he fails to 
have a full grasp of them he is bound to be at sea and cannot 
but be the sport of a party which may happen to capture him 
or captivate him. These basic considerations of Indian politics 
are : (1) The philosophy and outlook of the governing class in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


232 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

232 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

relation to the servile classes (2) The relation of the governing 
class to the Congress and (3) The raison d’etre of the political 
demands of the servile classes for constitutional safeguards. 

Regarding the first enough has been said to enable 
the foreigner to form his own opinion. The thesis I have 
endeavoured to present and to support with facts and 
arguments may be simply stated. It maintains that the only 
way to ensure that a sovereign and independent India will 
be a different India in which there will be no servile class 
doing duty to the governing class, is to frame a constitution 
which will by proper safeguards, circumscribe the power of 
the governing class to capture government and to put a limit 
upon its predatory powers. This is what the Untouchables 
are urging and this is what the Congress is opposing. The 
whole controversy between the Congress and the Untouchables 
centres round the question of constitutional safeguards. The 
issue is : Is the constitution of India to be with safeguards or 
without safeguards for the Scheduled Castes? The foreigner 
does not realize this to be the issue nor does he realize 
that the alleged representative character of the Congress 
is absolutely irrelevant to the issue. The Congress may be 
a representative body but that has nothing to do with the 
decision of the issue, whether the constitution of India should 
or should not contain any safeguards for the Scheduled Castes. 
For the decision of this issue, the representative character of 
the Congress is beside the point. The decision can rest only 
on the basis of needs and the question that will be relevant 
is: Do the Scheduled Castes need the safeguards they have 
been asking for? The foreigner is not justified in supporting 
the Congress as against the Scheduled Castes on the ground 
that the Congress is a representative body. The foreigner is, 
of course, justified in asking the Scheduled Castes to prove 
their case for safeguards. He is even justified in saying that 
the existence of a governing class is not enough and that 
they must further prove something that the governing class 
in India is so vile, so wicked, so entrenched that it will not 
yield to the forces of adult suffrage. Such a stand it is proper 
to take and the Scheduled Classes are prepared to face it. 
For, beyond doubt, the governing class in India does occupy 
a different position in India than it does in other countries of 
the world. In other countries, there is, at the most, a hyphen 
between the governing class and the rest. In India, there is a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


233 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 233 

bar between the two. A hyphen is only separation ; but a 
bar is a severance with interests and sympathies completely 
divided. In other countries, there is a continuous replenishment 
of the governing class by the incorporation of others who do 
not belong to it but who have reached the same elevation as 
the governing class. In India, the governing class is a close 
corporation in which nobody, not born in it, is admitted. This 
distinction is very important. In the case where the governing 
class is a close corporation, tradition, social philosophy and 
social outlook remain unbroken and the distinction between 
masters and slaves, between privileged and unprivileged 
continues hard in substance and fast in colour. On the other 
hand, where the governing class is not a close preserve, where 
there is social endosmosis between it and the rest, there is a 
mental assimilation which makes the governing class more 
flexible, its philosophy less anti-social. On realizing the truth 
behind these distinctions, a foreigner should be able to see that 
mere adult suffrage while it may suffice to hold the governing 
class in check in other countries, cannot have, in India, that 
effect and that consequently those parties in India like the 
Untouchables who are advocating additional safeguards in the 
constitution, are more worthy of Support for their anxiety to 
make free India safe for democracy, than the Congress which 
opposes such safeguards and which aims to place free India 
in the hands of a governing class. 

The facts bearing on the second consideration have also 
been fully set out. From these facts he should be able to see 
how intimate is the connection between the Congress and the 
governing class. They will explain why the governing class 
in India has placed itself in the vanguard of the Congress 
movement and why it strives to bring everybody within the 
Congress fold. To put it briefly the governing class is aware 
that a political campaign based on class ideology, class interests, 
class issues and class conflicts will toll its death knell. It 
knows that the most effective way of sidetracking the servile 
classes and fooling them is to play upon the sentiment of 
nationalism and national unity and realizes that the Congress 
platform is the only platform that can most effectively 
safeguard the interest of the governing class. For if there is 
any platform from which all talk of conflict between rich and 
poor, Brahmin and Non-Brahmin, landlord and tenant, creditor 
and debtor which does not suit the governing class, can be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


234 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

234 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

effectually banned it is the Congress platform which is not only 
bound to preach nationalism and national unity which is what 
the governing classes want and on which their safety entirely 
depends, but which prohibits any other ideology inconsistent with 
nationalism being preached from its platform. 

If these two considerations are grasped, the foreigner will not 
find it difficult to understand the third namely the raison d’etre 
of the political demands of the servile classes. 

The reservations demanded by the servile classes are really 
controls over the power of the governing classes. Even in European 
countries there is a demand for controls over the powers of certain 
classes of society. There is control on producers, distributors, 
money-lenders and landlords. If the necessity for controls over 
the power of certain classes is admitted in countries where there 
is much greater degree of homogeneity and identity of interests 
than there exists in India, a foreigner should not find it difficult 
to appreciate. The reservations do no more than correlate the 
constitution to the social institutions of the country in order to 
prevent political power to fall into the hands of the Governing 
class. 

After so much of explanation of facts and arguments I do 
not think it will be difficult for the foreigner at least to believe 
that there is another side to the Congress propaganda, if he is 
not prepared to agree with the point of view herein presented. 
It would indeed be a sad commentary on the character and 
intelligence of a foreigner who even after his having gone through 
the facts and figures given above was not able to cultivate a cool 
and a dispassionate attitude towards those who do not share the 
Congress point of view. 


IX 

There is a tragic side to the foreigner’s view of Indian 
politics to which it is impossible not to make a reference. The 
foreigners who take interest in Indian politics fall into three 
groups. The first group is aware of the social cleavages which 
rend Indian politics, cleavages of majorities and minorities, 
Hindus and Untouchables and so on. Their main object is not to 
solve these cleavages by appropriate constitutional safeguards 
and to open the way to constitutional advancement of India 
but to use these cleavages to block constitutional progress. 
The second group of foreigners are those who pay no attention 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


235 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 235 

to the cleavages, who care a button what happens to the 
minorities and to the Untouchables. They are out to support the 
Congress demand and would fulfil it without bothering about 
safeguards. The third group consists of tourists who come ‘to 
do’ India and learn about its politics if possible overnight. All 
three are dangerous people. But the third group is the most 
dangerous from the point of view of the ultimate interest of 
the Indian people. 

That there should be foreigners of the tourist sort who 
cannot understand the intricacies of Indian politics and who 
therefore support the Congress on no other ground except 
that which Mr. Pickwick gave to Sam Weller — to shout with 
the biggest crowd — is quite understandable. But what annoys 
most is the attitude of the leaders of the British Labour Party, 
heads of radical and leftist groups in Europe and America, 
represented by men like Laski, Kingsley Martin, Brailsford and 
editors of journals like the Nation in America, and the New 
Statesman in England championing the cause of the oppressed 
and the suppressed people. How can these men support the 
Congress passes one’s comprehension. Do they not know that 
the Congress means the governing class and that the governing 
class means the Congress : Do they not know that the governing 
class in India is a Brahmin-Bania combine ? That masses are 
drawn in the Congress only to be camp followers with no say 
in the making of Congress policy ? Do they not realize that 
for the reasons for which the Sultan could not abolish Islam 
or the Pope could not repudiate Catholicism, the governing 
class in India will not decree the destruction of Brahmanism 
and that so long as the governing class remains what it is, 
Brahmanism which preaches the supremacy of Brahmans 
and the allied castes and which recognises the suppression 
and degradation of the Shudras and the Untouchables as the 
sacred duty of the State will continue to be the philosophy 
of the State even if India became free ? Do they not know 
that this governing class in India is not a part of the Indian 
people, is not only completely isolated from them, but believes 
in isolating itself, lest it should be contaminated by them, has 
implanted in its mind by reason of the Brahmanic philosophy, 
motives and interests which are hostile to those who are outside 
its fold and therefore does not sympathise with the living 
forces operating in the servile masses whom it has trodden 
down, is not. charged with their wants, their pains, their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


236 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

236 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cravings, their desires, is inimical to their aspirations, does 
not favour any advance in their education, promotion to high 
office and disfavours every movement calculated to raise 
their dignity and their self-respect ? Do they not know that 
in the Swaraj of India is involved the fate of 60 millions of 
Untouchables ? It would be impossible to say that the leaders of 
the British Labour Party, that Kingsley Martin, Brailsford and 
Laski whose writings on liberty and democracy are a source 
of inspiration to all suppressed people, do not know these 
facts. Yet if they refer to India, it is always to support the 
Congress. It is very, very seldom that they are found to discuss 
the problem of the Untouchables which ought to make the 
strongest appeal to all radicals and democrats. Their exclusive 
attention to Congress activities and their utter neglect of other 
elements in the national life of India shows how misguided 
they have been. One could well understand their support 
to the Congress if the Congress was fighting for political 
democracy. But is it ? As every one knows, the Congress is 
only fighting for national liberty and is not interested in 
political democracy. The party in India who is fighting for 
political democracy is the party of the Untouchables who fear 
that this Congress fight for liberty, if it succeeds, will mean 
liberty to the strong and the powerful to suppress the weak and 
the down-trodden unless they are protected by constitutional 
safeguards. It is they who ought to receive the help of these 
radical leaders. But the Untouchables have been waiting in 
vain for all these years even for a gesture of good-will and 
support from them. These radicals and leftists in Europe 
and America have not even cared to know the forces behind 
the Congress. Ignorant or unmindful one does not know, but 
the fact remains that these leftists and radical leaders have 
been giving blind and unquestioning support to the Congress 
which admittedly is run by capitalists, landlords, money- 
lenders and reactionaries, only because the Congress calls its 
activities by the grandiloquent name of “Fight for Freedom.” 
All battles for freedom are not on equal moral plane for the 
simple reason that the motives and purposes behind these 
battles of freedom are not always the same. To take only a 
few illustrations from English History. The Barons’ Rebellion 
against John which resulted in the Magna Charta could be 
called a battle for freedom. But could any democrat in modern 
times give it the same support which he would give — say to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


237 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNERS 237 

Levellers’ Rebellion or to the Peasant’s Revolt in English 
History, merely because it could logically be described as a 
battle for freedom ? To do so will be to respond to a false cry 
of freedom. Such crude conduct would have been forgivable, 
had it proceeded from groups not intelligent enough to make 
a distinction between freedom to live and freedom to oppress. 
But it is quite inexcusable in radical and leftist groups led by 
Messrs. Laski, Kingsley Martin, Brailsford, Louis Fisher and 
other well-known champions of democracy. When pressed to 
explain why they don’t support Indian Parties which stand 
for true democracy, they are reported to meet the charge by a 
counter question. Are there any such parties in India ? Insist 
that there are such parties and they turn round and say : if 
such parties exist, how is it the Press does not report their 
activities ? When told that the Press is a Congress Press, 
they retort : how is it that the foreign correspondents of the 
English Papers do not report them ? I have shown why nothing 
better can be expected from these foreign correspondents. 
The Foreign Press Agency in India is no better than the 
Indian Press. Indeed it cannot be better. There are in India 
what are called foreign correspondents. In a large majority of 
cases they are Indians. Only a very few are foreigners. The 
selection of Indians as foreign correspondents is so made that 
they are almost always from the Congress camp. The foreign 
correspondents who are foreigners fall into two groups. If 
they are Americans they are just Anti-British and for that 
reason pro- Congress. Any political party in India which is 
not madly Anti-British does not interest them. Those who are 
not in the Congress will testify how hard it was for them to 
persuade the American War Correspondents who trooped into 
this country in 1941-42, even to entertain the possibility of 
the Congress not being the only party, much less to induce 
them to interest themselves in other political parties. It took 
a long time before they recovered their sanity and when they 
did, they either abused the Congress as an organization led 
by impossible men or just lost interest in Indian politics. 
They never got interested in other political parties in India 
and never cared to understand their point of view. The 
situation is no better in the case of foreign correspondents 
who are Britishers. They too are interested only in that kind 
of politics which is first and foremost Anti- British. They are 
uninterested in those political parties in India whose foremost 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


238 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

238 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

concern is to make a free India safe for democracy. The result is 
that the foreign press provides the same kind of news about Indian 
politics as does the Indian Press. These reasons cannot be beyond 
the ken of these radicals. Correspondents or no correspondents, 
is it not the duty of radicals to keep in touch with their kindred 
in other parts of the world to encourage them, to help them 
and to see that true democracy lives everywhere ? It is a most 
unfortunate thing that the Radicals of England and America 
should have forgotten the class to whom they owe a duty to help 
and have become the publicity agents of Indian Tories who are 
just misusing the slogan of liberty to befool and befog the world. 

The sooner they get out of this fog created by the Congress 
and realize that democracy and self-government in India cannot 
be real unless freedom has become the assured possession of all, 
the better for them and the better for the people of India. But if 
they persist in giving their blind support to the Congress on the 
basis of an empty slogan without examining its relation to facts 
and intentions, I for one will have no hesitation in saying that 
far from being the friends of India they are a positive menace 
to the freedom of the Indian masses. It is a pity that they do 
not seem to distinguish the case of a tyrant who is held down 
and who pleads for liberty because he wants to regain his right 
to oppress and the case of an oppressed class seeking to be 
free from the oppression of the tyrant. In their hurry to bring 
freedom to India they have no time to realize that by siding with 
the Congress what they are doing is not to make India safe for 
democracy but to free the tyrant to practise his tyrannies. Is it 
necessary to tell them that to support Congress is to let tyranny 
have freedom to enslave ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


239 


CHAPTER X 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY? 

Beware of Mr. Gandhi 

Congressmen never hesitate to impress upon the 
Untouchables that Mr. Gandhi is their saviour. Not only do 
Congressmen all over India hold out Mr. Gandhi as a real 
saviour but they go forth to persuade the Untouchables to 
accept the fact that he is their only saviour. When pressed 
for evidence, they tell the Untouchables that if any one 
ever took a vow to go on a fast unto death for the sake of 
the Untouchables it was Mr. Gandhi and none else. Indeed, 
without any compunction they tell the Untouchables that 
whatever political rights the Untouchables have got under 
the Poona Pact, they are the result of Mr. Gandhi’s efforts. 
As an illustration of such propaganda I refer to what one Rai 
Bahadur Mehrchand Khanna is reported 1 to have said at a 
meeting of the Untouchables held at Peshawar on April 12, 
1945 under the auspices of the Depressed Classes League : 

“Your best friend is Mahatma Gandhi who even resorted 
to a fast for your sake and brought about the Poona 
act under which you have been enfranchised and given 
representation on local bodies and legislatures. Some of 
you, I know, have been running after Dr. Ambedkar, who 
is just a creation of the British Imperialists and who uses 
you to strengthen the hands of the British Government 
in order that India may be divided and the Britishers 
continue to retain power. I appeal to you in your interests, 
to distinguish between self-styled leaders and your real 
friends.” 

If I refer to the statement of Rai Bahadur Mehrchand 
Khanna it is not because he is worth taking notice of. For 
there cannot be any one guilty of bigger blackguardism in 
Indian politics than this man. In the course of one year — not 
in very remote time but in 1944 — he successfully played three 
different roles. He started as Secretary of the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, turned agent of British Imperialism, went abroad to 
explain India’s war effort to the British and American people 
and is now agent of the Congress in N.W.F. Province. The 
1 Free Press Journal, dated, 14-4-45, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


240 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

240 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

opinion of a man like Rai Bahadur Khanna, who, to use 
Dryden’s language, is so various as to be everything by starts, 
and nothing long, and who in the course of one revolving moon, 
can be a chemist, fiddler, statesman, and buffoon, must be 
beneath contempt. If I refer to him it is only because I wish 
to illustrate what sort of propaganda 1 friends of Mr. Gandhi 
are carrying on in order to beguile the Untouchables. 

I do not know how many Untouchables will be found 
prepared to swallow such a lie. But this much I think has 
been proved by the Nazis that if a lie is a big lie — too big 
for the common man’s intelligence to scrutinize — and if it is 
repeated continuously, the lie has all the chances of being 
accepted as truth and if not accepted as truth has all the 
chances of growing upon the victims of propaganda and 
win their acquiescence. It is, therefore, necessary for me 
to expose the part played by Mr. Gandhi in the movement 
of the Untouchables and to warn the Untouchables against 
succumbing to this propaganda. 

I 

In making a survey of the part played by Mr. Gandhi it 
is well to begin by ascertaining when Mr. Gandhi for the 
first time realized that Untouchability was an evil. On this 
point, we have the direct testimony of Mr. Gandhi himself. In 
an address delivered as President of the Suppressed Classes 
Conference, held at Ahmedabad on the 14th and 15th April 
1921, Mr. Gandhi said : — 

“I was hardly yet twelve when this idea had dawned 
on me. A scavenger named Ukha, an Untouchable, used 
to attend our house for cleaning latrines. Often I would 
ask my mother why it was wrong to touch him, why I 
was forbidden to touch him. If I accidentally touched 
Ukha, I was asked to perform ablutions, and though I 
naturally obeyed, it was not without smilingly protesting 
that untouchability was not sanctioned by religion, that it 
was impossible that it should be so. I was a very dutiful 
and obedient child and so far as it was consistent with 
respect for parents. I often had tussles with them on 

1 Another illustration of such propaganda is that carried on by one Parsi 
gentleman by name Prof. A. R. Wadia. The views of Prof. Wadia have been 
critically examined and exposed by Mr. E. J. Sanjanna in a series of articles in 
the Rast-Rahabar — a Gujarathi Weekly published in Bombay from 29th October 
1944 to 15th April 1945 under the heading of “Sense aad Nonsense in Politics.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


241 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 

this matter. I told my mother that she was entirely wrong 
in considering physical contact with Ukha as sinful. 

“While at school I would often happen to touch the 
‘Untouchables’ and as I never would conceal the fact from 
my parents, my mother would tell me that the shortest cut 
to purification after the unholy touch was to cancel the touch 
by touching any Musalman passing by. And simply out of 
reverence and regard for my mother I often did so, but never 
did so believing it to be a religious obligation. After some time 
we shifted to Porebandar, where I made my first acquaintance 
with Sanskrit. I was not yet put to an English School, and 
my brother and I were placed in charge of a Brahmin, who 
taught us Ram Raksha and Vishnu Punjar. The texts ‘Jale 
Vishnuh’ ‘Sthale Vishnuh’ (there is he Lord (present) in water, 
there is the Lord (present) in earth, have never gone out of 
my memory. A motherly old dame used to live close by. Now 
it happened that I was very timid then, and would conjure 
up ghosts and goblins whenever the lights went out, and it 
was dark. The old mother, to disabuse me of fears, suggested 
that I should mutter the Ramraksha texts whenever I was 
afraid, and all evil spirits would fly away. This I did and, 
as I thought with good effect. I could never believe then 
that there was any text in the Ramraksha pointing to the 
contact of the ‘untouchables’ as a sin. I did not understand 
its meaning then, or understood it very imperfectly. But I 
was confident that Ramraksha which could destroy all fear 
of ghosts, could not be countenancing any such thing as fear 
of contact with the ‘untouchables.’ 

“The Ramayana used to be regularly read in our family. 
A Brahmin called Ladha Maharaj used to read it. He was 
stricken with leprosy, and he was confident that a regular 
reading of the Ramayana would cure him of leprosy, and 
indeed, he was cured of it. ‘How can the Ramayana,’ I 
thought to myself ‘in which one is regarded nowadays as 
an ‘untouchable,’ took Rama across the Ganges in his boat, 
countenance the idea of any human beings being ‘untouchables’ 
on the ground that they were polluted souls ? The fact that 
we addressed God as the ‘purifier of the polluted’ and by 
similar appellations, shows that it is a sin to regard any 
one born in Hinduism as polluted or untouchable — that it is 
satanic to do so. I have hence been never tired of repeating 
that it is a great sin. I do not pretend that this thing had 
crystallised as a conviction in me at the age of twelve, but 
I do say that I did then regard untouchability as a sin. I 
narrate this story for the information of the Vaishnavas and 
orthodox Hindus,” 


241 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


242 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

242 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is no doubt very interesting to know that in that age 
of blind orthodoxy Mr. Gandhi should have become aware 
that Untouchability was a sin and that too at so early an 
age as 12. What the Untouchables, however, want to know 
is what did Mr. Gandhi do to remove the evil. I give below 
an extract from a biographical note about Mr. Gandhi by the 
publishers, Tagore & Co., of Madras to their volume called 
Young India, issued in 1922, to show the principal activities, 
which Mr. Gandhi launched since the time he started his 
public career. This is what the note says : — 

“Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born on October 
5, 1869. Caste Bania ; son of Karamchand Gandhi, Dewan 
of Porebunder, Rajkote and some other Kathiawar States; 

He was educated at the Kathiawad High School, later 
at London University and the Inner Temple. On return 
from London was enrolled as advocate of the Bombay 
High Court. Went to Natal and thence to the Transvaal 
on a legal mission. Was enrolled as advocate of the Natal 
Supreme Court. Decided to remain there. Founded the 
Natal Indian Congress, 1894. Returned to India, 1895. 
Agitation in India on behalf of the Natal and Transvaal 
Indians. Return to Durban. On landing attacked by the 
mob and narrowly escaped death; led an Indian Ambulance 
Corps in the Anglo-Boer War 1899 ; Returned to India in 
1901 to recoup his health. Again returned to South Africa 
to lead the Indian deputation to place the Indian view of 
the South African Indian trouble before Mr. Chamberlain. 
Enrolled as attorney of the Supreme Court of Transvaal and 
founded the Transvaal British Indian Association and was 
its Honorary Secretary and Principal legal adviser. Founded 
the Indian Opinion in 1903 and the “Phoenix” Settlement. 

Led a Stretcher Bearer Corps in the native rebellion 
in 1906; Agitation against the Anti-Asiat e Act 1906 ; 
Deputation to England for the repeal of the Act; Passive 
Resistance movement begun against the Act; Negotiations 
between General Smuts and Mr. Gandhi and compromise. 
Smuts later denying the promise of repeal of the law, and 
again commenced passive resistance. Imprisoned twice 
for breaking the law. Again went to England in 1909 to 
lay the Indian case before the British public ; Provisional 
Settlement in 1911 Mr. Gokhale’s visit to South Africa. On 
the Government declining to fulfil the settlement of 1911 
organized a revival of the passive resistance movement. 
Final settlement in 1914. Visit to England ; Raised an 
Indian Ambulance Corps in 1914.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


243 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 243 

From this biographical note, it is clear that Mr. Gandhi 
began his public life in 1894 when he founded the Natal Indian 
Congress. From 1894 to 1915, he was in South Africa. During 
this period, he never thought of the Untouchables and never even 
inquired after Ukha. 

Mr. Gandhi returned to India in 1915. Did he then take up 
the cause of the Untouchables ? Let me again quote from the 
same biographical note which says : — 

“Returned to India 1915; Founded the Satyagrah 
Ashram at Ahmedabad. Took part in the Settlement of the 
Champaran Labour troubles in 1917 and Kaira famine and 
Ahmedabad mill strike, 1918 ; Recruiting Campaign 1918 ; 
Agitation against the Rowlatt Act and the inauguration of 
the Satyagraha movement, 1919; Arrested at Kosi on his 
way to Delhi and sent back to Bombay ; Punjab disorders 
and the official atrocities 1919 ; Was member of the Congress 
Committee of Enquiry into the Punjab atrocities ; Took part in 
the Khilafat Agitation. Inauguration of the Non-Co-operation 
campaign, 1920; Interview with Lord Reading May 1921 ; 
appointed sole executive authority of the Congress in 1921 
Session of the Congress; Civil Disobedience Programme, 
February 1922; Suspension of Civil Disobedience campaign 
on account of Chauri Chaura riots, February 1922; Arrested 
on March 10, 1922 tried and sentenced to six years simple 
imprisonment.” 

This note is obviously incorrect. It omits some very significant 
and quite well-known events in the life of Mr. Gandhi. To make 
it complete, the following items must be added : — 

“1919 declared readiness to. welcome Afghan invasion 
of India to Free India from British Imperialism ; 1920 put 
before the country the Bardoli Programme of Constructive 
work ; 1921 started Tilak Swaraj Fund and collected one 
crore and 25 lakhs to be used for preparing the country for 
winning swaraj.” 

In these five years, Mr. Gandhi was completely absorbed in 
transforming the Congress into a militant organization — a war 
machine fit to fight and shake British Imperialism. He took up 
the cause of the Khilafat with a view to bring the Muslims to 
join the Congress and did his level best to rally the Hindus for 
the support of the Khilafat. 

What did Mr. Gandhi do for the Untouchables during 
this period ? Congressmen will of course refer to the Bardoli 
Programme. It is true that in the Bardoli Programme the 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 244 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

244 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

uplift of the Untouchables was an item. But what is important 
is to know what happened to it ? To tell the story in a 
summary 1 form the Bardoli Programme was not a programme 
for the removal of Untouchability. It was a programme of 
amelioration which was defined by Disraeli as a combination 
of ancient institutions and modern improvements. The 
programme, openly recognized Untouchability and planned 
to do no more than provide separate wells and separate 
schools for the Untouchables. The Sub-Committee appointed 
to draw up a programme for the uplift of the Untouchables 
consisted of persons, who had never shown any interest in 
the Untouchables and some of them were even hostile to 
them. Swami Shraddhanand, the one and only person in 
the Sub-Committee who can be said to be charged with the 
desire to do something substantial for the Untouchables, 
was forced to resign. A paltry sum of money was allotted for 
carrying on the work of the Committee. The Committee was 
dissolved without meeting even once. The work of the uplift 
of the Untouchables was declared to be a work best suited 
to the Hindu Mahasabha. Mr. Gandhi took no interest in 
that part of the Bardoli Programme, which related to the 
Untouchables. On the contrary instead of siding with Swami 
Shraddhanand he sided with the reactionaries and opponents 
of Swami Shraddhanand, knowing full well that they did not 
want anything on a big scale done for the Untouchables. 

So much for what Mr. Gandhi did in 1921 in connection 
with the Bardoli Programme. 

What did Mr. Gandhi do after 1922 ? The publication from 
which the previous extract from the biographical note was 
taken is dated 1922. It is necessary to make the following 
additions to bring the biographical note up to date : — 

“1924 was released from prison; Forged a compromise 
between the two wings of the Congress who in his 
absence were fighting over the issue of Council Entry 
versus Constructive programme; 1929 proclaimed complete 
independence as the political goal of India ; 1930 launched 
Civil Disobedience movement ; 1931 went to London 
to represent Congress at the Round Table Conference. 
1932 was imprisoned. Declared fast unto death against 
the Communal Award of His Majesty’s Government and 
saved his life agreeing to the Poona Pact 1933 planned 
a campaign in favour of temple-entry for Untouch- 


For details see Chapter II. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


245 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 245 

ables and established the Harijan Sevak Sangh; 1934 ceased 
to be a member of the Congress; 1942 planned ‘Quit India’ 
movement and was imprisoned ; 1934 went on fast and was 
released; 1944 engaged in correspondence with Lord Wavell 
and in issuing statements explaining away the 8th August 
1942 Resolution ; 1945 occupied with Kasturba Fund.” 

The year 1924 gave Mr. Gandhi another opportunity to 
push forth his campaign, for the removal of Untouchability 
and make it effective. What did Mr. Gandhi do ? 

The years between 1922 and 1944 have a special significance 
in the history of Congress politics. The Programme of non- 
cooperation was accepted by the Congress at a special session 
held in Calcutta in September 1920. The programme included 
the well known five boycotts : the boycott of the Legislature, 
boycott of foreign cloth, etc. The resolution on non-cooperation 
was opposed by the leaders of the intellectual classes, namely 
Bepin Chandra Pal, C. R. Das, Lala Lajpat Rai to mention 
only a few names, but was passed notwithstanding their 
opposition. The regular Annual Session of the Congress was 
held in Nagpur in December 1920. The resolution on non-co- 
operation again came up for discussion. Strange as it may 
seem the same resolution was moved by Mr. C. R. Das 1 and 
seconded by Lala Lajpat Rai and confirmed. The result was 
that 1921 saw non-co-operation galore. On 19th March 1922, 
Mr. Gandhi was tried for sedition and sentenced to six years’ 
imprisonment. Immediately Mr. Gandhi was put behind the 
prison bars, Mr. C. R. Das seems to have recovered his balance 
and started a campaign to lift the boycott of the Legislature, 
In this he was joined by Vithalbhai Patel, Pandit Motilal 
Nehru and Pandit Malaviya. This move was opposed by the 
followers of Mr. Gandhi, who were not prepared to abate a 
jot or a tittle from the terms of the resolution on non-co- 
operation passed in Calcutta and confirmed in Nagpur. This 
led to a schism in the Congress. In 1924, Mr. Gandhi on 
account of his illness was released from gaol, before his time. 
When he came out, Mr. Gandhi found that the Congress was 
divided into two warring camps on the issue of the boycott 

1 This is notwithstanding the fact reported by Mr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, the 
Official Historian of the Congress namely that: — 

“Mr. C. B. Das brought a contingent of about 250 delegates from East Bengal 
and Assam, bore their expenses to and fro, and spent Rs. 36,000 from his pocket 
to undo what was done in Calcutta. There was even a small fight between his 
men and those of Jitendralal Banerjee, his opponent.” 

The History of the Congress, p. 347. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


246 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

246 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the Legislature. The quarrel was a bitter one and both sides 
were engaged in slinging mud at each other. Mr. Gandhi knew 
that if the quarrel continued the Congress would be weakened 
and wanted to patch it up. Neither side was prepared to give 
in. There were statements and counter-statements. Ultimately, 
Mr. Gandhi made certain proposals for restoring peace 
between the two wings which were accepted by both sides. The 
proposals were intended to please both sides. To please the 
protagonists of Council Entry he proposed that the Congress 
should recognize entry in the Legislatures as legitimate part 
of Congress activity and the opponents of Council Entry should 
stop their propaganda against it. To please the opponents of 
Council -Entry he proposed that the Congress should accept 
a new basis for franchise namely : (i) the Congress franchise 
instead of being 4 annas per annum should be a tender of 
2,000 yards of hand-spun and self-spun yarn with the penalty 
clause attached to it by which any default in this behalf would 
automatically, disqualify a person from being a member of 
the Congress and that ( ii ) the observance of five boycotts, of 
foreign cloth, Government Law Courts, schools and colleges, 
and of titles should be deemed as a qualification for a post 
within the Congress organization and any person who did not 
believe in the principle of boycott and who did not carry them 
out in his own person must be deemed to be disqualified as 
a candidate. 

Here was an opportunity for Mr. Gandhi to advance his 
anti-Untouchability campaign. He could have proposed that if 
a Hindu wishes to enroll himself as a member of the Congress 
he should prove that he does not observe untouchability and 
that the employment of an Untouchable in his household 
should be adduced in support of his claim in this behalf and 
that no other evidence would be allowed to be tendered. Such 
a proposal could not have been impracticable for almost every 
Hindu, certainly those who call themselves high Caste Hindus, 
keeps more than one servant in, his household. If Mr. Gandhi 
could make the Hindu accept spinning and boycott as franchises 
for membership of the Congress he could also make acceptable 
the employment of an Untouchable in a Hindu household a 
franchise for membership of the Congress. But Mr. Gandhi 
did not do it. 

After 1924 till 1930 there is a complete blank. Mr. Gandhi 
does not appear to have taken any active steps for the removal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


247 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 247 

of Untouchability or got himself interested in any activity 
beneficial to the Untouchables during this period. While 
Mr. Gandhi was inactive the Untouchables had started a 
movement called the satyagraha movement. The object of the 
movement was to establish their right to take water from public 
wells and public temples. The satyagraha at the Chowdar 
Tank situated in Mahad, a town in the Kolaba District of the 
Bombay Presidency, was organised to establish the right of 
the Untouchables to take water from public watering places. 
The satyagraha at the Kala Ram Temple situated in Nasik, 
a town in the Nasik District of the Bombay Presidency, was 
organised to establish the right of the Untouchables to enter 
Hindu temples. There were many minor satyagrahas. These 
were, however, the two principal ones over which the efforts 
of the Untouchables and their opponents, the Caste Hindus, 
were concentrated. The din and noise caused by them were 
heard all over India. Thousands of men and women from 
the Untouchables-took part in these satyagrahas. Both men 
and women belonging to the Untouchables were insulted 
and beaten by the Hindus. Many were injured and some 
were imprisoned by Government on the ground of causing 
breach of the peace. This satyagraha movement went on 
for full six years when it was brought to a close in 1935 at 
a Conference held in Yeola in Nasik District in which the 
Untouchables as a result of the adamantine attitude of the 
Hindus in refusing to give them equal social rights resolved 
to go out of the Hindu fold. This satyagraha movement was 
no doubt independent of the Congress. It was organised by 
the Untouchables, led by the Untouchables and financed by 
the Untouchables. Yet the Untouchables were not without 
hope of getting the moral support of Mr. Gandhi. Indeed 
they had very good ground for getting it. For the weapon of 
satyagraha — the essence of which is to melt the heart of the 
opponent by suffering — was the weapon which was forged 
by Mr. Gandhi, and who had led the Congress to practise it 
against the British Government for winning Swaraj. Naturally 
the Untouchables expected full support from Mr. Gandhi to 
their satyagraha against the Hindus the object of which was 
to establish then-right to take water from public wells and 
to enter public Hindu temples. Mr. Gandhi however did not 
give his support to the satyagraha. Not only did he not give 
his support, he condemned it in strong terms. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


248 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

248 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In this connection reference may be made to two novel 
weapons for redressing human wrongs. Mr. Gandhi claims 
exclusive credit for forging and perfecting them. First is 
satyagraha. Mr. Gandhi has put into action this weapon of 
satyagraha many a times against the British Government 
for the removal of political wrongs. But Mr. Gandhi has 
never used the weapon of satyagraha against Hindus to get 
them to throw open wells and temples to the Untouchables. 
Fasting is another weapon of Mr. Gandhi. It is said that there 
have been altogether 21 fasts to the credit of Mr. Gandhi. 
Some were for the sake of Hindu-Muslim unity and quite 
a number as atonements for the immoralities committed by 
the inmates of his Ashram. One was against the order of 
the Government of Bombay refusing to give the work of a 
scavenger in the gaol to a prisoner by name Mr. Patwardhan 
although he demanded it. In these 21 fasts there is not one 
undertaken for the removal of Untouehability. These are 
very significant facts. 

In 1930 came the Round Table Conference. Mr. Gandhi 
joined the deliberations of the Conference 1 in 1931. The 
Conference was concerned with a vital question of framing 
a constitution for a self-governing India. It was unanimously 
held that if India was to be a self-governing country then 
the government must be a government of the people, by 
the people and for the people. Everybody agreed that only 
when a government is in a real sense a government by the 
people that it could be a government of the people and for 
the people. The problem was how to make it a government 
by the people in a country rent into communities, majorities 
and minorities, who are charged not merely with social 
cleavages but also with social antagonisms. Having regard 
to these circumstances it was agreed that in India there was 
no possibility of government by the people unless Legislature 
and the Executive were framed on the basis of communal 
representation. 

The problem of the Untouchables loomed large at the 
Conference. It assumed a new aspect. The question was : 
Should the Untouchables be left as they were to the tender 
mercies of the Hindus or should they be given the means 
to protect themselves by extending to them the principle of 
communal representation? The Untouchables strongly objected 
to be left to the pleasure of the Hindus and demanded the same 
1 For details see Chapter III. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 11-2(10 249 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 249 

protection as was given to the other minorities. The contention 
of the Untouchables was accepted by all. It was just and 
logical. They contended that the chasm between the Hindus 
and Muslims, between Hindus and Sikhs, between Hindus and 
Christians is nothing as compared with the chasm between 
the Hindus and the Untouchables. It is the widest and the 
deepest. The chasm between the Hindus and the Muslims is 
religious and not social. That between the Hindus and the 
Untouchables is both religious and social. The antagonism 
arising out of the chasm existing between Hindus and Muslims 
cannot spell political disaster to the Muslims because the 
relationship between the Hindus and the Muslims is not that 
of master and slave. It is one of mere estrangement. On the 
other hand, the chasm between Hindus and the Untouchables 
must spell political disaster for the Untouchables because the 
relationship between the two is that of master and slave. The 
Untouchables contended that the attempts to close the gap 
between them and the Hindus by means of social process had 
been tried for ages. They had all failed. There was no hope of 
their success. Since power is being transferred into the hands 
of the Hindu majority they must have political safeguards of 
the same sort as, if not better, than those conceded to the 
Muslims and other minorities. 

Here was an opportunity to Mr. Gandhi to show his 
sympathy to the Untouchables by lending his support to their 
demand and thereby strengthen their power of resistance 
against the tyranny and oppression of the Hindus. Instead 
of showing his sympathy, Mr. Gandhi used every means in 
his power to defeat them. He made a pact with the Muslims 
with a view to isolate the Untouchables. Failing to win the 
Musalmans to his side, he went on a fast unto death to 
compel the British Government to withdraw their decision to 
give to the Untouchables the same political rights as given 
to the Muslims and other minority communities. When the 
fast failed and Mr. Gandhi was obliged to sign a pact — called 
the Poona Pact — which conceded the political demands of the 
Untouchables he took his revenge by letting the Congress 
employ foul electioneering tactics to make their political rights 
of no avail. 

In 1933, Mr. Gandhi took up two movements. First was 
the Temple-entry Movement. 1 He took personal responsibility 


For details see Chapter IV. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 1 1-2014 250 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

250 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for seeing through these two measures. One was the opening 
of the Guruvayur temple. The other was the passing of the 
Temple-entry Bill sponsored by Mr. Ranga Iyer in the Central 
Legislature. Mr. Gandhi said that he would fast unto death 
if the trustee of the Guruvayur temple did not throw it open 
to the Untouchables by a certain date. The Guruvayur temple 
still remains closed to the Untouchables but Mr. Gandhi has 
not fulfilled his vow of going on fast. Surprising as it may be 
he has done nothing to get the temple declared open to the 
Untouchables although it is now thirteen years since he took the 
vow. Mr. Gandhi virtually coerced the Governor-General to give 
his sanction to the introduction of the Temple-entry Bill. The 
Congress party in the Central Legislature which was pledged 
to carry through the Bill refused to support it when the stage 
of referring it to a Select Committee came on the ground that 
the Bill gave offence to the Hindus and in the election that 
was pending the Hindus would seek revenge on the Congress 
and defeat it at the poll if the Congress supported the Bill. To 
the great chagrin of Mr. Ranga Iyer, the Congress party let 
him down by leaving the Bill to die. Mr. Gandhi did not mind 
this. He even went to the length of justifying the conduct of 
the Congress Party. 

The other movement which Mr. Gandhi sponsored in 1933 
was the establishment of the Harijan Sevak Sangh 1 with a 
net- work of branches all over India. There were three motives 
which lay behind the organization of the Sangh. First was to 
prove that Hindus had enough charitable spirit towards the 
Untouchables and that they would show it by their generous 
contributions towards their uplift. The second motive was 
to serve the Untouchables by helping them in the many 
difficulties with which they were faced in their daily life. The 
third motive was to create in the minds of the Untouchables 
a sense of confidence in the Hindus from whom they were 
estranged in matters political. None of the three objects has 
been realized. In the first flush the Hindus contributed a total 
of about 8 lakhs of rupees for the Sangh which is of course 
nothing as compared to the crores they have contributed 
for general political purposes. After that they have gone 
dry. The Sangh is now depending for its finances either on 
Government grants or on the income derived from the sale of 
Mr. Gandhi’s autographs or on the munificence of some wealthy 


For details see Chapter V. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


251 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 251 

merchant who makes a contribution to the Sangh, not because 
he loves the Untouchables but because he thinks it profitable 
to please Mr. Gandhi. The branches of the Sangh are being 
closed every year. The Sangh is contracting and contracting 
so rapidly that very soon it will have only a centre and no 
circumference. That the Hindus have lost interest in the 
Sangh is not the only regrettable aspect of this activity of 
Mr. Gandhi. The Sangh has not been able to secure the 
good will and the co-operation of the Untouchables for whose 
benefit it is supposed to have been started. This is due 
to various reasons. The work of the Sangh is of the most 
inconsequential kind. It does not catch anyone’s imagination. 
It neglects most urgent purposes for which the Untouchables 
need help and assistance. The Sangh rigorously excludes 
the Untouchables from its management. The Untouchables 
are no more than beggars — mere recipients of charity. The 
result is that the Untouchables feel no concern for the Sangh. 
They look upon it as a foreign body set up by the Hindus 
with some ulterior motive. Here was an opportunity for 
Mr. Gandhi to make the Sangh a real bridge between the 
Hindus and the Untouchables. He could make it a virile 
institution by improving its programme of work and by 
allowing the Untouchables to participate in its working. Mr. 
Gandhi has done nothing of the kind. He has allowed the 
Sangh to languish. It is dying peacefully and may perish 
even during the life-time of Mr. Gandhi. 

There need be no surprise if this survey of Mr. Gandhi’s 
anti Untouchability campaign, of his sayings and his doings 
baffles and puzzles the reader. There need be no wonder if 
the reader were to pause and ask a few questions on the 
lines set out below to clear his own mind : 

(1) In 1921, Mr. Gandhi collected 1 crore and 35 lakhs 
of rupees for the Tilak Swaraj Fund. Mr. Gandhi insisted 
that there was no possibility of winning swaraj unless 
Untouchability was removed. Why did he not protest when 
only a paltry sum of Rs. 43,000 was. given to the cause of 
the Untouchables ? 

(2) In 1922 there was drawn up the Bardoli Programme 
of constructive work. Uplift of the Untouchables was an 
important item in it. A Committee was appointed to work 
out the details. The Committee never functioned and was 
dissolved and the uplift of the Untouchables as an item in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


252 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

252 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

constructive programme was dropped. Only Rs. 500 were allotted 
to the Committee for working expenses. Why did Mr. Gandhi 
not protest against this niggardly and step -motherly treatment 
of the Committee by the Congress Working Committee ? Why 
did not Mr. Gandhi support Swami Shradhanand who was 
fighting with the Congress Working Committee for large funds 
being assigned to the Committee ? Why did not Mr. Gandhi 
protest against the dissolution of the Committee ? Why did not 
Mr. Gandhi appoint another Committee ? Why did he allow the 
work for the Untouchables to drop out as though it was of no 
importance ? 

(3) Mr. Gandhi had at the very outset of his campaign 
for Swaraj insisted that there were five conditions precedent 
for winning swaraj : ( i ) Hindu-Moslem Unity; (ii) Removal 
of Untouchability; (Hi) Universal adoption of hand-spun and 
hand-woven khadi; (iv) absolute non-violence and (u) complete 
non-co-operation. Mr. Gandhi had not only laid down these 
conditions but had told Indians that without the fulfilment of 
these conditions there could be no Swaraj. In 1922, he fasted for 
the sake of Hindu-Moslem unity. In 1924, he made production of 
hand-spun yarn the basis of franchise for Congress membership. 
Why did he not make non-observance of Untouchability the 
basis of Congress franchise in 1924 or at any time subsequent 
thereto ? 

(4) Mr. Gandhi has gone on fast many a time to achieve a 
variety of objects which are dear to him. Why has Mr. Gandhi 
not fasted even once for the sake of the Untouchables ? 

(5) Mr. Gandhi has devised satyagraha as a weapon to redress 
wrongs and to win freedom and has practised it against the 
British Government. Why has not Mr. Gandhi started satyagraha 
even once against the Hindus on behalf of the Untouchables for 
securing admission to wells, temples and other public places to 
which access is denied by the Hindus ? 

(6) Following Mr. Gandhi’s lead the Untouchables started 
satyagraha from 1929 onwards against the Hindus for admission 
to wells and temples. Why did Mr. Gandhi condemn their 
satyagraha ? 

(7) Mr. Gandhi declared that he would fast if the Guruvayur 
temple was not thrown open to the Untouchables by the Zamorin. 
The temple has not been thrown open. Why did not Mr. Gandhi 
go on fast ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


253 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 253 

(8) Mr. Gandhi in 1932 threatened the British Government 
with dire consequences if the Governor-General did not give 
permission to Mr. Ranga Iyer to introduce his Temple-entry 
Bill on behalf of the Congress Party in the Central Legislature. 
As fresh elections to the Central Legislature were announced 
the Congress Party withdrew its support to the Bill and 
Mr. Ranga Iyer had to drop it. If Mr. Gandhi was earnest and 
sincere about Temple-entry, why did Mr. Gandhi support the 
action of the Congress Party ? What was more important — 
Temple-entry for the Untouchables or Electoral victory to the 
Congress ? 

(9) Mr. Gandhi knows that the difficulty of the Untouchables 
does not lie in their not having civic rights. Their difficulty lies 
in the conspiracy of the Hindus who threaten them with dire 
consequences if the Untouchables dare to exercise them. The real 
way of helping the Untouchables is to have some organization 
for the protection of civic rights which will undertake the duty 
of prosecuting Hindus who assault the Untouchables or proclaim 
social and economic boycott against them and thereby prevent 
them from exercising their civic rights. Why did not Mr. Gandhi 
include this as one of the objects of the Harijan Sevak Sangh ? 

(10) Before Mr. Gandhi came on the scene the Depressed 
Classes Mission Society was formed by the caste Hindus for 
the uplift of the Untouchables. The moneys were subscribed by 
the Hindus. Yet the Society’s affairs were conducted by Joint 
Boards consisting of Hindus and Untouchables. Why has Mr. 
Gandhi excluded the Untouchables from the management of 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh ? . 

(11) If Mr. Gandhi is the real friend of the Untouchables, 
why did he not leave it to the Untouchables to decide whether 
political safeguards were the best means for their protection ? 
Why did he go to the length of making a pact with the Muslims 
in order to isolate and defeat the Untouchables ? Why did 
Mr. Gandhi declare a fast unto death the object of which was 
to deprive the Untouchables of the benefit of the Communal 
Award by this extreme form of coercion ? 

(12) After having accepted the Poona Pact, why did not 
Mr. Gandhi keep faith with the Untouchables by telling the 
Congress not to despoil the politics of the Untouchables by 
contesting the seats reserved for the Untouchables by getting 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


254 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

254 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

such Untouchables elected as were prepared to become the 
tools of the Hindus ? 

(13) After having accepted the Poona Pact why did not 
Mr. Gandhi keep up the gentleman’s agreement and instruct 
the Congress High Command to include representatives of the 
Untouchables in the Congress Cabinets ? 

(14) Why did Mr. Gandhi disapprove of the appointment 
by Dr. Khare of Mr. Agnibhoj — a member of the Scheduled 
Castes — as a minister in the Congress Cabinet in the 
C. P. when Mr. Agnibhoj was in every way qualified to be a 
Minister ? Did Mr. Gandhi say that he was opposed to the 
creation of such high ambitions among persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes ? 


Ill 

What is the explanation that Mr. Gandhi has to offer ? 
What is the explanation that Mr. Gandhi’s friends have to 
offer ? Mr. Gandhi’s anti-untouchability campaign is marked by 
so many twists and turns, inconsistencies and contradictions, 
attacks and surrenders, advances and retreats that the whole 
campaign has become a matter of mystery. Few have a belief 
in its efficacy and quite a large number hold that there is not 
enough earnestness and sincerity behind it. Some explanation 
is therefore necessary. It is more for the sake of Mr. Gandhi’s 
reputation, for earnestness and sincerity than for the sake of 
giving a clear understanding of Mr. Gandhi’s aims and methods 
to the reader that one would like Mr. Gandhi and his friends 
to explain the points raised in the foregoing questions. 

It would no doubt be interesting to know what Mr. Gandhi 
and his friends may have to say in reply to these questions. 
Everybody interested in this question will naturally be looking 
forward to it. It will not however do for anyone else to anticipate 
the reply and then deal with it. They must be left to frame it 
in their own way and select their own time to do so. In the 
meantime one may well ask what the Untouchables have to 
say about Mr. Gandhi and his anti-untouchability campaign. 
It is not difficult to state what view the Untouchables take of 
Mr. Gandhi’s anti-untouchability campaign. 

Do the Untouchables regard Mr. Gandhi as being in 
earnest ? The answer is in the negative. They do not regard 
Mr. Gandhi as being in earnest. How can they ? How can they look 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


255 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 255 

upon a man being in earnest who when in 1921 the whole 
country was aroused to put the Bardoli programme in action 
remained completely indifferent to the anti-untouchability part 
of it ? How could they look upon a man as being in earnest 
who, when out of 1 crore and 25 lakhs of Swaraj Fund, found 
that only 43 thousands rupees were allotted to the cause of 
the Untouchables did not raise any protest at this niggardly 
treatment of a long neglected cause ? How can they regard 
a man as being in earnest who when in 1924 he got an 
opportunity to impose upon the Hindus the obligation to remove 
Untouchability did not do so even though he had the power and 
the occasion to enforce it ? Such a step would have served three 
purposes. It would have put the nationalism of Congressmen 
to test. It would have helped to remove Untouchability, and 
it. would have proved that Mr. Gandhi was sincere in his 
talks about the evil of Untouchability and its being a sin and 
a stigma on Hinduism. Why did not Mr. Gandhi do it ? Does 
this not show that Mr. Gandhi was more interested in the 
spread of spinning than in the removal of Untouchability ? 
Does this not show that removal of Untouchability was 
the least part of Mr. Gandhi’s programme and that it was 
not even last ? Does it not show that the statements by 
Mr. Gandhi that Untouchability is a blot on Hinduism and that 
there will be no Swaraj without the removal of Untouchability 
were just empty phrases with no earnestness behind them ? 
How could they believe in the earnestness of a person who 
takes a vow to fast if the Guruvayur temple is not opened 
to the Untouchables but will not go on fast even when the 
temple remains closed ? How could they accept a man to be 
in earnest when he sponsors a Bill for securing Temple-entry 
and subsequently becomes a party to dropping it ? How could 
they accept the earnestness of a man who contents himself 
with saying that he will not go into a temple if it is not 
open to the Untouchables when what is required of him is 
to adopt every means to get the temples thrown open to the 
Untouchables ? How could they believe in the earnestness 
of a man who is ready to fast for everything but will not 
fast for the Untouchables ? How can they believe in the 
earnestness of a man who is prepared to practise satyagraha 
for everything and against everybody but who will not practise 
it against the Hindus for the sake of the Untouchables ? 
How can they believe in the earnestness of a man who 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


256 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

256 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

does nothing more than indulge in giving sermons on the 
evils of Untouchability ? 

Do they regard Mr. Gandhi as honest and sincere ? The 
answer is that they do not regard Mr. Gandhi as honest and 
sincere. At the outset of his campaign for Swaraj Mr. Gandhi 
told the Untouchables not to side with the British. He told 
them not to embrace Christianity or any other religion. He 
told them that they could find salvation in Hinduism. He told 
Hindus that they must remove Untouchability as a condition 
precedent to Swaraj. Yet in 1921 when only a paltry sum out 
of the Tilak Swaraj Fund was allotted to the Untouchables, 
when the Committee to plan the uplift of the Untouchables 
was unceremoniously wound up Mr. Gandhi did not raise a 
word of protest. 

Mr. Gandhi had under his command a sum of Rs. 1 crore 
and 25 lakhs belonging to the Tilak Swaraj Fund. Why did 
Mr. Gandhi not insist upon a substantial portion of this 
amount being ear-marked for the uplift of the Untouchables ? 
That Mr. Gandhi showed almost complete indifference to 
the cause of the Untouchables is beyond dispute. What is 
surprising is the explanation which Mr. Gandhi offered for 
his indifference. He said that he was busy in planning a a 
campaign to win swaraj and that he had no time to spare 
for the cause of the Untouchables. He not only did not blush 
at his explanation but he offered a moral justification for his 
indifference to the cause of the Untouchables. He took the 
stand that there was nothing wrong in his devoting himself 
entirely to the political cause of India to the exclusion of the 
cause of the Untouchables for in his opinion the good of the 
whole includes the good of the part and that as the Hindus 
are slaves of, the British, slaves cannot emancipate slaves. 
Phrases such as ‘slaves of slaves’ and ‘greater includes the 
less’ may be admirable dialectics, though they cannot have 
more truth than the saying that because the country’s wealth 
has increased, therefore everybody’s wealth has increased. But 
we are not considering Mr. Gandhi’s ability as a dialectician. 
We are testing his sincerity. Can we accept a man’s sincerity 
who evades his responsibility and contents himself with an 
excuse ? Can the Untouchables believe that Mr. Gandhi is the 
champion of their cause? 

How can they regard Mr. Gandhi as honest and sincere if 
they consider Mr. Gandhi’s conduct towards them and towards 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 1 1-2014 257 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 257 

the Muslims and Sikhs in the matter of constitutional safeguards? 

Mr. Gandhi used to justify his discrimination between 
the Scheduled Castes and other Minorities in the matter of 
constitutional safeguards by another plea. The plea was that 
there were historical reasons, which compel him to recognize 
the Muslims and the Sikhs. He has never explained what 
those reasons are. They cannot be other than those, which 
hold the Muslims and the Sikhs as the fragments of old ruling 
communities. One does not mind Mr. Gandhi having succumbed 
to such puerile and undemocratic arguments, though he could 
have insisted that he would treat all minorities on equal basis 
and would not give any weight to such illogical and irrelevant 
considerations. The question is : How could the admission of 
such a plea have prevented Mr. Gandhi from opposing the 
demand of the Scheduled Castes ? Why did Mr. Gandhi regard 
himself as bound by no other reasons except the historical 
reasons ? Why did not Mr. Gandhi think that if historical 
reasons were decisive in the case of Muslims and Sikhs, moral 
reasons were decisive in the case of the Untouchables ? The 
fact is that the plea of historical reasons is a hollow plea. It 
was not a plea at all. It was an excuse for not conceding the 
demand of the Untouchables. 

Mr. Gandhi is never so much disgusted as he is when he is 
confronted with the question of Majority versus Minority. He 
would like to forget it and ignore it. But circumstances will 
not let him do either and he is often forced to deal with the 
issue. The last time he dealt with it was on the 21st October 
1939 in the form of an Editorial in the Harijan under the 
heading “The Fiction of Majority.” The article is full of venom 
and Mr. Gandhi has not hesitated to pour all the ridicule 
he could on those who were constantly raising the question. 
In the article he vehemently denied that the Muslims are a 
Minority. He denied that the Sikhs are a Minority and denied 
that the Indian Christians are a Minority. His contention 
was that they were not minorities in the technical sense of 
Oppressed Communities they were minorities they were to 
in the numerical sense only, which meant that they were no 
minorities at all. What did Mr. Gandhi have to say about 
the Scheduled Castes ? Could he deny their contention that 
they are a Minority ? Let me quote Mr. Gandhi’s own words. 
Mr. Gandhi said : 


'I have endeavoured to show that there is no such things 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


258 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

258 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as real minorities in India whose rights can be endangered 
by India becoming independent. With the exception of the 
Depressed Classes there is no minority which is not able to 
take care of itself.” 

Here is an admission on, the part of Mr. Gandhi that the 
Scheduled Castes are a minority in, the real sense of the word 
and that they are the only minority in India who will not 
be able to take care of themselves in a free India governed 
by a Hindu Communal Majority. Notwithstanding this inner 
conviction Mr. Gandhi maintained in a most vehement manner 
that he would not concede any political safeguards to the 
Untouchables. How can the Untouchables accept such a man 
as sincere and honest ? 

Mr. Gandhi opposed the demands of the Untouchables for 
political safeguards at the Round Table Conference. He did 
everything to defeat the object of the Untouchables. To weaken 
the force behind their demand and isolate them he tried to 
buy over the Muslims by offering to concede the whole of their 
fourteen demands. Mr. Gandhi at the meeting of the Minorities 
Sub-Committee had said : “Who am I to oppose the demand of 
the Untouchables if the Committee gave it its approval.” It was 
wrong for Mr. Gandhi to have tried to defeat the verdict of the 
Committee by offering to give the Muslims their full demand 
formulated in Mr. Jinnah’s fourteen points in return for their 
agreeing to oppose the demands of the Scheduled Castes!! His 
was a most subtle piece of strategy. He offered the Musalmans 
a most difficult choice between having their 14 points and 
withdrawing their support to the demand of the Untouchables or 
siding with the Untouchables and losing their 14 points. In the 
end Mr. Gandhi’s strategy failed and neither did the Musalmans 
lose their 14 points nor did the Untouchables lose their case. 
But the episode remains as a witness to Mr. Gandhi’s perfidy. 
What else can be the appropriate description of the conduct of 
a man who offers criminal inducement to another for getting 
him to break his promise, who calls a person his friend and 
then contrives to stab him in the back ? How can such a man 
be regarded by the Untouchables as honest and sincere ? 

Mr. Gandhi left the decision of the communal question to 
the arbitration of the British Prime Minister. Notwithstanding 
Mr. Gandhi’s efforts to defeat the Untouchables His Majesty’s 
Government conceded them their political demands. As a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


259 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 259 

party to the arbitration Mr. Gandhi was bound to abide by 
the decision. But Mr. Gandhi decided to defy it and he did 
it by going on a fast unto death. Mr. Gandhi shook India 
and the the world outside by his Fast unto Death. The 
object of the Fast was to compel the British Government 
to withdraw the Constitutional Safeguards which the 
British Prime Minister had proposed in his Award for the 
protection of the Untouchables under the new Constitution. 
One of Mr. Gandhi’s disciples has described the fast as an 
Epic Fast. Why it should be described as an Epic Fast it 
is not easy to follow. There was nothing heroic about it. 
It was the opposite of heroic. It was an adventure. It was 
launched by Mr. Gandhi because he believed that both the 
Untouchables and the British Government would quake 
before his threat of fast unto death, and surrender to his 
demand. Both were prepared to call off his bluff and as a 
matter of fact did call it off. All his heroism vanished the 
moment Mr. Gandhi found that he had overdone the trick. 
The man who started by saying that he would fast unto death 
unless the safeguards to the Untouchables were completely 
withdrawn and the Untouchables reduced to the condition 
of utter helplessness without rights and without recognition 
was plaintively pleading “My life is in your hands, will you 
save me ? ” Mr. Gandhi’s over-impatience to sign the Poona 
Pact — though it did not cancel the Prime Minister’s Award 
as he had demanded but only substituted another and a 
different system of constituent safeguards — is the strongest 
evidence that the hero had lost his courage and was anxious 
to save his face and anyhow save his life. 

There was nothing noble in the fast. It was a foul and filthy 
act. The Fast was not for the benefit of the Untouchables. It 
was against them and was the worst form of coercion against 
a helpless people to give up the constitutional safeguards of 
which they had become possessed under the Prime Minister’s 
Award and agree to live on the mercy of the Hindus. It was 
a vile and wicked act. How can the Untouchables regard 
such a man as honest and sincere ? 

After having gone on a fast unto death, he signed the 
Poona Pact. People say that Mr. Gandhi sincerely believed that 
political safeguards were harmful to the Untouchables. But 
how could a honest and sincere man who opposed the political 
demands of the Untouchables who was prepared to use the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


260 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

260 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Muslims to defeat them, who went on a Fast unto Death, in the 
end accept the, very same demands — for there is no difference 
between the Poona Pact and the Communal Award — when he 
found that there was no use opposing, as Opposition would 
not succeed? How can an honest and sincere man accept as 
harmless the demands of the Untouchables which once he 
regarded as harmful ? 

Do the Untouchables regard Mr. Gandhi as their friend and 
ally ? The answer is in the negative. They do not regard him 
as their friend. How can they ? It may be that Mr. Gandhi 
honestly believes that the problem of the Untouchables is a 
social problem. But how can they believe him to be their friend 
when he wishes to retain caste and abolish Untouchability 
it being quite clear that Untouchability is only an extended 
form of caste and that therefore without abolition of caste 
there is no hope of abolition of Untouchability ? It may 
be that Mr. Gandhi honestly believes that the problem of 
Untouchables can be solved by social processes. But how can 
the Untouchables regard a man as their friend who develops 
a fanatic and frantic opposition to political processes being 
employed when everyone was agreed that the use of political 
processes cannot mar the effect of social process and may 
be depended upon to help and accelerate the solution of the 
problem. How could a man be regarded as the friend of the 
Untouchables when he does not believe the Untouchables 
reaching to places of power and authority in the State. In 
this controversy over political safeguards Mr. Gandhi could 
have pursued any of the following courses. He could have 
been the champion of the Untouchables. As such, he should 
not only have welcomed their demand for safeguards but he 
should have proposed them himself without waiting for the 
Untouchables to do so. Not only should he have proposed 
them himself but he should have fought for them. For, what 
could give greater happiness to a genuine champion of the 
Untouchables than to see that provision was made to enable 
them to become members of the Legislature, Ministers of 
Executive, and occupants of high offices in the State ? Surely, 
if Mr. Gandhi is a champion of the Untouchables these are 
the very provisions he should have fought for. Secondly, if he 
did not wish to be the champion of the Untouchables, he could 
have been their ally. He could have helped them by giving 
them his moral and material support. Thirdly, if Mr. Gandhi 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


261 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 261 

did not like to play the part of a champion and was averse to 
be even an ally of the Untouchables, the next thing he could 
have done, consistent with his proclaimed and much advertised 
sympathies for the Untouchables, was to be their friend. Again 
as a friend he could have taken up the attitude of benevolent 
neutrality — declining to fight but ready to render all help for 
getting the demand for safeguards accepted. Failing benevolent 
neutrality he could have taken the attitude of strict neutrality 
and could have told the Untouchables to get the safeguards if 
the Round Table Conference was prepared to give them and that 
he would neither help nor hinder. Abandoning all these sober 
considerations Mr. Gandhi came out as an open enemy of the 
Untouchables. How can the Untouchables regard such a man 
as their friend and ally ? 


IV 

That Mr. Gandhi’s anti-untouchability campaign has failed 
is beyond cavil. Even the Congress papers admit it. I give below 
a few quotations from some of them : 

On 17th August 1939 Mr. B. K. Gaikwad, a member of the 
Scheduled Castes in the Bombay Legislative Assembly, asked 
a question as to how many temples in the Bombay Presidency 
were thrown open to the Untouchables since 1932 when 
Mr. Gandhi started his Temple-entry movement. According to 
the figures given by the Congress Minister the total number 
of temples thrown open was 142. Of these 121 were ownerless 
temples standing on the wayside, which were under the care of 
nobody in particular and which nobody used as places of worship. 
Another fact revealed was that not a single temple was thrown 
open to the Untouchables in Gujarat, the district which is the 
home of Mr. Gandhi. 

Writing on 10th March 1940 the Harijan Bandu, Mr. Gandhi’s 
Gujarathi paper, said : 

“The Untouchability of the ‘Harijans’ in the matter of entry 

into schools persists nowhere so much still as in Gujarat.” 1 

The Bombay Chronicle in its issue of 27th August 1940 
re-produced an extract from a monthly letter of the Harijan 
Sevak Sangh. It 

“States that Harijans of Godhavi in Ahmedabad District 
1 Quoted from Sanjana’s Sense and Nonsense in Politics. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


262 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

262 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

were so persecuted by caste Hindus for sending their children 
to Local Board School that ultimately 42 Harijan families left 
that place. ..and went to the Taluka town of Sanand.” 

On 27th August 1943, Mr. M. M. Nandgaonkar, a leader of 
the Untouchables residing in Thana in the Bombay Presidency 
and ex-Vice President of Thana Municipality was refused tea 
in a Hindu hotel. The Bombay Chronicle commenting upon this 
incident in its issue dated 28th August 1943 said : 

“When Gandhiji fasted in 1932, some feverish attempts 
were made to have some temples and hotels opened to Harijans. 
Now the actual position is nearly what it used to be before 
with regard to temple entry and access to hotels. The cleanest 
Harijan is not admitted to temples and hotels. Yet many 
anti-Untouchability workers take a complacent view of these 
disabilities and patronisingly talk of ‘uplift first’ for Harijans, 
saying that when Harijans learn to be clean, their civic 
disabilities will fall off automatically. This is rank nonsense.” 

Writing on the proceedings of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation held in Cawnpore in January 1944 the Bombay 
Chronicle in its issue of 4th February 1944 said : 

“But such is the passivity of Hindu society that both 
caste and Untouchability still thrive. Nay, several Hindu 
leaders... misguided by the interested propaganda by certain 
Britishers, still plead that there is some mysterious virtue 
in caste because Hindu culture has remained today. Else, 
they argue, caste would not have survived the shocks of 
centuries... It is most tragic to find that, in spite of all that 
Gandhiji and other reformers. ..have done, Untouchability still 
persists to no small extent. It is most rampant in villages... 
Even in a city like Bombay, a person known to be a sweeper, 
let alone a scavenger, however clean dressed he may be, is 
not allowed to enter a caste Hindu restaurant, nay, even an 
Irani’s restaurant for tea.” 

The Untouchables have always said that Mr. Gandhi’s anti- 
Untouchability campaign has failed. After 25 years of labour, 
hotels have remained closed, wells have remained closed, 
temples have remained closed and in very many parts of India — 
particularly in Gujarat — even schools have remained closed. 
The extracts produced from the papers form therefore a very 
welcome testimony especially because the papers are Congress 
papers. As they fully corroborate what the Untouchables have 
been saying on the point, nothing further need be said on the 
subject except to ask one question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


263 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 263 

Why has Mr. Gandhi failed ? According to me, there are 
three reasons which has brought about this failure. 

The first reason is the Hindus to whom he makes his appeal 
for the removal of Untouchability do not respond. Why is this 
so ? It is a common experience that the words a man uses arid 
the effect they produce are not always commensurate. What he 
says has its momentum indefinitely multiplied, or reduced to 
nullity, by the impression that the hearer for good reason or bad 
happens to have formed of the spirit of the speaker. This gives 
a clue to know why Mr. Gandhi’s sermons on Untouchability 
have completely failed to move the Hindus, why people hear 
his after-prayer sermons for few minutes and then go to the 
comic opera and why there is nothing more to it. The fault is 
not entirely of the Hindu public. The fault is of Mr. Gandhi 
himself. Mr. Gandhi has built up his reputation of being a 
Mahatma on his being an harbinger of political freedom and 
not on his being a spiritual teacher. Whatever may be his 
intentions, Mr. Gandhi is looked upon as an apostle of Swaraj. 
His anti-Untouchability campaign is looked upon as a fad if not 
a side-show. That is why the Hindus respond to his political 
biddings but never to his social or religious preaching. The 
momentum of his anti-Untouchability campaign must therefore 
remain a nullity. Mr. Gandhi is a political shoe-maker. He 
must stick to his political last. He thought he could take up 
the task of solving the social question. That was a mistake. 
A politician is not the man for it. That is why the hope held 
out to the Untouchables that Mr. Gandhi’s sermons will do 
the trick has failed. 

The second reason is that Mr. Gandhi does not wish to 
antagonize the Hindus even if such antagonism was necessary 
to carry out his anti-Untouchability programme. A few instances 
will illustrate Mr. Gandhi’s mentality. 

Most of Mr. Gandhi’s friends give credit to Mr. Gandhi for 
sincerity and earnestness for the cause of the Untouchables 
and expect the Untouchables to believe in it on the mere 
ground that Mr. Gandhi is the one man who keeps on 
constantly preaching to the Hindus the necessity of removing 
Untouchability. They have lost sight of the old proverb that 
an ounce of practice is worth a ton of preaching and have 
never cared to ask Mr. Gandhi to explain why does he not 
cease to preach to the Hindus the necessity of removing 
Untouchability and launch a campaign of satyagraha or start 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


264 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

264 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a fast. If they would ask for such an explanation they would 
know why Mr. Gandhi merely contents himself with sermons 
on Untouchability. 

The true reasons why Mr. Gandhi will not go beyond sermons 
were revealed to the Untouchables for the first time 1 in 1929 
when the Untouchables in the Bombay Presidency opened a 
campaign of satyagraha against the Hindus for establishing 
their civic rights in the matter of temple-entry and taking 
water from public wells. They hoped to get the blessings of 
Mr. Gandhi in as much as satyagraha was Mr. Gandhi’s own 
weapon to get wrongs redressed. When appealed to for support, 
Mr. Gandhi surprised the Untouchables by issuing a statement 
condemning their campaign of satyagraha against the Hindus. 
The argument urged by Mr. Gandhi was very ingenious. He 
stated that satyagraha was to be used only against foreigners ; 
it must not be used against one’s own kindred or countrymen 
and as the Hindus were the kindred and countrymen of the 
Untouchables by rules of satyagraha the latter were debarred 
from using the weapon against the former !! What a fall from the 
sublime to the ridiculous ! By this Mr. Gandhi made nonsense 
of satyagraha. Why did Mr. Gandhi do this ? Only because he 
did not want to annoy and exasperate the Hindus. 

As a second piece of evidence, I would refer to what is known 
as the Kavitha incident. Kavitha is a village in the Ahmedabad 
District in Gujarat. In 1935, the Untouchables of the village 
demanded from the Hindus of the village that their children 
should be admitted in the common school of the village along 
with other Hindu children. The Hindus were enraged at this 
outrage and took their revenge by proclaiming a complete social 
boycott. The events connected with this boycott were reported 
by Mr. A. V. Thakkar, who went to Kavitha to intercede with 
the Hindus on behalf of the Untouchables. The story told by 
him runs as follows : — 

“The Associated Press announced on the 10th inst. that 
the Caste Hindus of Kavitha agreed to admit Harijan boys to 
the village school in Kavitha and that matters were amicably 
settled. This was contradicted on the 13th instant by the 
Secretary of the Ahmedabad Harijan Sevak Sangh, who said 
in his statement that the Harijans had undertaken (privately 

1 In 1924 in the Satyagraha at Vaikom the object of which was to get a public 
road in Travancore open to the Untouchables, Mr. Gandhi objected to the Sikhs 
opening a kitchen for the satyagrahis. The reason given by Mr. Gandhi was not 
stated quite so explicitly. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 11-2(10 265 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 265 

of course) not to send their children to the school. Such an 
undertaking was not given voluntarily, but was extorted from 
them by the Caste Hindus, in this case the Garasias of the 
village, who had proclaimed a social boycott against poor 
Harijans — weavers, chamars and others, who number over 
100 families. They were deprived of agricultural labour, their 
animals of grazing in the pasture larid, and their children of 
buttermilk. Not only this, but a Harijan leader was compelled 
to take an oath by Mahadev that he and others would not 
hereafter even make an effort to reinstate their children in 
the school. The so-called settlement was brought about in 
this way. 

“But even after the bogus settlement reported on the 
10th and the complete surrender by poor Harijans, the 
boycott was not lifted up to the 19th and partly up to the 
22nd from the weavers. It was lifted somewhat earlier from 
the head of the chamars, as Garasias themselves could not 
remove the carcasses of their dead animals, and thus had to 
come to terms with the Chamars earlier. As if the enormities 
perpetrated so far were not enough, kerosine was poured into 
the Harijans’ well, once on the 15th instant and again on 
the 19th instant. One can imagine what terrorism was thus 
practised on poor Harijans because they had dared to send 
their children to sit alongside of the ‘princely’ Garasia boys. 

“I met the leaders of the Garasias on the morning of the 
22nd. They said they could not tolerate the idea of boys of 
Dheds and Chamars sitting by the side of their own boys. I 
met also the District Magistrate of Ahmedabad on the 23rd 
with a view to finding out if he would do something to ease 
the situation, but without any result. 

“Harijan boys are thus practically banned from the village 
school with nobody to help them. This has caused despondency 
among the Harijans to such an extent that they are thinking 
of migrating in a body to some other village.” 

This was a report made to Mr. Gandhi. What did 
Mr. Gandhi do ? The following 1 is the advice Mr. Gandhi gave to 
the Untouchables of Kavitha : — 

“There is no help like self-help. God helps those who help 
themselves. If the Harijans concerned will carry out their 
reported resolve to wipe the dust of Kavitha off their feet, they 
will not only be happy themselves but they will pave the way 
for others who may be similarly treated. If people migrate in 
search of employment how much more should they do so in 


Harijan, dated 5th October 1935. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


266 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

266 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

search of self-respect ? I hope that well-wishers of 

Harijans will help these poor families to vacate 

inhospitable Kavitha.” 

Mr. Gandhi advised the Untouchables of Kavitha to vacate. 
But why did he not advise Mr. Thakkar to prosecute the Hindus 
of Kavitha and help the Untouchables to vindicate their rights ? 
Obviously, he would like to uplift the Untouchables if he can 
but not by offending the Hindus. What good can such a man do 
to promote the cause of the Untouchatbles ? All this shows that 
Mr. Gandhi is most anxious to be good to the Hindus. That is 
why he opposes satyagraha against the Hindus. That is why he 
opposed the political demands of the Untouchables as he believed 
that they were aimed against them. He is anxious to be so good 
to the Hindus that he does not care if he is thereby becoming 
good for nothing for the Untouchables. That is why Mr. Gandhi’s 
whole programme for the removal of Untouchability is just words, 
words and words and why there is no action behind it. 

The third reason is that Mr. Gandhi does not want the 
Untouchables to organize and be strong. For he fears that they 
might thereby become independent of the Hindus and weaken 
the ranks of Hindus. This is best illustrated by the activities of 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The whole object of the Sangh is to 
create a slave mentality among the Untouchables towards their 
Hindu masters. Examine the Sangh from any angle one may 
like and the creation of slave mentality will appear to be its 
dominant purpose. 

The work of the Sangh reminds one of the mythological 
demoness Putana described in the Bhagvat — a companion to 
the Mahabharat. Kamsa the king of Mathurra, wanted to kill 
Krishna, as it was predicted that Kamsa will die at the hands 
of Krishna. Having come to know of the birth of Krishna, Kamsa 
asked Putana to undertake the mission to kill Krishna while 
he was yet a baby. Putana took the form of a beautiful woman 
and went to Yashoda, the foster mother of Krishna and having 
applied liquid poison to her breast pleaded to be employed as 
a wet nurse for suckling the baby Krishna and thus have the 
opportunity to kill it. The rest of the story it is unnecessary to 
pursue. The point of the story is that the real purpose is not 
always the same as the ostensible purpose and a nurse can be 
a murdress. The Sangh is to the Untouchables what Putana 
was to Krishna. The Sangh under the pretence of service is 
out to kill the spirit of independence from among the Un- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


267 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 267 

touchables. The Untouchables, in the early stages of their 
agitation, had taken the support of some well-meaning Hindus 
and had followed their leadership. By the time of the Round 
Table Conference, the Untouchables had become completely 
self-reliant and independent. They were no longer satisfied with 
charity from the Hindus. They demanded what they said was 
their right. There is no doubt that it is to kill this spirit of 
independence among the Untouchables that Mr. Gandhi started 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The Harijan Sevak Sangh by its 
petty services has collected a swarm of grateful Untouchables 
who are employed to preach that Mr. Gandhi and the Hindus 
are the saviours of the Untouchables. Daniel O’Connel the 
Irish leader once said that no man can be greateful at the 
cost of his honour, no woman can be grateful at the cost of 
her chastity and no country can be grateful at the cost of 
its liberty. The Untouchables are too simple-minded to know 
that the cost of the service which the Harijan Sevak Sangh 
offers to render is loss of independence. This is exactly what 
Mr. Gandhi wants. 

The worst part of the activities of the Harijan Sevak Sangh 
is the help rendered to the Untouchable students kept in the 
hostels maintained by the Sangh. These Untouchable students 
remind me of Bhishma and Kacha, two prominent characters 
which figure in the Mahabharata. Bhishma proclaimed with 
great show that the Pandavas were right and the Kauravas 
wrong. Yet when it came to a war between the two he fought 
on the side of the Kauravas and against the Pandavas. When 
asked to justify his conduct he was not ashamed to say that 
he fought for the Kauravas because they fed him. Kacha 
belonged to the community of the Devas who were engaged 
in a war against the Rakshasas. The spiritual head of the 
Rakshasas knew a mantra (incantation) by which he could 
revive a dead Rakshasa. The Devas were losing the battle 
since their head did not know the mantra and could not 
revive their dead. The Devas planned to send Kacha to the 
head of the Rakshasas with instructions somehow to learn 
the mantra and come back. Kacha in the beginning could 
not succeed. Ultimately he entered into an agreement with 
Devayani the daughter of the spiritual head of the Rakshasas 
that if she helped him to acquire the mantra he would be 
prepared to marry her. Devayani succeeded in fulfilling 
her part of the contract. But Kacha refused to perform his 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


268 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

268 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

part alleging that the interests of his community were more 
important than his promise to her. 

Bhishma and Kacha, in my opinion, are typical of the 
morally depraved characters who know no other purpose 
but to serve their own interests for the time being. The 
Untouchable students in the Harijan hostels are acting 
the part of both Bhishma and Kacha. During their stay in 
the hostels they play the part of Bhishma by singing the 
praises of Mr. Gandhi and the Congress. When they come 
out of the hostels they play the part of Kacha and denounce 
Mr. Gandhi and the Congress. I am extremely pained to 
see this. Nothing worse could happen to the youth of the 
Untouchables than this moral degeneration. But this is the 
greatest disservice which his Harijan Sevak Sangh has done 
to the Untouchables. It has destroyed their character. It 
has destroyed their independence. This is what Mr. Gandhi 
wants to happen. 

Take a fourth illustration. The Sangh is run by the Caste 
Hindus. There are some Untouchables who have demanded 
that the institution should be handed over to the Untouchables 
and should be run by them. Others have demanded that the 
Untouchables should have representation on the governing 
Board. Mr. Gandhi has flatly refused to do either on two 
very ingenious grounds which no man with the greatest 
cunning could improve. Mr. Gandhi’s first argument is that 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh is an act of penance on the part 
of the Hindus for the sin of observing Untouchability. It is 
they who must do the penance. Therefore 1 the Untouchable 
can have no place in running the Sangh. Secondly 
Mr. Gandhi says the money collected by him is given by 
the Hindus and not by the Untouchables and as the money 
is not of the Untouchables, the Untouchables have no right 
to be on the Governing Body. The refusal of Mr. Gandhi 
may be tolerated but his arguments are most insulting and 
a respectable Untouchable will be forgiven if he refuses 
to have anything to do with the Sangh. One should have 
thought that the Harijan Sevak Sangh was a Trust and 
the Untouchables its beneficiaries. Any trio in law would 
admit that the beneficiaries have every right to know the 
aims and objects of the Trust, its funds and whether the 
objects are properly carried out or not. The beneficiaries have 
even the right to have the Trustees removed for breach of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


269 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 269 

trust. On that basis it would be impossible to deny the claim 
of the Untouchables for representation on the Managing Board. 
Evidently Mr. Gandhi does not wish to accept this position. A 
self-respecting Untouchable who has no desire to cringe and 
who does not believe in staking the future of the Untouchables 
on the philanthropy of strangers cannot have any quarrel with 
Mr. Gandhi. He is quite prepared to say that if meanness is 
a virtue then Mr. Gandhi’s logic is superb and Mr. Gandhi 
is welcome to the benefit of it. Only he must not blame the 
Untouchables if they boycott the Sangh. 

These however could not be the real reasons for not allowing 
the Untouchables to run the Sangh. The real reasons are 
different. In the first place, if the Sangh was handed over to 
the Untouchables Mr. Gandhi and the Congress will have no 
means of control over the Untouchables. The Untouchables 
will cease to be dependent on the Hindus. In the second place, 
the Untouchables having become independent will cease to be 
grateful to the Hindus. These consequences will be quite contrary 
to the aim and object, which have led Mr. Gandhi to found 
the Sangh. He wants to create among the Untouchables what 
is known among Indian Christians as the mission compound 
mentality. That is why Mr. Gandhi does not wish to hand over 
the Sangh to the control and management of the Untouchables. 
Is this consistent with a genuine desire for the emancipation 
of the Untouchables ? Can Mr. Gandhi be called a liberator 
of the Untouchables ? Does this not show that Mr. Gandhi is 
more anxious to tighten the tie which binds the Untouchables 
to the apron strings of the Hindus than to free them from the 
thraldom of the Hindus ? 

These are the reasons why Mr. Gandhi’s anti-Untouchability 
campaign has failed. 


V 

To sum up, can it be said that Mr. Gandhi has recovered 
the title deeds to humanity which the Untouchables have lost ? 
Obviously not. Those title deeds are still with the Hindus. 
He has done nothing to recover them. Nor has he helped the 
Untouchables to recover them. On the contrary, Mr. Gandhi 
has put every obstacle in their way. The Untouchables feel that 
their title deeds to humanity — which means their emancipation 
from their thraldom of the Hindus — can be secured by 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 270 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

270 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

them by political power, and by nothing else. Mr. Gandhi, on 
the other hand, believes that his preaching and the charity 
and zeal of the Hindus are sufficient panacea for all the 
ills of the Untouchables. Can the Untouchables rely on a 
sustained flow of Hindu charity and Hindu zeal ? Charity 
which has its fury is worth talking about. Zeal which has its 
vengeance is worth building upon. But which friend of the 
Untouchables can ask them to depend upon the miserable 
measure of Hindu charity and the Hindu zeal ? Untouchability 
has been in existence for the last two thousand years during 
which period the Hindus have day in and day out sucked the 
very blood of the Untouchables and have mutilated them and 
trodden upon them in every way. During these two thousand 
years what amount of charity have the Hindus done to the 
Untouchables ? Only 8 lakhs and that too when Mr. Gandhi 
personally went round the country with a begging bowl !!! 
Having put his programme to test, Mr. Gandhi might have 
shown his willingness to concede the Untouchables’ demand 
for political power as their only means of salvation. Indeed 
so obvious is the justice of this demand that a man with no 
more than common sense could have understood that executive 
power in the hands of the Untouchables could do more in a 
year than the whole order of preaching friars could be relied 
upon to do in a century. But the very idea of political power 
to the Untouchables is hateful to Mr. Gandhi. Why should 
not the Untouchables say ‘Beware of Mr. Gandhi’ when they 
know that he would not allow the use of political processes 
for the emancipation of the Untouchables though Mr. Gandhi 
is fully alive to the fact that the social processes on which he 
laid so much store for helping them have completely failed. 

In this connection one is reminded of the attitude of 
President Lincoln in the American Civil War towards the 
two questions of union and slavery. This attitude is well 
revealed by the correspondence 1 that passed in 1862 between 
Mr. Horace Greeley and President Lincoln. In a letter addressed 
to the President entitled “The Prayer of Twenty Millions,” 
Mr. Greeley said : 

“On the face of this wide earth, Mr. President, there is 
not one disinterested, determined, intelligent champion of 
the Union cause who does not feel that all attempts to put 
down the rebellion and at the same time uphold its inciting 
cause (namely slavery) are preposterous and futile.” 


Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. XI, pp. xii-xiii 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


271 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 271 

To this, President Lincoln’s reply was : 

“If there be those who would no save the Union unless 
they could at the same time save slavery, I do not agree 
with them. 

“If there be those who would not save the Union unless 
they could at the same time destroy slavery, I do not agree 
with them. 

“My paramount object is to save the Union, and not either 
to save or to destroy slavery. 

“If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I 
would do it. If I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I 
would do it — and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving 
others alone, I would also do that.” 

These were the views of President Lincoln about Negro 
slavery and its relation to the question of Union. They certainly 
throw a very different light on one who is reputed to be the 
liberator of the Negroes. As a matter of fact he did not believe 
in the emancipation of the Negroes as a categorical imperative. 
Obviously the author of the famous Gettysberg oration about 
Government of the people, by the people and for the people 
would not have minded if his statement had taken the shape of 
government of the black people by the white people and for the 
white people provided there was union. Mr. Gandhi’s attitude 
towards Swaraj and the Untouchables resembles very much 
the attitude of President Lincoln towards the two questions of 
the Negroes and the Union. Mr. Gandhi wants Swaraj as did 
President Lincoln want Union. But he does not want Swaraj 
at the cost of disrupting the structure of Hinduism which is 
what political emancipation of the Untouchables means as 
President Lincoln did not want to free the slaves if it was 
not necessary to do so for the sake of the Union. There is 
of course this difference between Mr. Gandhi and President 
Lincoln. President Lincoln was prepared to emancipate the 
Negro slaves if it was necessary to preserve the Union. 
Mr. Gandhi’s attitude is in marked contrast. He is not prepared 
for the political emancipation of the Untouchables even if it 
was essential for winning Swaraj. Mr. Gandhi’s attitude is let 
Swaraj perish if the cost of it is the political freedom of the 
Untouchables. 

Some Untouchables are probably under the impression 
that all this is a matter of the dead past and that Mr. Gandhi 
having accepted the Poona Pact cannot now oppose the political 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 1 1-2014 272 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

272 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

demands of the Untouchables for as a party to the Poona Pact 
Mr. Gandhi must be assumed to have conceded that the 
Untouchables are a separate element in the national life of 
India. This is a complete misunderstanding. For there are 
grounds to believe that the Poona Pact has made no difference 
in Mr. Gandhi’s view and he still maintains the same attitude 
to the Untouchables’ claim for political safeguards as he did 
at the Round Table Conference and before the Poona Pact. 
These grounds have their foundation in the fact that when His 
Majesty’s Government declared in 1940 that the Untouchables 
are a separate element in the National life of India and that 
their consent to the Constitution is necessary Mr. Gandhi came 
out with a protest. When the Viceroy Lord Linlithgow referred 
to the Untouchables as a separate element and said that their 
consent to the Constitution was necessary, Mr. Gandhi said 1 : — 

“I felt that the putting up by the Viceroy, and then the 
Secretary of State of want of agreement by the Congress 
with the Princes, the Muslim League and even the Scheduled 
Classes as a barrier to the British recognition of India’s 
right to freedom was more than unjust to the Congress and 
the people.” 

* * * 

“The introduction of the Scheduled Classes in the 
controversy has made the unreality of the case of the British 
Government doubly unreal. They know that these are the 
special care of the Congress, and that the Congress is 
infinitely more capable of guarding their interests than the 
British Government. Moreover, the Scheduled Classes are 
divided into as many castes as the Caste Hindu Society. No 
single Scheduled classes member could possibly and truthfully 
represent the innumerable castes.” 

The argument advanced by Mr. Gandhi is puerile. It 
may be pointed out that in the hurry he made in stating his 
opposition to the position assigned to the Scheduled Castes by 
the Viceroy, Mr. Gandhi forgot that if the Scheduled Castes are 
divided into many castes and no single caste could represent 
them all, the case of the Muslims and the Indian Christians 
is in no way different. The Muslims are divided into three 
groups: (1) Sunnis; (2) Shias and (8) Momins each of which 
consists of many castes who interdine but do not intermarry. 
Indian Christians are divided into (1) Catholics, and (2) Pro- 


1 Harijan, dated 13th Ootober 1940, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


273 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

WHAT DO THE UNTOUCHABLES SAY ? 273 

testants. Catholics are again sub-divided into (1) Caste Christians 
and (2) Non-caste Christians. Both Catholics and Protestants 
have castes which do not intermarry and caste Christians and 
Non-caste Christians do not even interdine or go to the same 
church. This shows that Mr. Gandhi notwithstanding his being a 
party to the Poona Pact is determined not to allow the Scheduled 
Castes being given the status of a separate element and that he 
is prepared to adopt any argument however desperate to justify 
his attitude of opposition. 

In short Mr. Gandhi is still on the war path so far as the 
Untouchables are concerned. He may start the trouble over again. 
The time to trust him has not arrived. The Untouchables must 
still hold that the best way to safeguard themselves is to say 
‘Beware of Mr. Gandhi.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


274 


CHAPTER. XI 

GANDHISM 

The Doom of the Untouchables 

I 

Hitherto when Indians have been talking about, the 
reconstruction of Indian social and economic life they have 
been talking in terms of individualism versus collectivism, 
capitalism versus socialism, conservatism versus radicalism 
and so on. But quite recently a new ‘ ism’ has come on the 
Indian horizon. It is called Gandhism. It is true that very 
recently Mr. Gandhi had denied that there is such a thing 
as Gandhism. This denial is nothing more than the usual 
modesty which Mr. Gandhi wears so well. It does not disprove 
the existence of Gandhism. There have been quite a number 
of books with the title of Gandhism without any«protest 
from Mr. Gandhi. It has already caught the imagination of 
some people both inside and outside India. Some have so 
much faith in it that they do not hesitate to offer it as an 
alternative to Marxism. 

The followers of Gandhism who may happen to read what 
is said in the foregoing pages may well ask : Mr. Gandhi 
may not have done what the Untouchables expected 
him to do ; but does not Gandhism offer any hope to the 
Untouchables ? The followers of Gandhism may accuse me of 
remembering only the short, slow, intermittent steps taken 
by Mr. Gandhi for the sake of the Untouchables and of 
forgetting the potential length of the principles enunciated by 
him. I am prepared to admit that it does sometimes happen 
that a person who enunciates a long principle takes only a 
short step and that he may be forgiven for the short step 
in the hope that some day the principle will by its native 
dynamics force a long step covering all who were once left 
out. Gandhism is in itself a very interesting subject for 
study. But to deal with Gandhism after having dealt with 
Mr. Gandhi is bound to be a tedious task and therefore my 
first reaction was to leave out the consideration of Gandhism 
and Untouchables. At the same time, I could hardly remain 
indifferent to the facts that the effect of my omission 
to consider the subject might be very unfortunate. For 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


275 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 275 

Gandhists, notwithstanding my exposure of Mr. Gandhi, might 
take advantage of it and continue to preach that if Mr. Gandhi 
has failed to solve the problem of the Untouchables still the 
Untouchables will find their salvation in Gandhism. It is 
because I wish to leave no room for such propaganda that I 
have overcome my original disinclination and engage upon 
discussion of Gandhism. 


II 

What is Gandhism ? What does it stand for ? What are its 
teachings about economic problem ? What are its teachings 
about social problem ? 

At the outset it is necessary to state that some Gandhists 
have conjured up a conception of Gandhism which is purely 
imaginary. According to this conception Gandhism means 
return to the village and making the village self-sufficient. It 
makes Gandhism a mere matter of regionalism. Gandhism, I 
am sure, is neither so simple nor so innocent as regionalism 
is. Gandhism has a much bigger content than regionalism. 
Regionalism is a small insignificant part of it. It has a social 
philosophy and it has an economic philosophy. To omit to take 
into account the economic and social philosophy of Gandhism 
is to present deliberately a false picture of Gandhism. The first 
and foremost requisite is to present a true picture of Gandhism. 

To start with Mr. Gandhi’s teachings on social problem. 
Mr. Gandhi’s views on the caste system — which constitutes 
the main social problem in India — were fully elaborated by 
him in 1921-22 in a Gujarathi Journal called Nava-Jivan. 
The article 1 is written in Gujarathi. I give below an English 
translation of his views as near as possible in his own words. 
Says Mr. Gandhi: 

“1. I believe that if Hindu Society has been able to stand 
it is because it is founded on the caste system. 

“2. The seeds of Swaraj are to be found in the caste system. 
Different castes are like different sections of military 
division. Each division is working for the good of the 
whole... 

“3. A community which can create the caste system must 
be said to possess unique power of organization. 

1. It is reprinted in Vol. ‘II of the series called Gandhi Sikshan as No, 18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


276 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

276 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“4. Caste has a ready made means for spreading primary 
education. Every caste can take the responsibility for the 
education of the children of the Caste. Caste has a political 
basis. It can work as an electorate for a representative body. 
Caste can perform judicial functions by electing persons 
to act as judges to decide disputes among members of the 
same caste. With castes it is easy to raise a defence force 
by requiring each caste to raise a brigade. 

“5. I believe that inter dining or intermarriage are not necessary 
for promoting national unity. That dining together creates 
friendship is contrary to experience. If this was true there 
would have been no war in Europe . . . Taking food is as dirty 
an act as answering the call of nature. The only difference 
is that after answering call of nature we get peace while 
after eating food we get discomfort. Just as we perform the 
act of answering the call of nature in seclusion so also the 
act of taking food must also be done in seclusion. 

“6. In India children of brothers do not intermarry. Do they 
cease to love because they do not intermarry ? Among the 
Vaishnavas many women are so orthodox that they will 
not eat with the members of the family nor will they drink 
water from a common water pot. Have they no love? The 
Caste system cannot be said to be bad because it does 
not allow interdining or intermarriage between different 
Castes.” 

“7. Caste is another name for control. Caste puts a limit on 
enjoyment. Caste does not allow a person to transgress caste 
limits in pursuit of his enjoyment. That is the meaning 
such caste restrictions as interdining and intermarriage. 

“8. To destroy caste system and adopt Western European social 
system means that Hindus must give up the principle of 
hereditary occupation which is the soul of the caste system. 
Hereditary principle is an eternal principle. To change 
it is to create disorder. I have no use for a Brahmin if I 
cannot call him a Brahmin for my life. It will be a chaos if 
every day a Brahmin is to he changed into a Shudra and 
a Shudra is to be changed into a Brahmin. 

“9. The caste system is a natural order of society. In India 
it has been given a religious coating. Other countries not 
having understood the utility of the Caste System it existed 
only in a loose condition and consequently those countries 
have not derived from Caste system the same degree of 
advantage which India has derived. 

These being my views I am opposed to all those who are out 
to destroy the Caste System.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


277 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 277 

In 1922, Mr. Gandhi was a defender of the caste system. 
Pursuing the inquiry, one comes across a somewhat critical 
view of the caste system by Mr. Gandhi in the year 1925. This 
is what Mr. Gandhi said on 3rd February 1925 : — 

“I gave support to caste because it stands for restraint. 

But at present caste does not mean restraint, it means 
limitations. Restraint is glorious and helps to achieve 
freedom. But limitation is like chain. It binds. There is 
nothing commendable in castes as they exist today. They are 
contrary to the tenets of the shastras. The number of castes 
is infinite and there is a bar against intermarriage. This is 
not a condition of elevation. It is a state of fall.” 

In reply to the question : What is the way out Mr. Gandhi 
said : 

“The best remedy is that small castes should fuse 
themselves into one big caste. There should be four such 
big castes so that we may reproduce the old system of four 
varnas.” 

In short, in 1925 Mr. Gandhi became an upholder of the 
Varna system. 

The old Varna system prevalent in ancient India had society 
divided into four orders : (1) Brahmins, whose occupation 
was learning; (2) Kshatriyas whose occupation was warfare; 
(3) Vaishyas, whose occupation was trade and (4) Shudras, 
whose occupation was service of the other classes. Is Mr. 
Gandhi’s Varna System the same as this old Varna system of 
the orthodx Hindus ? Mr. Gandhi explained his Varna system 
in the following terms 1 : 

“1. I believe that the divisions into Varna is based on birth. 

“2. There is nothing in the Varna system which stands in 
the way of the Shudra acquiring learning or studying 
military art of offence or defence. Contra it is open to a 
Kshatriya to serve. The Varna system is no bar to him. 
What the Varna system enjoins is that a Shudra will 
riot make learning a way of earning a living. Nor will 
a Kshatriya adopt service as a way of earning a living. 
[Similarly a Brahmin may learn the art of war or trade. 

But he must not make them a way of earning his living. 
Contra a Vaishya may acquire learning or may cultivate 
the art of war. But he must not make them a way of 
earning his living.] 

1. The extracts are taken from an article by Mr. Gandhi on the subject and 
is reproduced in the Varna Vayavastha — a book which contains Mr. Gandhi’s 
writings in original Gujarathi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


278 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

278 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“3. The varna system is connected with the way of earning a 
living. There is no harm if a person belonging to one varna 
acquires the knowledge or science and art specialized in 
by persons belonging to other varnas. But as far as the 
way of earning his living is concerned he must follow 
the occupation of the varna to which he belongs which 
means he must follow the hereditary profession of his 
forefathers. 

“4. The object of the varna system is to prevent competition 
and class struggle and class war. I believe in the varna 
system because it fixes the duties and occupations of 
persons. 

“5. Varna means the determination of a man’s occupation 
before he is born. 

“6. In the Varna system no man has any liberty to choose 
his occupation. His occupation is determined for him by 
heredity.” 

Turning to the field of economic life, Mr. Gandhi stands for 
two ideals : 

One of these is the opposition to machinery. As early as 1921 
Mr. Gandhi gave vent to his dislike for machinery. Writing in the 
Young India of 19th January 1921, Mr. Gandhi said : 

“Do I want to put back the hand of the clock of progress ? 

Do I want to replace the mills by hand-spinning and hand- 
weaving ? Do I want to replace the railway by the country- 
cart ? Do I want to destroy machinery altogether ? These 
questions have been asked by some journalists and public 
men. My answer is: I would not weep over the disappearance 
of machinery or consider it a calamity.” 

His opposition to machinery is well evidenced by his idolization 
of charkha (the spinning wheel) and by insistence upon hand- 
spinning and hand-weaving. This opposition to machinery and 
his love for charkha is not a matter of accident. It is a matter of 
philosophy. This philosophy Mr. Gandhi took special occasion to 
propound in his presidential address at the Kathiawad Political 
Conference held on 8th January 1925. This is what Mr. Gandhi 
said : 

“Nations are tired of the worship of lifeless machines 
multi-plied ad infinitum. We are destroying the matchless 
living machines viz., our own bodies by leaving them to rust 
and trying to substitute lifeless machinery for them. It is a law 
of God that the body must be fully worked and utilised. We 
dare not ignore it. The spinning wheel is the auspicious symbol 
of Sharir Yajna — body labour. He who eats his food without 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 279 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 279 

offering this sacrifice steals it. By giving up this sacrifice 
we became traitors to the country, and banged the door 
in the face of the Goddess of Fortune.” 

Anyone who has read Mr. Gandhi’s booklet on Hind 
Swaraj (Indian Home Rule) will know that Mr. Gandhi is 
against modern civilization. The book was first published in 
1908. But there has been no change in his ideology. Writing 
in 1921 Mr. Gandhi said 1 : 

“The booklet is a severe condemnation of ‘modern 
civilization.’ It was written in 1908. My conviction is 
deeper today than ever. I feel that, if India would discard 
‘Modern civilization’ she can only gain by doing so.” In 
Mr. Gandhi’s view 2 : 

“Western civilization is the creation of satan.” 

The second ideal of Mr. Gandhi is the elimination of 
class-war and even class struggle in the relationship between 
employers and employees and between landlords and tenants. 
Mr. Gandhi’s views on the relationship between employers 
and employees were, set forth by him in an article on the 
subject which appeared in the Nava-Jivan of the 8th June 
1921 from which the following is an extract : 

“Two paths are open before India, either to introduce 
the Western principle of ‘Might is right’ or to uphold the 
Eastern principle that truth alone conquers, that truth 
knows no mishap, that the strong and the weak have alike 
a right to secure justice. The choice is to begin with the 
labouring class. Should the labourers obtain an increment 
in their wages by violence ? Even if that be possible, they 
cannot resort to anything like violence, howsoever legitimate 
may be their claims. To use violence for securing rights 
may seem an easy path, but it proves to be thorny in the 
long run. Those who live by sword die also by sword. The 
swimmer often dies by drowning. Look at Europe. No one 
seems to be happy there, for not one is contented. The 
labourer does not trust the capitalist and the capitalist 
has no faith in the labourer. Both have a sort of vigour 
and strength but even the bulls have it. They fight to the 
very bitter end. All motion is not progress. We have got no 
reason to believe, that the people of Europe are progressing. 
Their possession of wealth does not argue the possession 
of any moral or spiritual qualities. 

•k •k ~k 


1. Young India, 26th January 1921. 

2. Dharma Manthan, p. 65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


280 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

280 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“What shall we do then ? The labourers in Bombay made a 
fine stand. I was not in a position to know all the facts. But 
this much I could see that they could fight in a better way. 

The millowner may be wholly in the wrong. In the struggle 
between capital and labour, it may be generally said that 
more often than not the capitalists are in the wrong box. 

But when labour comes fully to realise its strength, I know 
it can become more tyrannical than capital. The millowners 
will have to work on the terms dictated by labour, if the 
latter could command intelligence of the former. It is clear, 
however, that labour will never attain to that intelligence. 

If it does, labour will cease to be labour and become itself 
the master. The capitalists do not fight on the strength of 
money alone. They do possess intelligence and tact. 

“The question before us is this: When the labourers, 
remaining what they are, develop a certain consciousness, 
what should be their course ? It would be suicidal if the 
labourers rely upon their numbers or brute-force, i.e., violence. 

By so doing, they will do harm to industries in the country. 

If, on the other hand, they take their stand on pure justice 
and suffer in their person to secure it, not only will they 
always succeed but they will reform their masters, develop 
industries and both master and men will be as members of 
one and the same family.” 

Referring to the same theme on another occasion Mr. Gandhi 
said 1 : 

“Nor was it otherwise before. India’s history is not one 
of strained relations between capital and labour.” 

Particularly noteworthy are the views of Mr. Gandhi on strike 
as a weapon in the hand of the workers to improve their economic 
condition. Mr. Gandhi says 2 : 

“Speaking, therefore, as one having handled large 
successful strikes, I repeat the following maxims, already 
stated in these pages, for the guidance of all strike leaders : 

(1) There should be no strike without a real grievance. 

(2) There should be no strike, if the persons concerned 
are not able to support themselves out of their 
own savings or by engaging in some temporary 
occupation, such as carding, spinning and 
weaving. Strikers should never depend upon public 
subscriptions or other charity. 

(3) Strikers must fix an unalterable minimum demand, 
and declare it before embarking upon their strike. 

1. Young India, February 23, 1922. 

2. Young India, 11th August, 1921. Italics not in the original. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


281 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 281 

“A strike may fail in spite of a just grievance and the 
ability of strikers to hold out indefinitely, if there are workers 
to replace them. A wise man, therefore, will not strike for 
increase of wages or other comforts, if he feels that he can 
be easily replaced. But a philanthropic or patriotic man will 
strike in spite of supply being greater than the demand, 
when he feels for and wishes to associate himself with his 
neighbour’s distress. Needless to say, there is no room in a 
civil strike of the nature described by me for violence in the 

shape of intimidation, incendiarism or otherwise Judged 

by the tests suggested by me, it is clear that friends of the 
strikers could never have advised them to apply for or receive 
Congress or any other public funds for their support. The 
value of the strikers’ sympathy was diminished to the extent, 
that they received or accepted financial aid. The merit of 
a sympathetic strike lies in the inconvenience and the loss 
suffered by the sympathisers.” 

Mr. Gandhi’s view on the relationship between landlords and 
tenants were expounded by him in the Young India of 18th May 
1921 in the form of instructions 1 to the tenants of U.P. who had 
risen against their landlords. Mr. Gandhi said: 

“Whilst the U. P. Government is crossing the bounds 
of propriety, and intimidating people, there is little doubt 
that the Kisans too are not making wise use of their newly 
found power. In several Zamindaries, they are said to have 
overstepped the mark, taken the law into their own hands 
and to have become impatient of anybody who would not do 
as they wish. They are abusing social boycott and are turning 
it into an instrument of violence. They are reported to have 
stopped the supply of water, barber and other paid services 
to their Zamindars in some instances and even suspended 
payment of the rent due to them. The Kisan movement 
has received an impetus from Non-co-operation but it is 
anterior to and independent of it. Whilst we will not hesitate 
to advise the Kisans when the moment comes, to suspend 
payment of taxes to Government, it is not contemplated that 
at any stage of Non-cooperation we would seek to deprive 
the Zamindars of their rent. The Kisan movement must be 
confined to the improvement of status of the Kisans and 
the betterment of the relations between the Zamindars and 
them. The Kisans must be advised scrupulously to abide 
by the terms of their agreement with the Zamindars, 
whether such is written or inferred from custom. Where a 
custom or even a written contract is bad, they may not try 

1. Italics are not in the original. Kisan means a tenant and zamindar means 
landlord. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


282 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

282 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to uproot it by violence or without previous reference to 
the Zamindars. In every case there should be a friendly 
discussion with the Zamindars and an attempt made to 
arrive at a settlement.” 

Mr. Gandhi does not wish to hurt the propertied class. 
He is even opposed to a campaign against them. He has no 
passion for economic equality. Referring to the propertied 
class Mr. Gandhi said quite recently that he does not wish to 
destroy the hen that lays the golden egg. His solution for the 
economic conflict between the owners and workers, between 
the rich and the poor, between landlords and tenants and 
between the employers and the employees is very simple. The 
owners need not deprive themselves of their property. All 
that they need do is to declare themselves Trustees for the, 
poor. Of course the Trust is to be a voluntary one carrying 
only a spiritual obligation. 


Ill 

Is there anything new in the Gandhian analysis of 
economic ills ? Are the economics of Gandhism sound ? What 
hope does Gandhism hold out to the common man, to the 
down-and out ? Does it promise him a better life, a life of 
joy, and culture, a life of freedom, not merely freedom from 
want but freedom to rise, to grow to the full stature which 
his capacities can reach ? 

There is nothing new in the Gandhian analysis of 
economic ills in so far as it attributes them to machinery 
and the civilization that is built upon it. The arguments 
that machinery and modern civilization help to concentrate 
management and control into relatively few hands, and with 
the aid of banking and credit facilitate the transfer into 
still fewer hands of all materials and factories and mills 
in which millions are bled white in order to support huge 
industries thousands of miles away from their cottages, 
or that machinery and modern civilization cause deaths, 
maimings and cripplings far in excess of the corresponding 
injuries by war, and are responsible for disease and 
physical deterioration caused directly and indirectly by the 
development of large cities with their smoke, dirt, noise, foul 
air, lack of sunshine and out-door life, slums, prostitution 
and unnatural living which they bring about, are all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


283 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 283 

old and worn out arguments. There is nothing new in them. 
Gandhism is merely repeating the views of Rousseau, Ruskin, 
Tolstoy and their school. 

The ideas which go to make up Gandhism are just 
primitive. It is a return to nature, to animal life. The only 
merit is their simplicity. As there is always a large corps of 
simple people who are attracted by them, such simple ideas 
do not die, and there is always some simpleton to preach 
them. There is, however, no doubt that the practical instincts 
of men — which seldom go wrong — have found them unfruitful 
and which society in search of progress has thought It best 
to reject. 

The economics of Gandhism are hopelessly fallacious. The 
fact that machinery and modern civilization have produced 
many evils may be admitted. But these evils are no argument 
against them. For the evils are not due to machinery and 
modern civilization. They are due to wrong social organization 
which has made private property and pursuit of personal gain 
matters of absolute sanctity. If machinery and civilization 
have not benefited everybody the remedy is not to condemn 
machinery and civilization but to alter the organization of 
society so that the benefits will not be usurped by the few 
but will accrue to all. 

In Gandhism the common man has no hope. It treats man as an 
animal and no more. It is true that man shares the, constitution 
and functions of animals, nutritive, reproductive, etc. 
But these are not distinctively human functions. The 
distinctively human function is reason, the purpose of which 
is to enable man to observe, meditate, cogitate, study and 
discover the beauties of the Universe and enrich his life and 
control the animal elements in his life. Man thus occupies 
the highest place in the scheme of animate existence. If this 
is true what is the conclusion that follows ? The conclusion 
that follows is that while the ultimate goal of a brute’s life is 
reached once his physical appetites are satisfied, the ultimate 
goal of man’s existence is not reached unless and until he has 
fully cultivated his mind. In short, what divides the brute from 
man is culture. Culture is not possible for the brute, but it is 
essential for man. That being so, the aim of human society 
must be to enable every person to lead a life of culture which 
means the cultivation of the mind as distinguished from the 
satisfaction of mere physical wants. How can this happen? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


284 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

284 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Both for society and as well as for the individual there is 
always a gulf between merely living and living worthily. In 
order that one may live worthily One must first live. The time 
and energy spent upon mere life, upon gaining of subsistence 
detracts from that available for activities of a distinctively 
human nature and which go to make up a life of culture. How 
then can a life of culture be made possible ? It is not possible 
unless there is sufficient leisure. For it is only when there 
is leisure that a person is free to devote himself to a life of 
culture. The problem of all problems which human society has 
to face is how to provide leisure to every individual. What does 
leisure mean ? Leisure means the lessening of the toil and effort 
necessary for satisfying the physical wants of life. How can 
leisure be made possible ? Leisure is quite impossible unless 
some meas are found whereby the toil required for producing 
goods necessary to satisfy human needs is lessened. What can 
lessen such toil ? Only when machine takes the place of man. 
There is no other means of producing leisure. Machinery and 
modern civilization are thus indispensable for emancipating 
man from leading the life of a brute, and for providing him 
with leisure and making a life of culture possible. The man 
who condemns machinery and modern civilization simply does 
not understand their purpose and the ultimate aim which 
human society must strive to achieve. 

Gandhism may be well suited to a society which does 
not accept democracy as its ideal. A society which does not 
believe in democracy may be indifferent to machinery and the 
civilization based upon it. But a democratic society cannot. The 
former may well content itself with life of leisure and culture 
for the few and a life of toil and drudgery for the many. But 
a democractic society must assure a life of leisure and culture 
to each one of its citizens. If the above analysis is correct 
then the slogan of a democratic society must be machinery, 
and more machinery, civilization and more civilization. Under 
Gandhism the common man must keep on toiling ceaselessly 
for a pittance and remain a brute. In short, Gandhism with 
its call of back to nature, means back to nakedness, back to 
squalor, back to poverty and back to ignorance for the vast 
mass of the people. 

The division of life into separate functions and of society 
into separate classes may not be altogether obliterated. In spite 
of many social and economic changes, in spite of the abolition 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


285 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 285 

of legal serfdom, legal slavery and the spread of the notion of 
democracy, with the extension of science, of general education 
through books, newspapers, travel and general intercourse in 
schools and factories there remains and perhaps will remain 
enough cleavage in society into a learned and an ignorant class, 
a leisure and a labouring class. 

But Gandhism is not satisfied with only notional class 
distinctions. Gandhism insists upon class structure. It regards 
the class structure of society and also the income structure as 
sacrosanct with the consequent distinctions of rich and poor, 
high and low, owners and workers as permanent parts of social 
organization. From the point of view of social consequences 
nothing can be more pernicious. Psychologically, class structure 
sets in motion influences which ape harmful to both the classes. 
There is no common plane on which the privileged and the 
subject classes can meet. There is no endosmosis, no give and 
take of life’s hopes and experiences. The social and moral 
evils of this separation to the subject class are of course real 
and obvious. It educates them into slaves and creates all the 
psychological complex which follows from a slave mentality. But 
those affecting the privileged class, though less material and 
less perceptible, are equally real. The isolation and exclusiveness 
following upon the class structure creates in the privileged 
classes the anti-social spirit of a gang. It feels it has interests 
‘of its own’ which it makes its prevailing purpose to protect 
against everybody even against the interests of the State. 
It makes their culture sterile, their art showy, their wealth 
luminous and their manners fastidious. Practically speaking 
in a class structure there is, on the one hand, tyranny, vanity, 
pride, arrogance, greed, selfishness and on the other, insecurity, 
poverty, degradation, loss of liberty, self-reliance, independence, 
dignity and self-respect. Democratic society cannot be indifferent 
to such consequences. But Gandhism does not mind these 
consequences in the least. It is not enough to say that Gandhism 
is not satisfied with mere class distinctions. It is not enough 
to say that Gandhism believes in a class structure. Gandhism 
stands for more than that. A class structure which is a faded, 
jejune, effete thing — a mere sentimentality, a mere skeleton is 
not what Gandhism wants. It wants class structure to function 
as a living faith. In this there is nothing to be surprised at. 
For class structure in Gandhism is not a mere accident. It is 
its official doctrine. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 286 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

286 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The idea of trusteeship which Gandhism proposes as 
a panacea by which the moneyed classes will hold their 
properties in trust for the poor is the most ridiculous part of 
it. All that one can say about it is that if anybody else had 
propounded it the author would have been laughed at as a 
silly fool who had not known the hard realities of life and was 
deceiving the servile classes by telling them that a little dose 
of moral rearmament to the propertied classes — those who 
by their insatiable cupidity and indomitable arrogance have 
made and will always make this world a vale of tears for the 
toiling millions — will recondition them to such an extent that 
they will be able to withstand the temptation to misuse the 
tremendous powers which the class structure gives them over 
servile classes. 

The social ideal of Gandhism is either caste or varna. 
Though it may be difficult to say which, there can be no 
doubt that the social ideal of Gandhism is not democracy. 
For whether one takes for comparison caste or varna both 
are fundamentally opposed to democracy. It would have been 
something if the defence of caste system which. Gandhism offers 
was strong and honest. But his defence of the caste system is 
the most insensible piece of rhetoric one can think of. Examine 
Mr. Gandhi’s arguments in support of caste and it will be 
found that everyone of them is specious if not puerile. To run 
through the arguments summarized earlier in this Chapter 1 . 

The first three arguments call for pity. That the Hindu 
Society has been able to stand while others have died out or 
disappeared is hardly a matter for congratulation. If it has 
survived it is not because of caste but because the foreigner 
who conquered the Hindus did not find it necessary to 
kill them wholesale. There is no honour in mere survival. 
What matters is the plane of survival. One can survive 
by unconditional surrender. One can survive by beating a 
cowardly retreat and one can survive by fighting. On what 
plane have the Hindus survived ? If they can be said to have 
survived after fighting and beating their enemies the virtue 
ascribed to the caste system by Mr. Gandhi could be admitted. 
The history of the Hindus has been one of surrender — 
abject surrender. It is true others have surrendered to their 
invaders. But in their case surrender is followed by a revolt 


1. See pages 275-277 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


287 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 287 

against the foreign ruler. The Hindus have not only never 
withstood the onslaught of the foreign invader, they have never 
even shown the capacity to organize a rebellion to throw off 
the foreign yoke. On the other hand the Hindus have tried 
to make slavery comfortable. On this one may well argue the 
contrary namely that this helpless condition of the Hindus 
is due entirely to the caste system. 

Argument in para 4 is plausible. But it cannot be said that 
caste is the only machinery for discharging such functions 
as the spread of primary education or the judicial settlement 
of disputes. Caste is probably the worst instrument for the 
discharge of such functions. It can be easily influenced and 
easily corrupted. Such functions have been discharged in other 
countries much better than they have been in India although 
they have had no caste system. As to using the caste as basis 
for raising military units the idea is simply fantastic. Under 
the occupational theory underlying the caste system this is 
unthinkable. Mr. Gandhi knows that not a single caste in 
his own Province of Gujrat has ever raised a military unit. 
It did not do it in the present World War. But it did not 
do so even in the last World War, when Mr. Gandhi toured 
through Gujarat as a Recruiting Agent of British Imperialism. 
In fact under the caste system a general mobilization of the 
people for defence is impossible since mobilization requires 
a general liquidation of the occupational theory underlying 
the caste system. 

Arguments contained in paras 5 and 6 are as stupid as 
they are revolting. The argument in para 5 is hardly a good 
argument. It is quite true the family is an ideal unit in which 
every member is charged with love and affection for another 
member although there is no intermarriage among members 
of a family. It may even be conceded that in a Vaishnava 
family members of the family do not interdine and yet they are 
full of love and affection for one another. What does all this 
prove ? It does not prove that interdining and intermarrying 
are not necessary for establishing fraternity. What it 
proves is that where there are other means of maintaining 
fraternity — such as consciousness of family tie — interdining 
and intermarriage are not necessary. But it cannot be denied 
that where — as in the caste system — no binding force exists 
intermarriage and interdining are absolutely essential. There 
is no analogy between family and caste, Inter-caste dinner and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


288 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

288 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

inter-caste marriage are necessary because there are no other 
means of binding the different castes together while in the case 
of a family there exists other forces to bind them together. 
Those who have insisted upon the ban against interdining 
and inter-marriage have treated it as a question of relative 
values. They have never elevated it to the level of a question of 
absolute value. Mr. Gandhi is the first one to do it. Interdining 
is bad and even if it was capable of producing good it should 
not be resorted to and why ? Because eating is a filthy act, 
as filthy as answering the call of nature! The caste system 
has been defended by others. But this is the first time I have 
seen such an extraordinary if not a shocking argument used 
to support it. Even the orthodox may say, “Save us from 
Mr. Gandhi.” It shows what a deep-dyed Hindu Mr. Gandhi 
is. He has outdone the most orthodox of orthodox Hindus. It 
is not enough to say that it is an argument of a cave man. 
It is really an argument of a mad man. 

The argument in favour of the caste system outlined in 
para 7 is not worth much in terms of building up moral 
strength. The caste system no doubt prohibits a man from 
satisfying his lust for a woman who is not of his caste. 
The caste system no doubt prohibits a man from satisfying 
his craving for food cooked in the house of a man who is 
not of his caste. If morality consists of observing restraints 
without regard to the sense or sensibility of restraints then 
the caste system may be admitted to be a moral system. But 
Mr. Gandhi does not see that these easy restraints are more 
than balanced by vast liberties permitted by Hinduism. For 
Hinduism places no restraint upon a man marrying hundred 
women and keeping hundred prostitutes within the ambit of 
his caste. Nor does it stop him from indulging in his appetite 
with his castemen to any degree. 

The argument in para 8 begs the whole question. The 
hereditary system may be good or may not be good. It may 
be agreeable to some. It may be disagreeable to others. 
Why elevate it into an official doctrine ? Why make it 
compulsory ? In Europe it is not an official doctrine and it 
is not compulsory. It is left to the choice of an individual 
most of whom do follow the profession of their ancestors and 
some don’t. Who can say that compulsory system has worked 
better than the voluntary system ? If a comparison of the 
economic condition of the people in India and the people of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


289 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 289 

Europe is any guide there would be very few rationally- minded 
people who would be found to support the caste system on this 
ground. As to the difficulty in changing nomenclature to keep 
pace with frequent changes in occupation it is only artificial. 
It arises out of the supposed necessity of having labels for 
designating persons following a particular profession. The 
class labels are quite unnecessary and could well be abolished 
altogether without causing difficulty. Besides what happens 
today in India ? Men’s callings and their class labels are not 
in accord. A Brahmin sells shoes. Nobody is disturbed because 
he is not called a Chamar. A Chamar becomes an officer of the 
State. Nobody is disturbed because he is not called a Brahmin. 
The whole argument is based on a misunderstanding. What 
matters to society is not the label by which the individual’s 
class is known but the service he offers. 

The last argument set out in para 9 is one of the most 
astounding arguments I have heard in favour of the caste 
system. It is historically false. No one who knows anything 
about the Manu Smriti can say that the caste system is a 
natural system. What does Manu Smriti show? It shows that 
the caste system is a legal system maintained at the point 
of a bayonet. If it has survived it is due to (1) prevention of 
the masses from the possession of arms ; (2) denying to the 
masses the right to education and (3) depriving the masses 
of the right to property. The caste system far from natural 
is really an imposition by the ruling classes upon the servile 
classes. 

That Mr. Gandhi changed over from the caste system to 
the varna system does not make the slightest difference to the 
charge that Gandhism is opposed to democracy. In the first 
place, the idea of varna is the parent of the idea of caste. If 
the idea of caste is a pernicious idea it is entirely because 
of the viciousness of the idea of varna. Both are evil ideas 
and it matters very little whether one believes in varna or in 
caste. The idea of varna was most mercilessly attacked by the 
Buddhists who did not believe in it. Orthodox or the Sanatan 
Vedic Hindus had no rational defence to offer. All that they 
could say was that it was founded on the authority of the 
Vedas and that as the Vedas were infallible so was the varna 
system. This argument was not enough to save the varna 
system against the rationalism of the Buddhists. If the idea 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


290 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

290 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the varna survived it was because of the Bhagvat Gita, 
which gave a philosophical foundation to the varna system by 
arguing that the varna was based on the innate qualities of 
man. The Bhagvat Gita made use of the Sankhya philosophy 
to bolster and buttress the varna idea which would have 
otherwise petered away by making sense of a thing that is 
absolute nonsense. Bhagvat Gita had done enough mischief by 
giving a fresh lease of life to the varna system by basing it 
upon, anew and plausible foundation, namely that of innate 
qualities. The varna system of the Bhagvat Gita has at least 
two merits. It does not say that it is based on birth. Indeed it 
makes a special point that each man’s varna is fixed according 
to his innate qualities. It does not say that the occupation of 
the son shall be that of the father. It says that the profession 
of a person shall be according to his innate qualities, the 
profession of the father according to the father’s innate quality 
and that of the son according to the son’s innate qualities. 
But Mr. Gandhi has given a new interpretation of the varna 
system. He has changed it out of recognition. Under the old 
orthodox interpretation caste connoted hereditary occupation 
but varna did not. Mr. Gandhi by his own whim has given 
a new connotation to the varna. With Mr. Gandhi varna is 
determined by birth and the profession of a varna is determined 
by the principle of heredity so that varna is merely another 
name for caste. That Mr. Gandhi changed from caste to varna 
does not indicate the growth of any new revolutionary ideology. 
The genius of Mr. Gandhi is elvish, always and throughout. 
He has all the precocity of an elf with no little of its outward 
guise. Like an elf he can never grow up and grow out of the 
caste ideology. 

Mr. Gandhi sometimes speaks on social and economic 
subjects as though he was a blushing Red. Those who will 
study Gandhism will not be deceived by the occasional 
aberrations of Mr. Gandhi in favour of democracy and against 
capitalism. For Gandhism is in no sense a revolutionary creed. 
It is conservatism in excelsis. So far as India is concerned, 
it is a reactionary creed blazoning on its banner the call of 
Return to Antiquity. Gandhism aims at the resuscitation and 
re-animation of India’s dread, dying past. 

Gandhism is a paradox. It stands for freedom from foreign 
domination, which means the destruction of the existing political 
structure of the country. At the same time it seeks to maintain 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/YS- 1 4- 1 1-2014 291 

WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 291 

intact a social structure which permits, the domination of 
one class by another on a hereditary basis which means a 
perpetual domination of one class by another. What is the 
explanation of this paradox ? Is it a part of a strategy by 
Mr. Gandhi to win the whole-hearted support of the Hindus, 
orthodox and unorthodox, to the campaign of Swaraj ? If it is 
the latter, can Gandhism be regarded as honest and sincere ? 
Be that as it may there are two features of Gandhism which 
are revealing but to which unfortunately no attention has 
so far been paid. Whether they will make Gandhism more 
acceptable than Marxism is another matter. But as they do 
help to distinguish Gandhism from Marxism, it may be well 
to refer to them. 

The first special feature of Gandhism is that its philosophy 
helps those who have, to keep what they have and to prevent 
those who have not from getting what they have a right to 
get. No one who examines the Gandhian attitude to strikes, 
the Gandhian reverence for Caste and the Gandhian doctrine 
of Trusteeship by the rich for the benefit of the poor can 
deny that this is upshot of Gandhism. Whether this is the 
calculated result of a deliberate design or whether it is a 
matter of accident may be open to argument. But the fact 
remains that Gandhism is the philosophy of the well-so-do 
and the leisure class. 

The second special feature of Gandhism is to delude people 
into accepting their misfortunes by presenting them as best 
of good fortunes. One or two illustrations will suffice to bring 
out the truth of this statement. 

The Hindu sacred law penalized the Shudras (Hindus of 
the fourth class) from acquiring wealth. It is a law of enforced 
poverty unknown in any other part of the world. What does 
Gandhism do ? It does not lift the ban. It blesses the Shudra 
for his moral courage to give up property ! ! It is well worth 
quoting Mr. Gandhi’s own words. Here they are 1 : 

“The Shudra who only serves (the higher caste) as 
a matter of religious duty, and who will never own any 
property, who indeed has not even the ambition to own 

anything, is deserving of thousand obeisance The very 

Gods will shower down flowers on him. 


1. Quoted from Varna Vyavastha, p. 51. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


292 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

292 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Another illustration in support is the attitude of Gandhism 
towards the scavenger. The sacred law of the Hindus lays 
down that a scavenger’s progeny shall live by scavenging. 
Under Hinduism scavenging was not a matter of choice, it 
was a matter of force 1 . What does Gandhism do ? It seeks to 
perpetuate this system by praising scavenging as the noblest 
service to society ! ! Let me quote Mr. Gandhi: As a President 
of a Conference of the Untouchables, Mr. Gandhi said 1 : 

“I do not want to attain Moksha. I do not want to be 
reborn. But if I have to be reborn, I should be born an 
untouchable, so that I may share their sorrows, sufferings and 
the affronts levelled at them, in order that I may endeavour 
to free myself and them from that miserable condition. I, 
therefore prayed that if I should be born again, I should do 
so not as a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, or Shudra, but as 
an Atishudra... 

“I love scavenging. In my Ashram, an eighteen years old 
Brahmin lad is doing the scavenger’s work in order to teach 
the Ashram scavenger cleanliness. The lad is no reformer. 

He was born and bred in orthodoxy... But he felt that his 
accomplishments were incomplete until he had become also a 
perfect sweeper, and that, if he wanted the Ashram sweeper to 
do his work well, he must do it himself and set an example. 

“You should realize that you are cleaning Hindu Society.” 

Can there be a worse example of false propaganda than 
this attempt of Gandhism to perpetuate evils which have been 
deliberately imposed by one class over another ? If Gandhism 
preached the rule of poverty for all and not merely for the 
Shudra the worst that could be said about it is that it is a 
mistaken idea. But why preach it as good for one class only ? 
Why appeal to the worst of human failings, namely, pride 
and vanity in order to make him voluntarily accept what on 
a rational basis he would resent as a cruel discrimination 
against him ? What is the use of telling the scavenger that 
even a Brahmin is prepared to do scavenging when it is clear 
that according to Hindu Shastras and Hindu notions even if 
a Brahmin did scavenging he would never be subject to the 
disabilities of one who is a born scavenger ? For in India a 
man is not a scavenger because of his work. He is a scavenger 
because of his birth irrespective of the question whether he does 
scavenging or not. If Gandhism preached that scavenging is a 
noble profession with the object of inducing those who refuse 
1. Young India, 27th April 1921. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


293 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 293 

to engage in it, one could understand it. But why appeal 
to the scavenger’s pride and vanity in order to induce him 
and him only to keep on to scavenging 1 by telling him that 
scavenging is a noble profession and that he need not be 
ashamed of it ? To preach that poverty is good for the Shudra 
and for none else, to preach that scavenging is good for the 
Untouchables and for none else and to make them accept 
these onerous impositions as voluntary purposes of life, by 
appeal to their failings is an outrage and a cruel joke on the 
helpless classes which none but Mr. Gandhi can perpetuate 
with equanimity and impunity. In this connection one is 
reminded of the words of Voltaire who in-repudiation of an 
‘ism’ very much like Gandhism said: “Oh! mockery to say to 
people that the suffering of some brings joy to others and 
works good to the whole ! What solace is it to a dying man 
to know that from his decaying body a thousand worms will 
come into life?” 

Criticism apart, this is the technique of Gandhism, to make 
wrongs done appear to the very victim as though they were 
his privileges. If there is an ‘ism’ which has made full use of 
religion as an opium to lull the people into false beliefs and 
false security, it is Gandhism. Following Shakespeare one can 
well say : Plausibility ! Ingenuity ! Thy name is Gandhism. 

IV 

Such is Gandhism. Having known what is Gandhism the 
answer to the question, ‘Should Gandhism become the law of 
the land what would be the lot of the Untouchables under 
it,’ cannot require much scratching of the brain. How would 
it compare with the lot of the lowest Hindu ? Enough has 
been said to show what would be his lot should the Gandhian 
social order come into being. In so far as the lowest Hindu 
and the Untouchable belong to the same disinherited class, 
the Untouchable’s lot cannot be better. If anything it might 
easily be worse. Because in India even the lowest man 
among the Caste Hindus — why even the aboriginal and Hill 
Tribe man — though educationally and economically not very 

1. Some of the Provinces of India have laws which make refusal by a scavenger 
to do scavenging a crime for which he can be tried and punished by a criminal 
court. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 294 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

294 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

much above the Untouchables is still superior to the 
Untouchables. It is not he regards himself as superior to 
the Untouchables. The Hindu society accepts his claim to 
superiority over the Untouchables. The Untouchable will 
therefore continue to suffer the worst fate as he does now 
namely, in prosperity he will be the last to be employed and 
in depression the first to be fired. 

What does Gandhism do to relieve the Untouchables from 
this fate ? Gandhism professes to abolish Untouchability. That 
is hailed as the greatest virtue of Gandhism. But what does 
this virtue amount to in actual life ? To assess the value of this 
anti-Untouchability which is regarded as a very big element 
in Gandhism, it is necessary to understand fully the scope of 
Mr. Gandhi’s programme for the removal of Untouchability. 
Does it mean anything more than that the Hindus will not 
mind touching the Untouchables ? Does it mean the removal 
of the ban on the right of the Untouchables to education ? It 
would be better to take the two questions separately. 

To start with the first question, Mr. Gandhi does not say that 
a Hindu should not take a bath after touching the Untouchables. 
If Mr. Gandhi does not object to it as a purification of pollution 
then it is difficult to see how Untouchability can be said to 
vanish by touching the Untouchables. Untouchability centres 
round the idea of pollution by contact and purification by 
bath to remove the pollution. Does it mean social assimilation 
with the Hindus? Mr. Gandhi has most categorically stated 
that removal of Untouchability does not mean inter-dining 
or inter-marriage between the Hindus and the Untouchables. 
Mr. Gandhi’s anti-Untouchability means that the Untouchables 
will be classed as Shudras instead of being classed as Ati- 
Shudras . 1 There is nothing more in it. Mr. Gandhi has 
not considered the question whether the old Shudras will 
accept the new Shudras into their fold. If they don’t then 
the removal of Untouchability is a senseless proposition 
for it will still keep the Untouchables as a separate social 
category. Mr. Gandhi probably knows that the abolition of 
Untouchability will not bring about the assimilation of the 
Untouchables by the Shudras. That seems to be the reason 
why Mr. Gandhi himself has given a new and a different name 


1. Young India, 5th February 1925. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


295 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 295 

to the Untouchables. The new name registers by anticipation 
what is likely to be the fact. By calling the Untouchables 
Harijans Mr. Gandhi has killed two birds with one stone. 
He has shown that assimilation of the Untouchables by 
the Shudras is not possible. He has also by his new name 
counteracted assimilation and made it impossible. 

Regarding the second question, it is true that Gandhism 
is prepared to remove the old ban placed by the Hindu 
Shastras on the right of the Untouchables to education 
and permit them to acquire knowledge and learning. Under 
Gandhism the Untouchables may study law, they may study 
medicine, they may study engineering or anything else they 
may fancy. So far so good. But will the Untouchables be free 
to make use of their knowledge and learning ? Will they 
have the right to choose their profession ? Can they adopt 
the career of lawyer, doctor or engineer ? To these questions 
the answer which Gandhism gives is an emphatic ‘no. 1 ’ 
The Untouchables must follow their hereditary professions. 
That those occupations they are unclean is no answer: That 
before the occupation became hereditary it was the result 
of force and not volition does not matter. The argument 
of Gandhism is that what is once settled is settled for 
ever even if it was wrongly settled. Under Gandhism the 
Untouchables are to be eternal scavengers. There is no 
doubt that the Untouchables would much prefer the orthodox 
system of Untouchability. A compulsory state of ignorance 
imposed upon the Untouchables by the Hindu Shastras 
made scavenging bearable. But Gandhism which compels an 
educated Untouchable to do scavenging is nothing short of 
cruelty. The grace in Gandhism is a curse in its worst form. 
The virtue of the anti-Untouchability plank in Gandhism is 
quite illusory. There is no substance in it. 


V 

What else is there in Gandhism which the Untouchables can 
accept as opening a way for their ultimate salvation ? Barring 
this illusory campaign against Untouchability Gandhism is 
simply another form of Sanatanism which is the ancient name 
for militant orthodox Hinduism. What is there in Gandhism 
which is not to be found in orthodox Hinduism ? There is 
1 See supra, pages 275-77 for Mr. Gandhi’s views on the subject. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


296 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

296 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

caste in Hinduism, there is caste in Gandhism. Hinduism 
believes in the law of hereditary profession, so does Gandhism. 
Hinduism enjoins cow-worship. So does Gandhism. Hinduism 
upholds the law of karma, predestination of man’s condition in 
this world, so does Gandhism. Hinduism accepts the authority 
of the Shastras. So does Gandhism. Hinduism believes in 
avatars or incarnations of God. So does Gandhism. Hinduism 
believes in idols, so does Gandhism . 1 All that Gandhism has 
done is to find a philosophic justification for Hinduism and 
its dogmas. Hinduism is bald in the sense that it is just a set 
of rules which bear on their face the appearance of a crude 
and cruel system. Gandhism supplies the philosophy which 
smoothens its surface and gives it the appearance of decency 
and respectability and so alters it and embellishes it as to make 
it even attractive. What philosophy does Gandhism propound 
to cover the nudity of Hinduism ? This philosophy can be put 
in a nutshell. It is a philosophy which says that “All that is 
in Hinduism is well, all that is in Hinduism is necessary for 
public good.” Those who are familiar with Voltaire’s Candide 
will recognize that it is the philosophy of Master Pangiloss 
and recall the mockery Voltaire made of it. The Hindus are 
of course pleased with it. No doubt it suits them and accords 
with their interest. Prof. Radhakrishnan — whether out of 
genuine feeling or out of sycophancy we need not stop to 
inquire — has gone to the length of describing Mr. Gandhi as 
‘God on earth.’ What do the Untouchables understand this to 
mean ? To them it means that: “This God by name Gandhi 
came to console an afflicted race : He saw India and changed 
it not saying all is well and will be, if the Hindus will only 
fulfil the law of caste. He told the afflicted race, ‘I have come 
to fulfil the law of caste.’ Not a tittle, not a jot shall I allow 
to abate from it.” 

What hope can Gandhism offer to the Untouchables ? To the 
Untouchables Hinduism is a veritable chamber of horrors. The 
sanctity and infallibility of the Vedas, Smritis and Shastras, the 
iron law of caste, the heartless law of karma and the senseless 
law of status by birth are to the Untouchables veritable 
instruments of torture which Hinduism has forged against the 
Untouchables. These very instruments which have mutilated, 

1 Mr. Gandhi’s articles of faith have been outlined by him in Young India of 
6th October 1921. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-U-2013 297 

WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

GANDHISM 297 

blasted and blighted the life of the Untouchables are to be found 
intact and untarnished in the bosom of Gandhism. How can the 
Untouchables say that Gandhism is a heaven and not a chamber 
of horrors as Hinduism has been ? The only reaction and a very 
natural reaction of the Untouchables would be to run away from 
Gandhism. 

Gandhists may say that what I have stated applies to the old 
type of Gandhism. There is a new Gandhism, Gandhism without 
caste. This has reference to the recent statement 1 of Mr. Gandhi 
that caste is an anachronism. Reformers were naturally gladdened 
by this declaration of Mr. Gandhi. And who would not be glad to 
see that a man like Mr. Gandhi having such terrible influence over 
the Hindus, after having played the most mischievous part of a 
social reactionary, after having stood out as the protagonist of the 
caste system, after having beguiled and befooled the unthinking 
Hindus with arguments which made no distinction between what 
is fair and foul should have come out with this recantation ? But 
is this really a matter for jubilation ? Does it change the nature 
of Gandhism ? Does it make Gandhism a new and a better ‘ism’ 
than it was before. Those who are carried away by this recantation 
of Mr. Gandhi, forget two things. In the first place all that 
Mr. Gandhi has said is that caste is an anachronism. He does 
not say it is an evil. He does not say it is anathema. Mr. Gandhi 
may be taken to be not in favour of caste. But Mr. Gandhi 
does not say that he is against the Varna system. And what is 
Mr. Gandhi’s varna system ? It is simply a new name for the caste 
system and retains all the worst features of the caste system. 

The declaration of Mr. Gandhi cannot be taken to mean any 
fundamental change in Gandhism. It cannot make Gandhism 
acceptable to the Untouchables. The Untouchables will still have 
ground to say : “Good God! Is this man Gandhi our Saviour?” 

• • 


Hindustan Times, 15th April 1945. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


298 


Appendix I 

SHRADHANAND ON BARDOLI PROGRAMME 
FOR UNTOUCHABLES 

Correspondence between Swami Shradhanand and Pandit 
Motilal Nehru, General Secretary of the Congress, on the Congress 
Sub-Committee appointed in 1922 to frame a Scheme for the uplift 
of the Untouchables. 

(1) Swamiji’s Letter 

The General Secretary, 

All India Congress Committee, 

Camp, Delhi. 

I acknowledge, with thanks, receipt of your letters Nos. 331 
and 332 embodying resolutions of the Working Committee and 
of the All-India Congress Committee about Untouchability. I 
observe with pain, that the resolution of the All India Congress 
Committee, as at present worded, does not include the whole of 
what was passed by the Committee. 

The facts are these : I sent the following letter to Mr. Vithalbhai 
Patel (the then) General Secretary on 23rd May 1922, which was 
also published by the principal dailies of the country. 

‘My Dear Mr. Patel, 

There was a time (vide Young India of 25th May, 1921) when 
Mahatmaji put the question of Untouchability in the forefront of the 
Congress programme. I find now that the question of raising the 
Depressed Classes has been relegated to an obscure corner. While 
Khadi claims the attention of some of our best workers and a liberal 
sum has been earmarked for it, for the year, while a strong sub- 
committee has been appointed to look after national education and 
a special appeal for fund is to be made for the same, the question 
of the removal of Untouchability has been shelved by making 
small grants to Ahmedabad, Ahmednagar and Madras. I am of 
opinion that with a majority of 6 crores of our brethren set against 
us by the bureaucracy, even the Khadi Scheme cannot succeed 
completely. The Members of the Working Committee, perhaps, do 
not know that on this side, our suppressed brethern are leaving 
off khadi and taking to buying cheap foreign cloth. I want to move 
the following resolution in the meeting of the All-India Congress 
Committee which comes off on the 7th of June next at Lucknow, 
that a sub -committee consisting of three members of the All-India 
Congress Committee be appointed to give effect to the resolution 
about the so-called Depressed Classes, that a sum of five lakhs of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


299 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX I 299 

rupees be placed at their disposal for propaganda work and that in 
future all applications for grants be referred to the said subcommittee 
for disposal.” My proposal was amended by the Working Committee 
and ran as follows : — 

“This Committee hereby appoints a committee consisting of 
Swami Shradhanand, Mrs. Sarojini Naidu and Messrs. G. B. 
Deshpande and I. K. Yajnik to formulate a scheme embodying 
practical measures to be adopted for bettering the condition of 
the so-called Untouchables throughout the country and to place 
it for consideration before the next meeting of the Working 
Committee, the amount to be raised for the scheme to be Rs. 2 
lakhs for the present.” 

Mr. Patel asked me to accept the Working Committee’s proposed 
resolution in toto. I refused to accept the Working Committee’s 
resolution and in the very first sitting of the All-India Congress 
Committee substituted 5 lakhs for 2 lakhs with the condition that 
one lakh of the same be allotted by the All-India Congress Committee 
out of the funds in its hands, in cash and an appeal be made for 
the balance. 

Mr. Rajagopalachariar, on behalf of the Working Committee, 
proposed that instead of fixing the amount to be allotted out of the 
Congress funds now, it should be provided that when the Scheme was 
accepted by the Working Committee that Committee should allot as 
much cash as it could then spare for this purpose. I do not recollect 
the exact words but the purport of the amendment as given above 
is, to my knowedge, true. 

On this an uproar arose and the query was pressed from all 
sides that the cash balance in the hands of the All-India Congress 
Committee ought to be announced. The President called me aside and 
told me in confidence that the Congress possessed very little cash 
balance and if pressed to disclose the true state of affairs it would 
harm the movement, as outsiders and even C.I.D. people were also 
present. On this I accepted the amendment of Mr. Rajagopalachariar 
in spite of protests from my seconder and supporters. But my surprise 
was great when I found the resolution in the dailies, as reported by 
the Associated Press, shorn of Mr. Rajagopalachariar’s amendment. 

After the above resolution was passed, some members suggested 
that a convener of the sub -committee ought to be appointed and 
several members proposed me as the convener. On this, Mr. Vithalbhai 
Patel (the then General Secretary) got up and said : “As Swami 
Shradhanand’s name occurs first, naturally he will be the convener 
and therefore there was no need of moving any fresh resolution at all.” 

Members from all parts of the country began to give information 
to me about Untouchability in their provinces and pressed me to 
visit their parts. On this, I made some promises. Then I thought 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


300 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

300 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that without some cash for preliminary expenses, no enquiries 
on the spot could be made and hence no proper scheme could be 
formulated. I also learnt that Rs. 25,000 had been voted by the 
Working Committee for “the Independent” of Allahabad and that 
an application for grant of Rs. 10,000 to the Urdu daily Congress 
of Delhi had been placed by Hakim Ajmal Khan and Dr. Ansari 
before the Working Committee. So, considering that after all, the 
Congress might not be so hard pressed for cash, I wrote a letter 
addressed to the President, asking him to give the Untouchability 
Sub-Committee an advance of Rs. 10,000 for preliminary expenses. 

After all this,- the following resolution of the Working Committee 
forwarded by your letter No. 331 presents a very interesting 
reading: — 

“Read letter from Swami Shradhanand, dated 8th June 1922 for 
an advance for drawing up a scheme for Depressed Class work — 
Resolved that Mr. Gangadharrao B. Deshpande be appointed 
convener of the sub-committee appointed for the purpose and he 
be requested to convene a meeting at an early date, and that 
Swami Shradhanand’s letter be referred to the Sub-Committee.” 

There is another matter which is inexplicable. After my first 
letter had been acknowledged, I addressed the following letter from 
Hardwar on 3rd June 1922 : — 

“My Dear Mr. Patel, 

I shall leave Hardwar the day after tomorrow and reach Lucknow 
on the morning of June 6th. You know by now, that I feel the most 
for the so-called Depressed Classes. Even in the Punjab I find that 
no attention worth the name has been paid to this item of the 
constructive programme. In the U. P. of course it will be an uphill 
work. But there is another very serious difficulty. 

The Bardoli programme in its note under item (4) lays down 
that where prejudice is still strong, separate wells and separate 
schools must be maintained out of the Congress Funds. This leaves 
a loophole for those Congress workers who are either prejudiced 
against the Depressed Classes or are weak and no work can be done 
in inducing people to agree to allow the Untouchables to draw water 
from common wells. In the Bijnoor District, I learn there was no 
restriction and the Untouchables drew water freely from common 
wells. But in some places, fresh prejudice is being engendered under 
the aegis of the Bardoli resolution note. In my recent visits to Ambala 
Cant., Ludhiana, Batala, Lahore, Amritsar and Jandiala, I found 
that the question of the removal of disabilities of the Untouchables 
is being ignored. In and near Delhi, it is the Dalitodhar Sabha, 
of which I am the president, rather than the Congress which is 
doing appreciable work. I think that unless item (4) of the Bardoli 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


301 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX I 301 

constructive programme is amended in proper form, the work which 
I consider to be the most important plank in the Congress programme, 
will suffer. 

Kindly place the following proposal before the President and if 
he allows it to be placed before the next meeting, of the All-India 
Congress Committee, I shall move it there — “Instead of the Note under 
item (4) of the Bardoli resolution substitute the following note: — 

“The following demands of the Depressed Classes ought to be 
complied with at once, namely that (a) they are allowed to sit on 
the same carpet with citizens of other classes ; ( b ) they get the 
right to draw water from common wells and (c) their children get 
admission into National schools and Colleges and are allowed to 
mix freely with students drawn from the so-called higher castes.” 

I want to impress upon the members of the All-India Congress 
Committee the great importance of this term. I know of cases where 
the Depressed Classes are in open revolt against tyranny of the so- 
called upper castes and unless the above demands are conceded to 
them, they will succumb to the machine of the bureaucracy. 

After my first proposals were passed in the All-India Congress 
Committee Meeting on June 7th at Lucknow, I asked Mr. Patel to 
put my proposed amendment of Note to item (4) of Bardoli resolution 
before the meeting. He told me that the Working Committee would 
refer it to the Sub-Committee and asked me not to press it there. 
I agreed. But I have not received copy of my resolution of the 
Working Committee, referring my proposal to the Untouchability 
Sub- Committee. 

The Untouchability question is very acute in and near Delhi and 
I have to grapple with it at once. But the Sub-Committee cannot 
begin work off-hand because the Working Committee has to take 
several other political situations in the country into consideration 
before deciding upon any scheme of practical measures to be adopted 
for uprooting Untouchability on behalf of the Congress. Under these 
circumstances, I cannot be of any use to the Sub-Committee and beg 
to resign from membership. 

Yours sincerely, 

Delhi, Jan. 30. Shradhanand SaNyasi. 

(2) Secretary’s Reply 

Dear Swamiji, 

Your letter, dated June 1922 received in my office on the 30th of 
that month, has by a resolution of the Working Committee passed in 
Bombay on the 18th instant been referred to me with instructions to 
explain facts and request you to be good enough to reconsider your 
resignation from the Depressed Classes Sub-Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


302 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

302 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As you are. aware, I have no personal knowledge of the facts 
which happened prior to my release from the jail. But I was present 
at the meeting of the Working Committee which passed the resolution 
dated 10th June 1922, appointing Mr. Deshpande as the Convener of 
the Sub-Committee. It was not then mentioned that there was any 
understanding about any particular member acting as the convener 
of the Sub-Committee and the whole resolution was passed merely 
to complete the necessary formalities in regard to the payment of 
money. It was felt that a formal resolution of the Sub-Committee was 
necessary before any expenditure could be sanctioned. Mr. Deshpande 
was accordingly appointed as the convener and a sum of Rs. 500/- was 
voted for the expense of these preliminary steps. By an oversight, the 
resolution as drafted omitted to mention the sanction of Rs. 500/-. 
You will thus observe that it was not due to the unwillingness of the 
Working Committee to sanction Rs. 10,000/- for Untouchability, but the 
true reason for framing the resolution in the manner it was framed 
was that I have explained above. Nothing could be farther from the 
intention of the Working Committee than a desire to under-rate the 
importance of the work your Sub- Committee was called upon to do or in 
any way to ignore the valuable advice tendered by you. On your letter 
being placed before the last meeting of the Working Committee, the 
omission of the grant of Rs. 500/- was supplied and I was instructed 
to communicate with you on the subject. It will be a great pity if 
the Sub-Committee is deprived of the benefit of your experience and 
special knowledge of the whole question of Untouchability and I will 
ask you, therefore, in public interest, to reconsider your decision and 
wire to my office at Allahabad withdrawing your resignation from the 
Sub-Committee. I need hardly add that any resolutions arrived at by 
your Sub-Committee will receive all the consideration they deserve 
at the hands of the Working Committee. 

As to the alteration in the Working Committee’s resolution in 
regard to separate wells and schools, the best course would be for 
your Sub-Committee to recommend the change and for the Working 
Committee to adopt it. 

I am afraid you are under a misapprehension as regards the 
grant to The Independent, of Allahabad, and The Congress of Delhi. 
In reference to the former, all that has been done is to sanction 
the application of the U. P. Provincial Committee to advance as a 
loan to the “Nationalist Journals” Ltd., Rs. 25,000/- from the funds 
already granted to that committee and in reference to the latter, the 
application for a grant of a loan was wholly rejected. 

Yours sincerely, 

Motilal Nehru, 

Bombay, July 23, 1922. General Secretary. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-20 1 3/VS- 14-1 1-2014 303 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX I 303 

(3) swamiji’s Rejoinder 
Dear Pandit Motilal Ji, 

I received your letter of 23rd July 1922 addressed from Bombay 
about my resignation from the Untouchability Sub-Committee, I am 
sorry I am unable to reconsider it because some of the facts brought 
out by me in my first letter have simply been ignored. 

(1) Kindly enquire of Mr. Rajagopalachariar whether I did not 
first propose that at least one lakh should be given in cash out of 
the funds in the hands of the All-India Congress Committee, whether 
he did not move an amendment substituting words for the above 
which purported to promise that when the plan of work formulated 
by the Sub-Committee was accepted by the Working Committee, that 
Committee would allot as much money for Untouehability department 
as it could then spare and whether I did not accept his amendment 
when the President called me aside and explained the exact financial 
position at the time. If this is the fact, then why did the amendment 
not appear with the resolution ? 

(2) Did you enquire of Mr. Vithalbhai J. Patel whether the 
members of the All-India Congress Committee did not propose me 
as the convener of the Sub-Committee and whether he did not then 
say — “As Swami Shradhanand’s name occurs first naturally he will 
be the convener and therefore there was no need of moving any fresh 
resolution at all?” I enquired about this from Dr. Ansari and he 
wrote back to me on June 17th, 1922, saying that I was appointed 
convener. Dr. Ansari is with you and you can verify it from him. I 
hope Mr. Patel has not forgotten all about it. 

(3) Then the immediate work among the Untouchables here is very 
urgent and I cannot delay it for any reason whatsoever. Kindly have 
my resignation accepted in the next meeting of the Working Committee, 
so that I may be free to work out my own plan about the removal 
of Untouchability. This was my position at the end of July last. My 
experience in the Amritsar and Mianwali Jails and the information 
I gathered there have confirmed me in the belief that unless sexual 
purity (Brahmacharya) is revived on the ancient Aryan lines and 
the curse of Untouchability is blotted out of the Indian Society, no 
efforts of the Congress nor of other patriotic organisations out of the 
Congress will avail in their efforts for the attainment of Swaraj. And 
as national self-realization and virile existence is impossible without 
Swaraj, I, as a Sanyasi, should devote the rest of my life to this 
sacred cause — the cause of sexual purity and true national unity. 


Delhi, July 23, 1922. 


Yours, etc. 

Shradhanand Sanyasi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


304 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

304 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Appendix II 

POLITICAL SAFEGUARDS FOR DEPRESSED CLASSES 

Supplementary Memorandum on the claims of the Depressed 
Classes for Special Representation, submitted to the R. T. C. by 
Dr. Bhimrao R. Ambedkar and Rao Bahadur R. Srinivasan. 

In the memorandum that was submitted by us last year dealing 
with the question of political safeguards for the protection of the 
Depressed Classes in the constitution for a self-governing India, 
and which forms Appendix III, to the printed volume of Proceedings 
of the Minorities Sub-Committee, we had demanded that special 
representation of the Depressed Classes must form one of such 
safeguards. But we did not then define the details of the special 
representation we claimed as being necessary for them. The reason 
was that the proceedings of the Minorities Sub-Committee came to 
an end before the question was reached. We now propose to make 
good the omission by this supplementary memorandum so that the 
Minorities Sub-Committee, if it comes to consider the question this 
year, should have the requisite details before it. 

(1) Extent of Special, Representation 

A. Special Representation in Provincial Legislatures. 

(i) In Bengal, Central Provinces, Assam, Bihar and Orissa, 
Punjab and the United Provinces, the Depressed Classes 
shall have representation in proportion to their population 
as estimated by the Simon Commission and the Indian 
Central Committee. 

(ii) In Madras, the Depressed Classes shall have twenty-two 
per cent representation. 

{Hi) In Bombay: 

(а) in the event of Sind continuing to be a part of the 
Bombay Presidency, the Depressed Classes shall have 
sixteen per cent, representation; 

(б) in the event of Sind being separated from the Bombay 
Presidency the Depressed Classes shall enjoy the same 
degree of representation as the Presidency Muslims, 
both being equal in population. 

B. — Special Representation in the Federal Legislature. 

In Both Houses of the Federal Legislature, the Depressed Classes 
shall have representation in proportion to their population in India. 

Reservations 

We have fixed this proportion of representation in the 
Legislatures on the following assumptions : — 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


305 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX II 305 

(1) We have assumed that the figures for the population of the 
Depressed Classes given by the Simon Commission (Vol. I, p. 
40) and the Indian Central Committee (Report p. 44) will be 
acceptable as sufficiently correct to form a basis for distributing 
seats. 

(2) We have assumed that the F ederal Legislature will comprise the 
whole of India, in which case the population of the Depressed 
Classes in Indian States, in Centrally Administered Areas, and 
in Excluded Territories, besides their population in Governor’s 
Provinces, will form very properly an additional item in 
calculating the extent of representation of the Depressed Classes 
in the Federal Legislature. 

(3) We have assumed that the administrative areas of the Provinces 
of British India will continue to be what they are at present. 

But if the assumptions regarding figures of population are challenged, 
as some interested parties threaten to do, and if under a new census the 
Depressed Classes show a lower proportion, or if the administrative areas 
of the Provinces are altered, resulting in disturbing the existing balance 
of population, the Depressed Classes reserve their right to revise their 
proportion of representation and even to claim weightage. In the same 
way, if the All-India Federation does not come into being, they will be 
willing to submit to readjustment in their proportion of representation 
calculated on that basis in the Federal Legislature. 

(2) Method of Representation 

1. The Depressed Classes shall have the right to elect their 
representatives to the Provincial and Central Legislature through 
separate electorates of their voters. 

For their representation in the Upper House of the Federal or 
Central Legislature, if it is decided to have indirect election by 
members of the Provincial Legislatures, the Depressed Classes 
will agree to abandon their right to separate electorates So far 
as their representation to the Upper House is concerned subject 
to this : that in any system of proportional representation 
arrangement shall be made to guarantee to them their quota 
of seats. 

2. Separate electorates for the Depressed Classes shall not be liable 
to be replaced by a system of joint electorates and reserved seats, 
except when the following conditions are fulfilled : — 

(a) A referendum of the voters held at the demand of a majority 
of their representatives in the Legislatures concerned and 
resulting in an absolute majority of the members of the 
Depressed Class having the franchise. 

(b) No such referendum shall be resorted to until after twenty 
years and until universal adult suffrage hasbeen established, 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 306 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

306 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(3) Necessity of Defining the Depressed Classes 

The representation of the Depressed Classes has been grossly 
abused in the past inasmuch as persons other than the Depressed 
Classes were nominated to represent them in the Provincial 
Legislatures, and cases are not wanting in which persons not 
belonging to the Depressed Classes got themselves nominated as 
representatives of the Depressed Classes. This abuse was due to 
the fact that while the Governor was given the power to nominate 
persons to represent the Depressed Classes, he was not required 
to confine his nomination to persons belonging to the Depressed 
Classes. Since nomination is to be substituted by election under 
the new constitution, there will be no room for this abuse. But 
in order to leave no loophole for defeating the purpose of their 
special representation we claim 

(i) That the Depressed Classes shall not only have the right 
to their own separate electorates, but they shall also have 
the right to be represented by their own men. 

(ii) That in each Province the Depressed Classes shall be strictly 
defined as meaning persons belonging to communities which 
are subjected to the system of Untouchability of the sort 
prevalent therein and which are enumerated by name in 
a schedule prepared for electoral purposes. 

(4) Nomenclature 

In dealing with this part of the question we would like to 
point out that the existing nomenclature of Depressed Classes 
is objected to by members of the Depressed Classes who have 
given thought to it and also by outsiders who take interest in 
them. It is degrading and contemptuous, and advantage may be 
taken of this occasion for drafting the new constitution to alter 
for official purposes the existing nomenclature. We think that 
they should be called “Non-Caste Hindus,” “Protestant Hindus,” 
or “Non-Conformist Hindus,” or some such designation, instead 
of “Depressed Classes.” We have no authority to press for any 
particular nomenclature. We can only suggest them, and we 
believe that if properly explained the Depressed Classes will not 
hesitate to accept the one most suitable for them. 

We have received a large number of telegrams from the 
Depressed Classes all over India supporting the demands contained 
in this Memorandum. 


• • 


Nov. 4th 1931. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


307 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX III 307 

Appendix III 

MINORITIES PACT 

Provisions for a Settlement of the Communal Problem, put forward 
jointly by Muslims, Depressed Classes, Indian Christians, Anglo- 
Indians and Europeans. 

Claims of Minority Communities 

1. No person shall by reason of his origin, religion, caste or creed, 
be prejudiced in any way in regard to public employment, 
office of power or honour, or with regard to enjoyment of his 
civic rights and the exercise of any trade or calling. 

2. Statutory safeguards shall be incorporated in the constitution 
with a view to protect against enactments of the Legislature 
of discriminatory laws affecting any community. 

3. Full religious liberty, that is, full liberty of belief, worship 
observances, propaganda, associations and education, shall be 
guaranteed to all communities subject to the maintenance of 
public order and morality. 

No person shall merely by change of faith lose any civic right 
or privilege, or be subject to any penalty. 

4. The right to establish, manage and control, at their own 
expense, charitable, religious and social institutions, schools 
and other educational establishments with the right to exercise 
their religion therein. 

5. The constitution shall embody adequate safeguards for the 
protection of religion, culture and personal law, and the 
promotion of education, language, charitable institutions of 
the minority communities and for their due share in grants- 
in-aid given by the State and by the self-governing bodies. 

6. Enjoyment of civic rights by all citizens shall be guaranteed 
by making any act or omission calculated to prevent full 
enjoyment an offence punishable by law. 

7. In the formation of Cabinets in the Central Government 
and Provincial Governments, so far as possible, members 
belonging to the Mussalman community and other minorities 
of considerable number shall be included by convention. 

8. There shall be Statutory Departments under the Central and 
Provincial Governments to protect minority communities and 
to promote their welfare. 

9. All communities at present enjoying representation in any Legisl- 
ature through nomination or election shall have representation in 
all Legislatures through separate electorates and the minorities 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


308 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

308 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

shall have not less than the proportion set forth in the Annexure 
but no majority shall be reduced to a minority or even an equality. 
Provided that after a lapse often years it will be open to Muslims 
in Punjab and Bengal and any minority communities in any 
other Provinces to accept joint electorates, or joint electorates 
with reservation of seats, by the consent of the community 
concerned. Similarly after the lapse of ten years, it will be 
open to any minority in the Central Legislature to accept joint 
electorates with or without reservation of seats with the consent 
of the community concerned. 

With regard to the Depressed Classes, no change to joint 
electorates and reserved seats shall be made until after 20 years’ 
experience of separate electorates and until direct adult suffrage 
for the community has been established. 

10. In every Province and in connection with the Central Government, 
a Public Services Commission shall be appointed, and the 
recruitment to the Public Services, except the proportion, if any, 
reserved to be filled by nomination by the Governor-General 
and the Governors, shall be made through such commission 
in such a way as to secure a fair representation to the various 
communities consistently with the considerations of efficiency 
and the possession of the necessary qualifications. Instructions 
to the Governor-General and the Governors in the Instrument 
of Instructions with regard to recruitment shall be embodied 
to give effect to this principle, and for that purpose to review 
periodically the composition of the Services. 

11. If a Bill is passed which, in the opinion of two-thirds of the members 
of any Legislature representing a particular community, affects 
their religion or social practice based on religion, or in the case 
of fundamental rights of the subjects if one-third of the members 
object, it shall be open to such members to lodge their objection 
thereto, within a period of one month of the Bill being passed by 
the House, with the President of the House who shall forward 
the same to the Governor-General or the Governor, as the case 
may be, and he shall thereupon suspend the operation of that 
Bill for one year, upon the expiry of which period he shall remit 
the said Bill for further consideration by the Legislature. When 
such Bill has been further considered by the Legislature and the 
Legislature concerned has refused to revise or modify the Bill 
so as to meet the objection thereto, the Governor-General or the 
Governor, as the case may be, may give or withhold his assent 
to it in the exercise of his discretion, provided, further, that the 
validity of such Bill may be challenged in the Supreme Court by 
any two members of the denomination affected thereby on the 
ground that it contravened one of their fundamental rights. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


309 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX III 309 

Special Claims of Mussulmans 

A. The North-West Frontier Province shall be constituted a 
Governor’s Province on the same footing as other Provinces with due 
regard to the necessary requirements for the security of the Frontier. 

In the formation of the Provincial Legislature, the nominations 
shall not exceed more than 10 per cent, of the whole. 

B. — Sind shall be separated from the Bombay Presidency and 
made a Governor’s Province similar to and on the same footing as 
other Provinces in British India. 

C. — Mussulman representation in the Central Legislature shall be 
one-third of the total number of the House, and their representation 
in the Central Legislature shall not be less than the proportion set 
forth in the Annexure. 

Special Claims of the Depressed Classes 

A. — The constitution shall declare invalid any custom or usage by 
which any penalty or disadvantage or disability is imposed : upon or 
any discrimination is made against any subject of the State in regard 
to the enjoyment of the civic rights on account of Untouchability. 

B. Generous treatment in the matter of recruitment to Public 
Services and the opening of enlistment in the Police and Military 
Service. 

C. — The Depressed Classes in the Punjab shall have the benefit 
of the Punjab Land Alienation Act extended to them. 

D. — Right of Appeal shall lie to the Governor or Governor or 
General for redress of prejudicial action or neglect of interest by any 
Executive Authority. 

E. — The Depressed Classes shall have representation not less 
than set forth in the Annexure. 

Special Claims of the Anglo-Indian Community 

A. — Generous interpretation of the claims admitted by Sub- 
Committee No. VIII (Services) to the effect that in recognition of 
the peculiar position of the community, special consideration should 
be given to the claim for public employment, having, regard to the 
maintenance of an adequate standard of living. 

B. — The right to administer and control its own educational 
institutions, i.e. European education, subject to the control of the 
Minister. 

Provisions for generous and adequate grants-in-aid and scholarship 
on the basis of present grants. 

C. — Jury rights equal to those enjoyed by other communities 
in India unconditionally of proof of legitimacy and descent and the 


ANNEXURE — Representation in Legislatures. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


310 


310 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


-+J 

^H 

O 

Oh 

<D 

£ 

o 

a 

• rH 

m 

u 

<D 

CD 

Remarks 

*Represents percentage in 
Governor’s Provinces of B.I. 


*Pop. figures exclude Tribal 
Areas. 



On Sind being separated 

weightage to Mussulmans 
in Bombay to be on the 
same, footing as to the 

Hindus in the N.F.W.P. 





go 

<D 

bJD 

Euro- 

peans 


CM 

rH 

o 

rH 

o 

CM 

to 

CO 

rH 

<N 

op 

(N 

CO 

cd 

-+j 

£ 

<D 

o 

Sh 

CD 

a 

T* 

CD 

gq 

m 

<D 

u 

CD 

(D 

Tribal, 

etc. 

1 

I 


1 

CO 

1 

CN 

CN 

1 


Anglo- 

Indians 

rH 

CO 

rH 

CO 

rH 

CO 

CM 


1.5 

<N 

Sikhs 

CD 

o 

rH 


1 

1 

1 


1 

co o 

rH (N 


a 

CD 

3 

bJD 
& 
i— i 

co 

05 

Christians 

rH 


CO 

<n 

rH 

(N 

rH 

CO ^ 

1.5 

rH 


CO 

s 

i '3d 

1 

(21.5) 

CD 

100 

(34.8) 

35 

(54.9) 

102 

(11.3) 

25 


o' CD 
CM CD 


U0 

(7.1) 

30 

(56.5) 

51 

(14.8) 

30 

1— 1 
















• rH 

co 

aj 

rQ 

£ 


Total 

(66.5) 

rH 

(N 

rH 

co 

CD 

rH 

(62.3) 

51 

CO CO 
^ t> 

(82.3) 

65 

(76) 

116 

(86.8) 

78 

(86.7) 

142 

(28.6) 

24 

(84.5) 

64 
















o 

• rH 
-+J 

3 

Ph 

Hindi 

CO 

£ 

Oh 

Q 

* 

oT 

rH 

o 

CN 

LO 

(13.4; 

13 

(24.7; 

35 

(14.5; 

14 


00 00 
O CN 


(23.7; 

20 

(15.4; 

40 

(13.5; 

10 

(26.4: 

20 

o 

Pm 

II 


Caste 

(47.5) 

101 

123 

(48.9) 

38 

(18.3) 

38 

(67.8) 

51 

oo oo 
co 00 

(63.1) 

58 

(71.3) 

102 

(15.1) 

14 

(58.1) 

44 

CO 

CD 

M 

o 

u 

rD 

Strength 

of 

Chamber 

200 

o 

o 

CO 

*100 

200 

O 

O 

rH 

200 

100 

200 

O 

o 

rH 

100 
















fi 

• rH 
















CO 

CD 

^H 

biD 

• rH 
£ 


1 

Centre 

All India (193 1] 

Upper 

u 
a ) 
* 
o 

H 

Assam 

Bengal 

Bihar & Orissa 


Bombay 


PM 

d 

Madras 

Punjab 

Pm 

d 


Sind & N.W.F.P. Weightage similar to that enjoyed by the Mussulmans in the Provinces in which they constitute a minority of the 
population, shall be given to the Hindu minority in Sind and to the Hindu and Sikh minorities in the N.W.F.P. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


311 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IV 311 

right of accused persons to claim trial by either a European or 
an Indian jury. 

Special Claims of the European Community 

A. — Equal rights and privileges to those enjoyed by Indian- 
born subjects in all industrial and commercial activities. 

B. — The maintenance of existing rights in regard to procedure 
of criminal trials, and any measure or bill to amend, alter, or 
modify such a procedure cannot be introduced except with the 
previous consent of the Governor-General. 

Agreed by: — 

His Highness The Aga Khan (Muslims) 

Dr. Ambedkar (Depressed Classes) 

Rao Bahadur Pannir Selvam (Indian Christians) 

Sir Henry Gidney (Anglo-Indians) 

Sir Hubert Carr (Europeans). 

Appendix IV 

STATEMENT BY B. R. AMBEDKAR ON GANDHI’S FAST 

Statement on Mr. Gandhis attitude at the Round Table 
Conference to the Untouchables and their demand for 
Constitutional Safeguards, 19th September 1932. 

I need hardly say that I was astounded to read the 
correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi, Sir Samuel Hoare 
and the Prime Minister, which was published recently in the 
Papers, in which he has expressed his determination to starve 
himself unto death till the British Government of its own 
accord or under pressure of public opinion revise their opinion 
and withdraw their scheme of communal representation for the 
Depressed Classes. The unenviable position, in which I have 
been placed by the Mahatma’s vow of self-immolation, can easily 
be imagined. 

It passes my comprehension why Mr. Gandhi should stake his 
life on an issue arising out of the communal question which he, at 
the Round Table Conference, said was one of a comparatively small 
importance. Indeed, to adopt the language of those of Mr. Gandhi’s 
way of thinking, the communal question was only, an appendix 
to the book of India’s constitution and not the main chapter. It 
would have been justifiable, if Mr. Gandhi had resorted to this 
‘extreme step for obtaining independence for the country on which 
he was so insistent all through the R. T. C. debates. It is also a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


312 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

312 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

painful surprise that Mr. Gandhi should single out special 
representation for the Depressed Classes in the Communal Award as 
an excuse for his self-immolation. Separate electorates are granted 
not only to the Depressed Classes, but to the Indian Christians, 
Anglo-Indians, Europeans, as well as to the Mahomedans and the 
Sikhs. Also separate electorates are granted to landlords, labourers 
and traders. Mr. Gandhi had declared his opposition to the special 
representation of every other class and creed except the Mahomedans 
and the Sikhs. All the same, Mr. Gandhi chooses to let everybody 
else except the Depressed Classes retain !he special electorates given 
to them. 

The fears expressed by Mr. Gandhi about the consequences of the 
arrangements for the representation of the Depressed Classes are, in 
my opinion, purely imaginary. If the nation is not going to be split 
up by separate electorates to the Mahomedans and the Sikhs, the 
Hindu society cannot be said to be split up if the Depressed Classes 
are given separate electorates. His conscience is not aroused if the 
nation is split by the arrangements of Special Electorates for classes 
and communities other than the Depressed Classes. 

I am sure many have felt that if there was any class which 
deserved to be given special political rights in order to protect itself 
against the tyranny of the majority under the Swaraj constitution 
it was the Depressed Classes. Here is a class which is undoubtedly 
not in a position to sustain itself in the struggle for existence. 
The religion to which they are tied, instead of providing for them 
an honourable place, brands them as lepers, not fit for ordinary 
intercourse. Economically, it is a class entirely dependent upon the 
high-caste’ Hindus for earning its daily bread with no independent 
way of living open to it. Nor are all ways closed by reason of the 
social prejudices of the Hindus but there is a definite attempt all 
throughout the Hindu Society to bolt every possible door so as not 
to allow the Depressed Gasses any opportunity to rise in the scale 
of life. Indeed it would not be an exaggeration to say that in every 
village the caste Hindus, however divided among themselves, are 
always in a standing conspiracy to put down in a merciless manner 
any attempt on the part of the Depressed Classes who form a small 
and scattered body of an ordinary Indian citizen. 

In these circumstances, it would be granted by all fair-minded 
persons that as the only path for a community so handicapped to 
succeed in the struggle for life against organised tyranny, some share 
of political power in order that it may protect itself is a paramount 
necessity. 

I should have thought that a well-wisher of the Depressed 
Classes would have fought tooth and nail for securing to them as 
much political power as might be possible in the new Constitution. 
But the Mahatma’s ways of thinking are strange and are certainly 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


313 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IV 313 

beyond my comprehension. He not only does not endeavour to augment 
the scanty political power which the Depressed Classes have got 
under the Communal Award, but on the contrary he has staked his 
very life in order to deprive them of little they have got. This is not 
the first attempt on the part of the Mahatma to completely dish the 
Depressed Classes out of political existence. Long before, there was 
the Minorities Pact. The Mahatma tried to enter into an agreement 
with the Muslims and the Congress. He offered to the Muslims all 
the fourteen claims which they had put forth on their behalf, and in 
return asked them to join with him in resisting the claims for social 
representation made by me on behalf of the Depressed Classes. 

It must be said to the credit of the Muslim delegates, that they 
refused to be a party to such a black act, and saved the Depressed 
Class from what might as well have developed into a calamity for 
them as a result of the combined opposition of the Mahommedans 
and Mr. Gandhi. 

I am unable to understand the ground of hostility of Mr. Gandhi 
to the Communal Award. He says that the Communal Award has 
separated the Depressed Classes from the Hindu Community. On the 
other hand, Dr. Moonje, a much stronger protagonist of the Hindu 
case and a militant advocate of its interests, takes a totally different 
view of the matter. In the speeches which he has been delivering 
since his arrival from London, Dr. Moonje has been insisting that 
the Communal Award does not create any separation between the 
Depressed Class and the Hindus. Indeed, he has been boasting 
that he has defeated me in my attempt to politically separate the 
Depressed Class from the Hindus. I am sure that Dr. Moonje is 
right in his interpretation of the Communal Award although, I am 
not sure that the credit of it can legitimately go to Dr. Moonje. It is 
therefore surprising that Mahatma Gandhi who is a nationalist and 
not known to be a communalist should read the Communal Award, 
in so far as it relates to the Depressed Class, in a manner quite 
contrary to that of a communalists like Dr. Moonje. If Dr. Moonje 
does not sense any separation of the Depressed Classes from the 
Hindus in the Communal Award the Mahatma ought to feel quite 
satisfied on that score. 

In my opinion, that Communal Award should not only satisfy 
the Hindus, but also satisfy those individuals among the Depressed 
Classes such as Rao Bahadur Rajah, Mr. Baloo or Mr. Govai, who 
are in favour of Joint Electorates. Mr. Rajah’s fulminations in the 
Assembly have amused me considerably. An intense supporter of 
Separate Electorates and the bitterest and the most vehement critic 
of caste Hindu tyranny, now professes faith in the Joint Electorates 
and love for the Hindus! How much of that is due to his natural 
desire to resuscitate himself from the oblivion in which he was cast 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


314 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

314 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by his being kept out of the Round Table Conference and how much 
of it is to his honest change of faith, I do not propose to discuss. 

The points on which Mr. Rajah is harping by way of criticism on 
the Communal Award are two: One is that the Depressed Classes 
have gained lesser number of seats than they are entitled to on the 
population basis, and the other is that the Depressed Classes have 
been separated from the Hindu fold. 

I agree in his first grievance, but when the Rao Bahadur begins to 
accuse those who represented the Depressed Classes at the R. T. C. for 
having sold their rights, I am bound to point out what Mr. Rajah did 
as a member of the Indian Central Committee. In that Committee’s 
report, the Depressed Classes were given in Madras 10 seats out of 
150 ; in Bombay 8 seats out of 14; in Bengal 8 seats out of 200 ; in U. P. 
8 seats out of 182; in the Punjab 6 seats out of 150 ; in Behar and 
Orissa 6 out of 150; in C. P. 8 out of 125 and in Assam, 9 seats for the 
Depressed Classes and the indigenous and primitive races out of 75. 
I do not wish to overburden this statement by pointing out how this 
distribution compares with the population ratio. But there can be no 
doubt that this meant a terrible under-representation of the Depressed 
Classes. To this distribution of seats Mr. Rajah was a party. Surely, 
Mr. Rajah, before he criticises the Communal Award and accuses 
others, should refresh his memory of what he accepted as Member 
of the Indian Central Committee on behalf of the Depressed Classes 
without any protest. If the population ratio of representation was to 
him a natural right of Depressed Classes and its full realisation was 
a necessity for their protection, why did not Mr. Rajah insist upon 
it in the Central Committee when he had an opportunity to do so? 

As to his contention that in the Communal Award, the Depressed 
Classes have been separated from the caste Hindus, it is a view to 
which I cannot subscribe. If Mr . Rajah has any conscientious objection 
to separate Electorates, there is no compulsion on him to stand as a 
candidate in the Separate Electorates. The opportunity to stand as a 
candidate in the general electorate as well as the right to vote in it are 
there, and Mr. Rajah is free to avail himself of the same. Mr. Rajah 
is crying at the top of his voice to assure to the . Depressed Classes 
that there is a complete change of heart on the part of the Caste 
Hindus towards the Depressed Class. He will have the opportunity 
to prove that fact to the satisfaction of the Depressed Class, who 
are not prepared to take his word by getting himself elected in the 
general constituency. The Hindus, who profess love and sympathy for 
the Depressed Classes, will have also an opportunity to prove their 
bona fides by electing Mr. Rajah to the legislature. 

The Communal Award, therefore, in my opinion, satisfied both 
those who want separate Electorates and those who want joint 
Electorates. In this sense, it is already a compromise and should be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


315 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IV 315 

accepted as it is. As to the Mahatma, I do not know what he wants. 
It is assumed that although Mahatma Gandhi is opposed to the 
system of separate electorates, he is not opposed to the system 
of Joint Electorates and Reserved Seats. That is a gross error. 
Whatever his views are today, while in London he was totally 
opposed to any system of Special representation for the Depressed 
Classes whether by joint Electorates or by Separate Electorates. 
Beyond the right to vote in a general electorate based upon Adult 
Suffrage, he was not prepared to concede anything to the Depressed 
Classes by way of securing their representation in the legislatures. 
This was the position he had taken at first. Towards the end of 
the R. T. C. he suggested to me a scheme, which he said, he was 
prepared to consider. The scheme was purely conventional without 
any constitutional sanction behind it and without any single seat 
being reserved for the Depressed Classes in the electoral law. 

The scheme was as follows; 

Depressed Class candidates might stand in the general electorate 
as against other high caste Hindu candidates. If any Depressed Class 
Candidate was defeated in the election, he should file an election 
petition and obtain the verdict that he was defeated because he 
was an Untouchable. If such a decision was obtained, the Mahatma 
said he would undertake to induce some Hindu members to resign 
and thus create a vacancy. There would be then another election 
in which the defeated Depressed Class candidate or any other 
Depressed Class candidate might again try his luck as against 
the Hindu candidates. Should he be defeated again, he should get 
similar verdict that he was defeated because he was an Untouchable 
and so on ad infinitum. I am disclosing these facts as some people 
are even now under the impression that the Joint Electorates and 
Reserved Seats would satisfy the conscience of the Mahatma. This 
will show why I insist that there is no use discussing the question 
until the actual proposals of the Mahatma are put forth. 

I must, however, point out that I cannot accept the assurances 
of the Mahatma that he and his Congress will do the needful. I 
cannot leave so important a question as the protection of my people 
to conventions and understandings. The Mahatma is not an immortal 
person, and the Congress, assuming it is not a malevolent force, is 
not to have an abiding existence. There have been many Mahatmas 
in India whose sole object was to remove Untouchability and to 
elevate and absorb the Depressed Classes, but every one of them 
has failed in his mission. Mahatmas have come and Mahatmas 
have gone. But the Untouchables have remained as Untouchables. 

I have enough experience of the pace of Reform and the faith 
of Hindu reformers in the conflicts that have taken place at Mahad 
and Nasik, to say that no well-wisher of the Depressed Classes will 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


316 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

316 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ever consent to allow the uplift of the Depressed Classes to rest upon 
such treacherous shoulders. Reformers who in moments of crises 
prefer to sacrifice their principles rather than hurt the feelings of 
their kindred can be of no use to the Depressed Classes. 

I am therefore bound to insist upon a Statutory guarantee for the 
protection of my people. If Mr. Gandhi wishes to have the Communal 
Award altered, it is for him to put forth his proposals and to prove 
that they give a better guarantee than has been given to us under 
the Award. 

I hope that the Mahatma will desist from carrying out the extreme 
step contemplated by him. We mean no harm to the Hindu society when 
we demand separate electorates. If we choose separate electorates, 
we do so in order to avoid the total dependence on the sweet will of 
the Caste Hindus in matters affecting our destiny. Like the Mahatma 
we also claim our right to err, and we expect him not to deprive us 
of that right. His determination to fast himself unto death is worthy 
of a far better cause. I could have understood the propriety of the 
Mahatma contemplating such extreme step for stopping riots between 
Hindus and Mohammedans or between the Depressed Classes and 
the Hindus or any other national cause. It certainly cannot improve 
the lot of the Depressed Classes. Whether he knows it or not, the 
Mahatma’s act will result in nothing but terrorism by his followers 
against the Depressed Classes all over the country. 

Coercion of this sort will not win the Depressed Classes to the 
Hindu fold if they are determined to go out. And if the Mahatma 
chooses to ask the Depressed Classes to make a choice between 
Hindu faith and possession of political power, I am quite sure that 
the Depressed Classes will choose political power and save the 
Mahatma from self-immolation. If Mr. Gandhi coolly reflects on the 
consequences of his act, I very much doubt whether he will find 
this victory worth having. It is still more important to note that the 
Mahatma is releasing reactionary and uncontrollable forces, and is 
fostering the spirit of hatred between the Hindu Community and the 
Depressed Classes by resorting to this method and thereby widening 
the existing gulf between the two. When I opposed Mr. Gandhi at 
the R. T. C, there was a hue and cry against me in the country and 
there was a conspiracy in the so-called nationalist press to represent 
me as a traitor to the nationalist cause, to suppress correspondence 
coming from my side and to boost the propaganda against my party 
by publishing exaggerated reports of meetings and conferences, many 
of which were never held. “Silver bullets” were freely used for creating 
divisions in the ranks of the Depressed Classes. There have been also 
a few clashes ending in violence. 

If the Mahatma does not want all this to be repeated on a larger 
scale, let him, for God’s sake, reconsider his decision and avert the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


317 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX V 317 

disastrous consequences. I believe the Mahatma does not want this. 
But if he does not desist, in spite of his wishes these consequences 
are sure to follow as night follows the day. 

Before concluding this statement, I desire to assure the public 
that although I am entitled to say that I regard the matter as 
closed, I am prepared to consider the proposals of the Mahatma. 
I however trust the Mahatma will not drive me to the necessity 
of making a choice between his life and the rights of my people. 
For I can never consent to deliver my people bound hand and 
foot to the Caste Hindus for generations to come. 

B. R. Ambedkar. 


Appendix V 

TEMPLE ENTRY IN TRAVANCORE 

His Highness the Maharaja of Travancore issued a Proclamation 
on the 12th November 1936 opening the Temples in the State to 
the Untouchables. The Proclamation reads as follows : — 

“Profoundly convinced of the truth and validity of our 
religion, believing that it is based on divine guidance and 
on all-comprehending toleration, knowing that in its practice 
it has throughout the centuries adapted itself to the need 
of the changing times, solicitous that none of our Hindu 
subjects should, by reason of birth, caste or community, be 
denied the consolation and solace of the Hindu faith, we 
have decided and hereby declare, ordain and command that, 
subject to such rules and conditions as may be laid down 
and imposed by us for preserving their proper atmosphere 
and maintaining their rituals and observances, there should 
henceforth be no restriction placed on any Hindu by birth 
or religion on entering or worshipping at temples controlled 
by us and our Government.” 

A great lot has been made by the Congressmen and by 
Mr. Gandhi about this Proclamation. It is regarded as heralding 
the birth of a new conscience in the Hindu world. I don’t feel 
quite so sure of this. At any rate there are facts on the other 
side, which are worth bearing in mind. 

The proclamation was issued by the Maharaja of Travancore 
in his name. But the real active force behind the scene was the 
Prime Minister, Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer. It is his motives that 
we must understand. In 1932, Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer was also 
the Prime Minister of Travancore. In 1932, when Mr. Gandhi had 
raised a controversy over the entry of the Untouchables into the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


318 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

318 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Guruvayur Temple, Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer had taken part 
in the controversy on the side of those who were against Temple 
Entry. In the course of this controversy, Sir C P. Ramaswamy Iyer 
issued a statement 1 to the Press. This is what he said : 

“Personally I do not observe caste rules. I realise there are 
strong, though not very articulate, feelings in this matter in the 
minds of men who believe that the present system of temple 
worship and its details are based on divine ordinances. The 
problem can be permanently solved only by a process of mutual 
adjustment and by the awakening of religious and social leaders 
of Hindu society to the realities of the present situation and to 
the need for preserving the solidarity of the Hindu community. 

“Shock tactics will not answer the purpose and direct action 
will be even more fatal is this sphere than in the political. I 
have the misfortune to differ from Mr. Gandhi when he says 
that the problem of temple-entry can be divorced from such 
topics as interdining and I agree with Dr. Ambedkar that the 
social and economic uplift of the Depressed Classes should be 
our immediate and urgent programme.” 

This statement shows that in 1933 spiritual considerations did 
not move Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer. Spiritual considerations have 
become operative after 1933. What made Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer 
take a different view in 1936 ? What had happened in Travancore 
in 1936 to compel this change of opinion ? It may be recalled that 
in 1936, there was held in Travancore a Conference of the Yezawa 
Community. The Yezawas are an Untouchable community spread 
over Malabar. It is an educated community and economically 
quite strong. It is also a vocal community and has been carrying 
on agitation in the State against social and religious disabilities. 
The Conference was held to consider whether the Yezawas should 
not abandon the Hindu Religion in favour of some other religion. 2 
The Yezawas form a very large community. The cessation of so 
large a community would be death-knell to the Hindus and the 
Conference had made the danger real. 

It may not be far fetched to say that the Proclamation was 
issued to forestall this danger. If this is correct, there is very little 
spiritual substance behind the proclamation. It must not be forgotten 
that Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer has his own way of giving spiritual 
colouring to a material act. The Brahmins have been, in accordance 
with the Hindu Law, exempt from capital punishment which applied 
to all Brahmins. This was a very glaring case of discrimination. 
Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer very recently announced the abolition 

1 Times of India dated November 10, 1932. 

2 This was in pursuance of the decision taken at Yeola in 1935 under my 
chairmanship. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


319 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX V 319 

of capital punishment in Travancore State and took credit for 
Having carried out a great humanitarian Reform. As a matter 
of fact, the object was really preventing the Brahmin from being 
brought under the guillotine in obedience to the principle of 
equality before law. 

How far did this Proclamation change facts and how far it 
has remained a show ? It is not possible to get real facts as they 
exist in Travancore. In the course of the discussion on the Malabar 
Temple Entry Bill in the Madras Legislatives Assembly, certain 
facts relating to Travancore were mentioned by Sir T. Pannirselvam 
which, if true, would show that the whole thing is hollow. 

Sir T. Pannirselvam said : — 

“One of the arguments advanced by the Premier in support 
of the measure was that temples in Travancore had been thrown 
open to the ‘Untouchables.’ A Maharaja vested with autocratic 
powers did so by an order. But how was it working there ? From 
representations received, he was led to believe that after the 
first flush of enthusiasm, Harijans had left off going to temples, 
and people who used to worship previously before Harijans 
were allowed to enter the temples, had stopped worshipping 
in temples. He would ask the Government to tell them if the 
measure was really a success in Travancore.” 

On the third reading of the Bill, Sir T. Pannirselvam made a 
statement which must have come as a surprise to many. He said : 

“He wanted to know whether it was a fact that the 
private temples of the Senior Maharani were excluded from 
the Proclamation. What was the reason for it ? Again during 
the celebration of the marriage of the daughter of the Senior 
Maharani, it was found necessary, so he was told, to perform 
purificatory ceremony of the temple. If such a purification of 
temples took place, what happened to the Proclamation ?” 

These facts were not challenged by anybody, either by Sir 
C. P. Ramaswami Iyer or C. Rajagopalachariar. Evidently, they 
cannot be challenged. If they are incontrovertible, then the less 
said about the Malabar Temple Entry Proclamation as a spiritual 
testament, the better. 

Is this Temple Entry in Travancore the be-all and end-all of 
the social reform in Travancore ? Is there to be just Temple Entry 
and no further or is it going to lead to equality in the matter of 
religious status ? Will, for instance, the Devastan Department be 
placed in the hands of the. Untouchables and the Shudras ? Nine 
years since the Proclamation have passed, there has been no move 
in democratization of religion in Travancore. 

Will the Untouchables of Travancore have to pay for Temple 
Entry ? I am not in a position to say. But I like to reproduce 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


320 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

320 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

below a letter addressed to me by Sri Narayan Swami of the All- 
Travancore Pulayar Cheramar Aykia Maha Sangham. It is dated 
24th November 1938. 

Camp Mayyanad, 

Quilon. 24-11-1938. 

To 

Dr. Ambedkar, 

Bombay, 

Respected Sir, 

I have unaffected pleasure to draw your attention to the following 
facts for obtaining the valuable advice from you. Being the leader 
of a Harijan Community of the Travancore State, I think, it is my 
paramount duty to suggest you definitely all the grievances that the 
Harijans of this State are enduring. 

1. The Temple Entry Proclamation issued by His Highness 
The Maharaja is indeed a boon to Harijans; but the Harijans are 
enjoying all the other social disabilities except the temple Entry. The 
Government do not take any step for the amelioration of the Harijans. 

2. Among 15 lakhs of Harijans, then are a few graduates, 
half a dozen undergraduates and 50 school finals and more than 
200 vernacular certificates holders. Though the Government have 
appointed a Public Service Commission, appointments to the Harijans 
are very few. All the appointments are given to Savarnas. If a Harijan 
is appointed, it will be for one weak or two weeks. According to the 
rules of the recruitment in Public. Service, the applicant is allowed 
to apply only after a year again. While a Savarna will be appointed 
for a year or more. When the list of the appointments is brought 
before the Assembly, the number of appointments will be equal to 
the communal representation ; but the duration of the post of all 
the Harijans will be equal to one Savarna. This kind of fraud is 
associating with the officials. Thus the public service is a common 
property of the Savarnas. No Harijan is benefited by it. 

3. There was a proclamation from H. H. The Maharaja, a few 
years ago that three acres of ground should be given to each Harijan 
to live in; but the officials are Savarnas who are always unwilling 
to carry out the proclamation. Even though the Government is 
willing to grant large extent of ground for pasturing near towns, 
not a piece of the ground is given to the Harijans. The Harijans are 
still living in the compounds of the Savarnas and are undergoing 
manifold difficulties. Though large extents of ground lay in “Reserve,” 
the applications of the Harijans for granting grounds are not at all 
regarded with importance or listened to. The most parts of the lands 
are benefited by the Savarnas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


321 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX V 321 

4. The Government nominates every year, for the election 
of members of the Assembly, one member from each Harijan 
Community. Though they are elected to present the grievances of the 
Harijans before the Assembly, they are found to be the machinery 
of the Government, viz., the toys of the Savarna officers, who are 
benefited by them. Thus the grievances of the Harijans cannot be 
redressed any way. 

5. All the Harijans of Travancore are labourers in the fields and 
compounds. They are the servants of the Savarnas who behave with 
them as beasts — nobody to look after for protection. Every Harijan 
gets only 2 chs (one anna) as the wage in most parts of the State. 
The social disabilities are the same to them even after the Temple 
Entry. The workers in the factories in various parts of the State 
of Travancore and the Officers of the State are all Savarnas and 
they arc at present agitating for responsible Government. Now the 
Harijans are demanding jobs in Government and in factories but the 
agitation in Travancore is a Savarna agitation by which the Savarnas 
are making arrangements to get rid of Harijans in Public Service 
and factories. They plead for higher salaries and more privileges. 
They pay the least care to the Harijan labourers while the people 
of Travancore are maddened with the agitation of the workers in 
the factories. The standard of salary of Harijan worker is very low 
while the standard of a factory worker is thrice the former. 

6. Due to starvation and want of proper means of livelihood, the 
heads of the children of Harijans are heated as a result of which 
they are likely to fail in school. Before proclamation, the duration 
of Concession in high schools was for 6 years; now, it has been 
reduced to three years by which a good number of students stopped 
their education after their failure. 

7. There is a department for the Depressed Classes, the head 
of which is Mr. C. O. Damodaran (the protector of the Backward 
Communities). Though every year a big amount is granted for the 
expenditure, at the end of the year, two-thirds of the sum is lapsed 
by his sagacity. He used to submit reports to the Government that 
there is no way of spending the amount. Ninety-five per cent of the 
sum allotted for the Depressed Class is spent as the salary of the 
officials who are always Savarnas and 5 per cent, is benefited. Now 
the Government is going to make some colonies in three parts of 
Travancore. The officers are Savarnas. This scheme is, in my opinion, 
not a success for the Government do not pay greater attention to 
it. I regret that Travancore Government spends one anna for the 
Harijan cause, while Cochin State spends a rupee for the same. 

8. The majority of the subjects of Travancore are now agitating 
strongly for Responsible Government under an organization ‘The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


322 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

322 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

State Congress.’ The leaders of this popular organisation belong 
to the four major communities of the State, namely, the Nair, 
Mahomedan, Christian and Ezhava community. The President 
of the State Congress Mr. Thanu Pillai issued a statement in 
which he stressed that special concessions would be given to the 
Depressed Class. All the leaders of the Depressed Class have been 
awaiting for a time to see the attitude of the State Congress. Now 
we come to understand that there is no reality in the promise 
of these leaders. 

9. Now I am sure that the leaders have neglected the cause 
of the Depressed Class. The State Congress was started on the 
principles of nationalism and now it has become an institution 
of communalism. Communal spirit is now working among the 
leaders. In every public speech, statement or article, the leaders 
mention only these four major communities, while they have no 
thought on us. I fear, if this is the case of the leaders of the 
political agitation of Travancore, the situation of the Depressed 
Class will be more deplorable when the Responsible Government 
is achieved, for the entire possession of the Government will be 
then within the clutches of the above mentioned communities 
and the Depressed Classes’ rights and privileges will be devoured 
by the former. In the meetings of the working committee of the 
States Congress, two-thirds of the time was devoted in discussion 
concerning the strike of the Alleppey Coir Factories; but nothing 
was mentioned in the meeting about the Harijan workers who 
are undergoing manifold difficulties. The workers in Factories are 
Savarnas and the agitation for obtaining Responsible Government 
is a kind of anti-Harijan movement. The motive of every leader 
of the State Congress is to improve the situation (circumstance) 
of the Savarna. The leaders of the major communities have some 
mercenary attitude who are going to sacrifice the Depressed for 
their progress. 

10. These are the conditions of the Depressed Class of the 
State. What are the ways by which we have to establish our rights 
in the State ? I humbly request you to be good enough to render 
me your advice at this occasion. I am awaiting for the reply. 

Excuse me for the trouble, 

Yours faithfully, 
Srinarayanaswami .” 

If the plan of Temple Entry is ultimately to deprive the 
Untouchables of their statutory rights, then the movement is not 
only not spiritual but it is positively mischievous and it would be 
the duty of all honest people to warn the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


323 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VI 323 

Appendix VI 

RECOGNITION OF UNTOUCHABLES 
AS A SEPARATE ELEMENT 

Pronouncements of the British Government on the position of 
the Untouchables in the Constitution of India. 

Introduction 

The necessity for recalling the pronouncements of the Viceroys 
and of the Secretaries of State has arisen because of the recent 
criticism in the Press against the reply of 15th August 1944 
given by Lord Wavell to Mr. Gandhi stating that the Scheduled 
Castes are a separate element in the national life of India and 
that their consent to the new Constitution was essential before 
power is transferred to Indian hands. This criticism is based 
upon the supposition that the Cripps’s proposals did not recognize 
the Scheduled Castes as a separate element and did not make 
their consent necessary. Reliance is placed upon the fact that the 
Cripps’s proposals spoke of “racial and religious minorities” only 
and it is argued that the Scheduled Castes are neither a racial 
nor a religious minority. 

It is hardly necessary to point out how ignorant this criticism 
is. The Scheduled Castes are really a religious minority. The 
Hindu religion by its dogma of untouchability has separated the 
Scheduld Castes from the main body of the Hindus in a manner 
which makes the separation far more real and far wider than 
the separation which exists either between Hindus and Muslims 
or Hindus and Sikhs or Hindus and Christians. It is difficult to 
concede of a more effective method of separation and segregation 
than the principle of untouchability and it is only those who 
are actuated by malicious spirit of finding excuses to deny the 
Scheduled Castes their claim to political rights would indulge 
in this kind of jugglery. Those who regard the statement of 
Lord Wavell as a new departure have completely forgotten what 
attitude His Majesty’s Government has taken in the matter of 
the Scheduled Castes from the very beginning when the transfer 
of political power from British to Indian hands was thought of. 
Ever since 1917 when the Montagu-Chelmsford Report advocated 
responsible Government, the British Government have taken 
a definite stand that they would, under no circumstances, 
transfer power to Indian hands until they were satisfied that the 
position of the Scheduled Castes was safeguarded by adequate 
Constitutional provisions. A few of the many declarations made by 
Secretaries of State and Viceroys of India from 1917 to 1941 are 
collected together in the following pages. It will be found that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


324 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

324 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

recognition that the Scheduled Castes are a separate and important 
element in the national life of the country and that their consent 
is necessary are in no way new proposals. Both the statements 
have been made by responsible representatives of His Majesty’s 
Government, viz., the Secretary of State and the Viceroy long 
before the Cripps’s proposals came into being. Particular attention 
is drawn to Mr. Amery’s statement on 14th August 1940 and Lord 
Linlithgow’s statement on 10th January 1940. It is hoped that 
a perusal of these declarations will enable those who are trying 
to negative the claim of the Scheduled Castes for political rights 
to realise that their propaganda is both foolish and malicious. 

( 1 ) 

Extract from the Montagu- Chelmsford Report on Indian 
Constitutional Reform — 1917. 

155 We have shown that the political education of the 

ryot cannot be a very rapid, and may be a very difficult process. 
Till it is complete, he must be exposed to the risk of oppression 
by people who are stronger and cleverer than he is : and until it 
is clear that his interests can safely be left in his own hands or 
that the legislative councils represent and consider his interest, we 
must retain power to protect him. So with the depressed classes. 
We intend to make the best arrangements that we can for their 
representation, in order that they too may ultimately learn the 
lesson of self-protection. But if it is found that their interests 
suffer and that they do not share in the general progress, we 
must retain the means in our own hands of helping them. 

* * * 

( 2 ) 

Extract from the Fifth Despatch of the Government of India 
dated 23rd April 1919 on the Report of the Southborough Committee 
on Franchise. 

13. We have analysed in the statement (printed at the top 
of the next page) the interests which in the committee’s opinion 
should be represented by non-official nomination. 

We accept these proposals generally. But there is one 
community whose case appears to us to require more consideration 
than the committee gave it. The Report on Indian Constitutional 
Reforms clearly recognizes the problem of the depressed classes 
and gave a pledge respecting them. “We intend to make the best 
arrangements that we can for their representation.” The castes 
described as “Hindus — others” in the committee’s report, though 
they are defined in varying terms, are broadly speaking all the same 
kind of people. Except for differences in the rigidity of their ex- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


325 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VI 325 


Name of Province 

Depressed Classes 

Anglo-Indians 

Indian Christians 

Labour 

Excluded Tracts 

Military Interest 

Industrial Interest other 
than Planting & Mining 

Aborigines 

Domiciled Bengalis 

Others 

Total 

Percentage of total 
Membership 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

Madras 

2 

— 

— 

— 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2 

6 

5 

Bombay 

— 

1 

1 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2 

6 

5 

Bengal 

1 

— 

1 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

22 

5 

4 

United Provinces 

1 

1 

1 







2 

5 

4 

Punjab 

— 

2* 

1 

— 

— 

1 

— 

— 

— 

2 

6 

7 

Bihar and Orissa 

1 

1 

1 

1 

— 

— 

1 

1 

1 

2 

9 

9 

Central Provinces . . . 

1 

1* 

— 

— 

2 

— 

— 

— 

— 

1 

5 

7 

Assam 

— 

1* 

1 

1 

1 

— 

— 

— 

— 

1 

5 

9 

Total ... 

7 

7 

6 

4 

5 

1 

1 

1 

1 

14 

47 

— 


* Europeans and Anglo-Indians. 


elusion they are all more or less in the position of the Madras 
Panchamas, definitely outside that part of the Hindu community 
which is allowed access to their temples. They amount to about 
one-fifth of the total population, and have not been represented 
at all in the Morley-Minto Councils. The committee’s report 
mentions the depressed classes twice, but only to explain that in 
the absence of satisfactory electorates they have been provided 
by nomination. It does not discuss the position of these people or 
their capacity for looking after themselves. Nor does it explain 
the amount of nomination which it suggests for them. Para 24 
of the report justifies the restriction of the nominated seats on 
grounds which do not suggest that the committee were referring 
to the depressed classes. The measures of representation which 
they propose for this community is as follows : — 


— 

Total 

Population 

Population 
of Depressed 
Classes 

Total Seats 

Seats for 
Depressed 
Classes 

Madras 

(millions) 

39.8 

(millions) 

6.3 

120 

2 

Bombay 

19.5 

.6 

113 

1 

Bengal 

45.0 

9.9 

127 

1 

United Provinces 

47.0 

10.1 

120 

1 

Punjab 

19.5 

1.7 

85 

— 

Bihar and Orissa 

32.4 

9.3 

100 

1 

Central Provinces 

12.2 

3.7 

72 

1 

Assam 

6.0 

0.3 

54 

— 

Total 

221.4 

41.9 

791 

7 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


326 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

326 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These figures speak for themselves. It is suggested that one- 
fifth of the entire population of British India should be allotted 
seven seats out of practically eight hundred. It is true that in 
all the councils there will be roughly a one-sixth proportion of 
officials who may be expected to bear in mind the interests of the 
depressed ; but that arrangement is not, in our opinion, what the 
Report on reforms aims at. The authors stated that the depressed 
classes also should learn the lesson of self-protection. It is surely 
fanciful to hope that this result can be expected from including 
a single member of the community in an assembly where there 
are sixty or seventy caste Hindus. To make good the principles of 
paras 151, 152, 154 and 155 of the Report we must treat the out- 
castes more generously. We think there should be in each council 
enough representatives of the depressed classes to save them from 
being entirely submerged, and at the same time to stimulate some 
capacity for collective action. In the case of Madras, we suggest 
that they should be given six seats; in Bengal, the United Provinces 
and Bihar and Orissa, we would give them four; in the Central 
Provinces and Bombay two and elsewhere one. In these respects 
we think that the committee’s report clearly requires modification. 
* * * 

( 3 ) 

Extract from Lord Birkenhead’s speech as Secretary of State 
for India in the House of Lords on the 30th March 1927 on the 
appointment of Statutory Commission. 

* * * 

Let me take the case of the depressed classes. There 

is in India a vast population even in relation to the numbers 
with which we are dealing, a population of sixty millions of the 
depressed classes. Their condition is not quite as terrible, quite 
as poignant as it has been in the past, but it is still terrible and 
poignant. They are repelled from all social intercourse. If they 
come between the gracious light of the sun and one who despised 
them the sun is disfigured for that man. They cannot drink at 
the public water-supply. They must make diversions of miles in 
order to satisfy thirst and they are tragically known and they have 
been known for generations as the “untouchables.” There are sixty 
millions of them in India. Am I to have a representative of them 
upon this Commission ? Never, never would I form a Commission 
nor would anyone in a democratic country, nor would my friends 
opposite recommend it, from which you have excluded a member 
of this class which more than any other requires representation 
if you are indeed to put the matter to a mixed jury of the kind 
I am indicating. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


327 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VI 327 

(4) 

Extract from the Report of the Simon Commission, Vol. II. 

4 = * 

78 In no other province has it been possible to get an 

estimate of the number of the depressed classes who are qualified 
to vote. It is clear that even with a considerable lowering of the 
franchise — which would no doubt increase the proportion of the 
depressed class voters — there would be no hope of the depressed 
classes getting their own representatives elected in general 
constituencies without special provision being made to secure it. 
In the long run the progress of the depressed classes, so far as 
it can be secured by the exercise by them of political influence, 
will depend on their getting a position of sufficient importance for 
other elements to seek their support and to consider their needs. 


* * * 

80 It will be seen, therefore, that we do not recommend 


allocating seats to the depressed classes on the basis of their full 
population ratio. The scale of reserved representation suggested 
will secure a substantial increase in the number of the M.L.C’s. 
drawn from the depressed classes. The poverty and want of 
education which so widely prevail amongst them make it extremely 
doubtful whether a large number of adequately equipped members 
could be at once provided, and it is far better that they should 
be represented by qualified spokesmen rather than by a larger 
number of ineffectives who are only too likely to be subservient 
to higher castes. The re-distribution of seats which is now being 
attempted among different kinds of representatives cannot be 
permanent, and provision must be made for its revision. But we 
think that our proposal is adequate for the present, especially 
as the representation of opinion by reservation of seats does not 
exclude the possibility of the capture of other seats not so reserved. 
* * * 

(5) 

Extract from the Government of India’s Despatch on Proposals 
for Constitutional Reform {as set out hy the Simon Commission). 
* * * 

35. The Representation of the Depressed Classes. — The suggestions 
made by the Commission for the representation of the depressed 
classes have been much criticized by the provincial Governments. 
The difficulty of framing for each province a definition of the 
“depressed classes” is probably inherent in any scheme for the 
special representation of this class other than by nomination; but the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


328 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

328 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Appendix I 

Commission’s proposals place a peculiarly embarrassing duty on 
the Governor to certify candidates authorised to stand for the 
depressed classes ; and the proportion of representation which 
the Commission suggest, namely, in the ratio of three-quarters 
of the proportion of the depressed classes population to the total 
population of the electoral area of the provinces, seems likely to 
be unduly high. The Government of the United Provinces have 
calculated that in that province the Commission’s proposal would 
result in the return to the provincial legislature of no less than 
forty members in place of the single nominated member who 
at present represents the community. The whole problem of 
the representation of the depressed classes will require careful 
investigation by the Franchise Committee ; and at this stage 
we only wish to make plain that in our view their adequate 
representation should be secured by the best means that may be 
found practicable. Though there are some differences of opinion 
within the community, recent meetings of depressed classes 
associations have re-affirmed their belief in separate electorates. 
* * * 

( 6 ) 

Extract from the Terms of Reference to the Lothian Committee 
{on Franchise) 1932. 

* * 

3. You are aware that the present electorate in Indian provinces 
amounts to less than 3 per cent, of the population of the areas 
returning members to provincial Councils, and it is obvious that 
under this limited franchise, the majority of the people and 
many large and important sections of the community can enjoy 
no effective representation in the Legislatures. The principle of a 
responsible Federal Government, subject to certain reservations 
and safeguards, has been accepted by His Majesty’s Government 
while it has been decided that the Governors’ provinces are to 
become responsibly governed units, enjoying the greatest possible 
measure of freedom from outside interference and dictation in 
carrying out their own policies in their own sphere. In these 
circumstances, it is clearly necessary so to widen the electorate 
that the legislatures to which responsibility is to be entrusted 
should be representative of the general mass of the population 
and that no important section of the community may lack the 
means of expressing its needs and its opinions. 

* * * 

6. It is evident from the discussions which have occurred in 
various connections in the Conference that the new Constitution 
must make adequate provision for the representation of the De- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


329 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VI 329 

pressed Classes and that the method of representation by 
nomination is no longer regarded as appropriate. As you are 
aware, there is difference of opinion whether the system of 
separate electorates should be instituted for the Depressed Classes 
and your Committee’s investigations should contribute towards 
the decision of this question by indicating the extent to which 
the Depressed Classes would be likely, through such general 
extension of the franchise as you may recommend, to secure the 
right to vote in ordinary electorates. On the other hand, should 
it be decided eventually to constitute separate electorates for the 
Depressed Classes, either generally or in those provinces in which 
they form a distinct and separate element in the population, 
your committee’s inquiry into general problem of extending the 
franchise should place you in possession of facts which would 
facilitate the devising of a method of separate representation for 
the Depressed Classes. 

* * * 

( 7 ) 

Extract from the Statement issued by H. E. Lord Linlithgow the 
Viceroy and Governor -General of India, dated 17th October 1939. 
* * * 

“Be that as it may, His Majesty’s Government recognise 
that when the time comes to resume consideration of the plan 
for the future federal Government of India, and of the plan 
destined to give effect to the Assurance given in Parliament by 
the late Secretary of State, to which I have just referred, it will 
be necessary to reconsider in the light of the then circumstances 
to what extent the details of the plan embodied in the Act of 
1935 remain appropriate. 

And I am authorised now by His Majesty’s Government to 
say that at the end of the war they will be very willing to enter 
into consultation with representatives of the several communities, 
parties and interests in India, and with the Indian Princes, with 
a view to securing their aid and co-operation in the framing of 
such modifications as may seem desirable.” 

* * * 

( 8 ) 

Extract from a Statement made on 7th November 1939 by 
Lord Zetland, Secretary of State for India in the House of Lords. 
* * 

“The Congress have further consistently taken the line, which 
they still maintain, that the fact that there are racial and religions 
minorities in India is of no relevance in that connexion, and that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


330 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

330 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it has always been the intention of the Congress to secure, 
through the Constitution to be framed by Indians themselves, 
such protection for their rights as may prove acceptable to 
the minorities. 

His Majesty’s Government find it impossible to accept this 
position. The long-standing British connexion with India has 
left His Majesty’s Government with obligations towards her 
which it is impossible for them to shed by disinteresting 
themselves wholly in the shaping of her future form of 
Government. Moreover, one outstanding result of the recent 
discussions in which the Governor-General has been engaged 
with representatives of all parties and interests in India has 
been to establish beyond doubt the fact that a declaration in 
the sense proposed, with the summary abandonment by His 
Majesty’s Government of their position in India, would be far 
from acceptable to large sections of the Indian population.” 

•k •k •k 

( 9 ) 

Extract from the Speech made by H. E. Lord Linlithgow, 
Viceroy and Governor-General at the Orient Club, Bombay, on 
January 10, 1940. 

“Nor must we forget the essential necessity, in the 
interests of Indian unity, of the inclusion of the Indian States 
in any Constitutional scheme. 

There are the insistent claims of the minorities. 

I need refer only to two of them — the great Muslim 
minority and the Scheduled Castes — there are the guarantees 
that have been given to the minorities in the past; the fact 
that their position must be safeguarded, and that those 
guarantees must be honoured. 

k k "k 

( 10 ) 

Extract from a Speech made by the Right Hon’ble Mr. L. S. 
Amery, Secretary of State for India in the House of Commons on 
August 14, 1940. 

"k "k "k 

“Congress leaders... have built up a remarkable 
organization, the most efficient political machine in India... 
if only they had succeeded, if the Congress could, in fact 
speak, as it professes to speak, for all the main elements in 
India’s national life, then however advanced their demands, 
our problem would have been in many respects far easier 
than it is to-day. It is true that they are numerically the 
largest single party in British India, but their claim in virtue 
of that fact to speak for India is utterly denied by very 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


331 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VI 331 

important elements in India’s complex national life. These 
others assert their right to be regarded not as mere numerical 
minorities but as separate constituent factors in any future 
Indian policy. The foremost among these elements stands the 
great Muslim community. They will have nothing to do with 
a constitution framed by a constituent assembly elected by a 
majority vote in geographical constituencies. They claim the 
right in any constitutional discussions to be regarded as an 
entity against the operations of a mere numerical majority. 

The same applies to the great body what are known as the 
Scheduled Castes who feel that in spite of Mr. Gandhi’s 
earnest endeavours on their behalf that, as a community, 
they stand outside the main body of the Hindu community 
which is represented by the Congress. 

•k Jc ~k 

( 11 ) 

Extract from the Speech of the Right Hon’ble Mr. L. S. Amery, 
Secretary of State for India in the House of Commons on 23rd 
April 1941. 

•k k "k 

“India’s future Constitution should be devised by Indians for 

themselves and not by the British Government. India’s future 
Constitution should be essentially an Indian Constitution, framed 
in accordance with the Indian conception of Indian conditions and 
Indian needs. The only essential condition is that the Constitution 
itself and the body which is to frame it must be the outcome of 
agreement between principal elements in India’s national life. 

•k Jc "k 

( 12 ) 

Extract from a Statement by H. E. Lord Linlithgow, Viceroy 
and Governor -General of India on 8th August 1940. 

■k ■k ■k 

“These are two main points which have emerged. On 
these two points, His Majesty’s Government now desire me to 
make then-position clear. The first is as to the position of the 
minorities in relation to any future Constitutional scheme. . .It 
goes without saying that they (H. M. Government) could not 
contemplate the transfer of their present responsibilities for 
the peace and welfare of India to any system of Government 
whose authority is directly denied by large and powerful 
elements in India’s national life. Nor could they be parties 
to the coercion of such elements into submission to such a 
Government.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


332 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

332 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Appendix VII 

MINORITIES AND WEIGHTAGE 

Views of the Montagu-Chelmsford Report and of the Simom 
Commission on the inequitous distribution of weightage. 

( 1 ) 

Montagu-Chelmsford Report. 

Extract from the Montagu-Chelmsford Report on Indian 
Constitutional Reforms. 

•k •k •k 

163. Important minorities, it is proposed, should be 
Minority represented by election. This appears to point to 
representation a system of which latter are specified only for 
Muhammadans, who are no longer to be allowed 
to vote in the general electorates as well as in their own special 
ones. We have elsewhere touched upon the difficulty of denying 
to certain other communities such as the Sikhs in the Punjab, 
a concession which is granted to Muhammadans. The authors of 
the scheme have also agreed upon, and set forth the proportions 
of the seats to be reserved for the special Muslim electorates in 
the various provinces. We are not aware on what basis, other 
than that of negotiation, the figured were arrived at. Separate 
electorates are proposed in all province even where Muhammadans 
are in a majority: and wherever they are numerically weak, the 
proportion suggested is in excess of their numerical strength or 
their present representation. At the same time, nearly all the 
Muslim associations which addressed us urged upon us that it 
should be still further increased. Now a privileged position of 
this kind is open to the objection, that if any other community 
hereafter makes good a claim to separate representation, it can 
be satisfied only by deduction from the non-Muslim seats, of 
else by a rateable deduction from both Muslim and non-Muslim; 
and Hindu Muslim opinions are not likely to agree which 
process should be adopted. While, therefore, for reasons that we 
explain subsequently, we assent to the maintenance of separate 
representation for Muhammadans, we are bound to reserve our 
approval of the particular proposals set before us until we have 
ascertained what the effect upon other interests will be, and have 
made fair provision for them. We agree with the authors of the 
scheme that Muhammadans should not have votes both in their 
own special, and in the general electorates — and we welcome the 
Muslim League’s assent to the revision in this respect of existing 
arrangements.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


333 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VII 333 

( 2 ) 

Extract from the Report of the Indian Statutory Commission, Vol. II. 

•k 

Number of Muhammadan Seats 

Para 85. We now take up the question of the proportion of seats 
in the various provincial councils to be set aside for Muhammadan 
members. 

The Lucknow Pact, as we have already pointed out, included 
an agreement between Hindus and Moslems as to the proportion of 
Indian elected seats allotted in each province to the Muhammadan 
community, and its terms have been followed closely in the allocation 
of Muhammadan seats in the existing provincial legislatures. The 
Pact is no longer accepted by either side as offering a fair basis of 
representation and the rival contentions now put forward are indicated 
in paragraph 70 above. It is very much to be hoped that a renewed 
effort will be made between the two communities themselves to 
arrive at a fresh accommodation: but in the absence of agreement, 
a decision will have to be reached by others, on the assumption that 
separate electorates remain. Our own opinion is that in view of the 
existing position and of the weakness of the Moslem minority in six 
out of the eight 1 provinces, the present scale of weightage in favour of 
Muhammadans in those provinces might properly be retained. Thus, 
the proportion to be allotted to them, of seats filled from the “general” 
constituencies (other than the European general constituencies) would 
be determined as at present. But a claim has been put forward for a 
guarantee of Muhammadan representation which goes further than 
this — see paragraph 70 above and Appendix VII at the end of this 
chapter. This claim goes to the length of seeking to preserve the full 
security for representation now provided for Moslems in these six 
provinces and at the same time to enlarge in Bengal and the Punjab 
the present proportion of seats secured to the community by separate 
electorates to figures proportionate to their ratio of population. This 
would give Muhammadans a fixed and unalterable majority of the 
“general constituency” seats in both provinces. We cannot go so far. 
The continuance of the present scale of weightage in the six provinces 
could not — in the absence of a new general agreement between the 
communities — equitably be combined with so great a departure from 
the existing allocation in Bengal and the Punjab. 

It would be unfair that Muhammadans should retain the very 
considerable weightage they now enjoy in the six provinces, and 
that there should at the same time be imposed, in face of Hindu- 
Sikh opposition, a definite Moslem majority in the Punjab and in 
1 Burma is not in question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


334 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

334 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bengal unalterable by any appeal to the electorate. On the 
other hand, if by agreement separate electorates in Bengal were 
abandoned, so that each community in that province was left 
to secure such seats as it could gain by appeal to a combined 
electorate, we should not, on that account, seek to deprive the 
Moslem community of its existing weightage in the six provinces 
where they are in a minority. In the same way in the Punjab, 
if Moslems, Sikhs and Hindus were prepared to seek election 
through a joint electorate covering all three communities, here 
again we should still be prepared to see this combined with 
the preservation of the present numerical proportion secured 
to the Muhammadans by separate electorates in the six other 
provinces. 

We make this last suggestion, which really involves giving 
the Moslem community the advantage of a choice between two 
courses to follow, because we sincerely desire to see all practicable 
means attempted for reducing the extent of separate electorates 
and for giving the other system a practical trial. 

Appendix VIII 

CRIPPS PROPOSALS 

DRAFT DECLARATION FOR DISCUSSION WITH 
INDIAN LEADERS 


The conclusions of the British War Cabinet set out below 
are those which Sir Stafford Cripps has brought with him for 
discussion with Indian Leaders, and the question as to whether 
they will be implemented will depend upon the outcome of those 
discussions which are now taking place. 


His Majesty’s Government having considered the anxieties 
expressed in this country and in India as to the fulfilment of 
promises made in regard to the future of India have decided 
to lay down in precise and clear terms, the steps which they 
propose shall be taken for the earliest possible realisation of self- 
government in India. The object is the creation of a new Indian 
Union which shall constitute a Dominion associated with the 
United Kingdom and other Dominions by a common allegiance 
to the Crown but equal to them in every respect, in no way 
subordinate in any aspect of its domestic or external affairs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


335 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX VIII 335 

His Majesty’s Government, therefore, make the following 
Declaration: — 

(a) Immediately upon cessation of hostilities, steps shall be taken 
to set up in India, in manner described hereafter, an elected 
body charged with the task of framing a new Constitution 
for India. 

( b ) Provision shall be made, as set out below, for participation 
of Indian States in the Constitution-making body. 

(c) His Majesty’s Government undertake to accept and implement 
forthwith the Constitution so framed subject only to: — 

(t) The right of any Province of British India that is not 
prepared to accept the new Constitution, to retain its 
present constitutional position, provision being made for 
its subsequent accession if it so decides. 

With such non-acceding Provinces, should they so 
desire, His Majesty’s Government will be prepared to 
agree upon a new Constitution giving them the same 
full status as the Indian Union and arrived at by a 
procedure analogous to that here laid down. 

(ii) The signing of a Treaty which shall be negotiated between 
His Majesty’s Government and the Constitution-making 
body. This Treaty will cover all necessary matters arising 
out of the complete transfer of responsibility from British 
to Indian hands; it will make provision, in accordance 
with undertakings given by His Majesty’s Government, 
for the protection of racial and religious minorities; 
but will not impose any restriction on the power of the 
Indian Union to decide in future its relationship to other 
Member States of the British Commonwealth. 

Whether or not an Indian State elects to adhere 
to the Constitution, it will be necessary to negotiate a 
revision of its Treaty arrangements so far as this may 
be required in the new situation. 

(i d) The Constitution-making body shall be composed as follows 
unless the leaders of Indian opinion in the principal 
communities agree upon some other form before the end of 
hostilities: — 

Immediately upon the result being known of Provincial 
Elections which will be necessary at the end of hostilities, 
the entire membership of the Lower Houses of Provincial 
Legislatures shall as a single electoral college proceed 
to the election of the Constitution-making body by the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


336 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

336 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

system of proportional representation. This new body shall 
be in number about l/10th of the number of the electoral 
college. 

Indian States shall be invited to appoint representatives 
in the same proportion to their total population as in the 
case of representatives of British India as a whole and 
with the same powers as British Indian Members. 

(e) During the critical period which now faces India and 
until the New Constitution can be framed, His Majesty’s 
Government must inevitably bear the responsibility for and 
retain the control and direction of the defence of India as 
part of their world war effort, but the task of organising 
to the full the military, moral and material resources of 
India must be the responsibility of the Government of India 
with the co-operation of the peoples of India. His Majesty’s 
Government desire and invite the immediate and effective 
participation of the leaders of the principal sections of 
the Indian people in the counsels of their country, of the 
Commonwealth and of the united nations. Thus they will 
be enabled to give their active and constructive help in 
the discharge of a task which is vital and essential for 
the future freedom of India. 

Appendix IX 

OBJECTIONS TO CRIPPS PROPOSALS 

Statement by B. R. Ambedkar showing how the Gripps 
Proposals would affect the Untouchables 

The War Cabinet proposals show a sudden Volte Face on 
the part of His Majesty’s Government. The putting forth of 
these proposals, which were denounced by them as an invasion 
of minority rights, is an indication of their complete surrender 
of right to win might. This is Munich mentality, the essence 
of which is to save oneself by sacrificing others, and it is this 
mentality which is writ large on these proposals. It is reported 
that the American and English people are annoyed at Indians 
not welcoming the proposals of His Majesty’s Government 
relating to the constitutional advancement of India and thereby 
allowing the mission of Sir Stafford Cripps to fail. One can 
forgive the Americans for their attititude, but surely the 
English people and Sir Stafford Cripps ought to know better, 
It does not seem to have been sufficienty realised that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


337 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IX 337 

proposals of His Majesty’s Government now put forth as the best 
are the very proposals which have been rejected and condemned 
by His Majesty’s Government as the worst, only a few months 
previously. Those who realise this cannot but help saying that this 
is the ugliest part of the whole business of constitutional advance, 
which His Majesty’s Government is now suddenly and contrary to 
its previous declarations, rushing to undertake. The proposals fall 
into three parts: (1) There is to be a constituent assembly with 
a right to frame the Constitution for India. This Assembly is to 
have the fullest power to frame such constitution as the majority 
in the Assembly may choose to decide; (2) The new Constitution is 
not to include all of the present Provinces of India but only such 
Provinces as may be willing to be bound by it. For this the Provinces 
have been given a right to decide whether they shall join the new 
Constitution or stay out of it. This is left to be done by a plebiscite 
in which a bare majority is declared enough to decide the issue ; (3) 
The Constituent Assembly shall be required to enter into a treaty 
with the British Government. The treaty is to contain provisions 
for the safety and security of racial and religious minorities. After 
such a treaty is signed, the British Government is to withdraw its 
sovereignty and the Constitution framed by the Constituent Assembly 
is to come into operation. 

Such, in brief outline, is the scheme of His Majesty’s Government. 

The proposal regarding Constituent Assembly is not a new 
proposal. It was put forth by the Congress when the war broke out 
and what is important is that this proposal of the Congress was 
rejected by His Majesty’s Government. This is what Mr. Amery said 
in the House of Commons on August 14, 1940, regarding Constituent 
Assembly : — 

“Congress leaders... have built up a remarkable organization, 
the most efficient political machine in India... If only they had 
succeeded, if the Congress could, in fact speak, as it professes 
to speak, for all the main elements in India’s national life, then 
however advanced their demands, our problem would have been 
in many respects far easier than it is to-day. It is true that they 
are numerically the largest single party in British India, but 
their claim in virtue of that fact to speak for India is utterly 
denied by very important elements in India’s complex national 
life. These others assert their right to be regarded not as mere 
numerical minorities but as separate constituent factors in any 
future Indian policy. The foremost among these elements stands 
the great Muslim community. They will have nothing to do with 
a Constitution framed by a Constituent Assembly elected by a 
majority vote in geographical constituencies. They claim the right 
in any constitutional discussions to be regarded as an entity 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


338 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

338 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and are determined only to accept a Constitution whose actual 
structure will secure their position as an entity against the 
operations of a mere numerical majority. The same applies to 
the great body of what are known as the Scheduled Castes 
who feel, in spite of Mr. Gandhi’s earnest endeavours on their 
behalf, that, as a community, they stand outside the main body 
of the Hindu Community which is represented by the Congress.” 

This statement was made by Mr. Amery when he was elucidating 
the announcement made by the Viceroy on 8th August 1941 in 
which he had given the following pledge to the minorities on behalf 
of His Majesty’s Government: — 

“There are two main points which have emerged. On 
these two points. His Majesty’s Government now desire me to 
make their position clear. The first is as to the position of the 
minorities in relation to any future constitutional scheme.. .It 
goes without saying that they (H. M. Government) could not 
contemplate the transfer of their present responsibilities for the 
peace and welfare of India to any system of government whose 
authority is directly denied by large and powerful elements in 
India’s national life. Nor could they be parties to the coercion 
of such elements into submission to such a government.” 

Again on the 23rd April 1941, Mr. Amery referred to the 
demand of the Constituent Assembly and expressed himself in the 
following terms: — 

“India’s future Constitution should be devised by Indians 
for themselves and not by the British Government. India’s 
future Constitution should be essentially an Indian Constitution, 
framed in accordance with the Indian conception of Indian 
conditions and Indian needs. The only essential condition is 
that the Constitution itself and the body which is to frame it, 
must be the outcome of agreement between principal elements 
in India’s national life.” 

Such were the views and pledges given by H. M. Government 
regarding Constituent Assembly, which is now conceded. Regarding 
the demand for Pakistan, it was a demand put forward by the 
Muslim League. This demand was also rejected by His Majesty’s 
Government. This is what Mr. Amery said in regard to it in the 
House of Commons on August 1, 1940: — 

“This reaction against the dangers of what is called the 
Congress Raj or Hindu Raj has gone so far as to lead to a growing 
demand from Muslim quarters for a complete breaking up of India 
into separate Hindu and Muslim dominions. I need say nothing 
to-day of the manifold and to my mind, insuperable objections 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


339 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IX 339 

to such a scheme, at any rate in its extreme form. I would 
only note that it merely shifts the problem of permanent 
minorities to somewhat smaller areas, without solving it.” 

Again on April 23, 1941, he referred to it in his speech in the 
House of Common and spoke about it in the following terms : — 

“I am not concerned here to discuss the immense practical 
difficulties in the way of this so-called Pakistan project nor 
need I go back to the dismal record of India’s history in the 
18th century or to the disastrous experience of the Balkan 
countries before our eyes, to-day, in order to point out the 
terrible dangers inherent in any break up of the essential 
unity of India, at any rate in its relation to the outside world. 
After all, there is no British achievement in India of which we 
have reason to be proud than the unity... we have given her.” 

Such were the views of His Majesty’s Government only a year 
ago regarding Constituent Assembly and Pakistan. 

It is quite obvious that the proposal for a Constituent Assembly 
is intended to win over the Congress, while the proposal for 
Pakistan is designed to win over the Muslim League. How do 
the proposals deal with the Depressed Classes ? To put it shortly, 
they are bound hand and foot and handed over to the caste 
Hindus. They offer them nothing; stone instead of bread. For 
the Constituent Assembly is nothing short of a betrayal of the 
Depressed Classes. There can be no doubt as to what the position 
of the Depressed Classes will be in the Constituent Assembly; nor 
can there be any doubt regarding the political programme of the 
Constituent Assembly. In the Constituent Assembly, there may 
be no representatives of the Depressed Classes at all because no 
communal quotas are fixed by these proposals. If they are there, 
they cannot have a free, independent and decisive vote. In the 
first place, the representatives of the Depressed Classes will be 
in a hopeless minority. In the second place, all decisions of the 
Constituent Assembly are not required to be by a unanimous vote. 
A majority vote is enough to decide any question no matter what 
its constitutional importance is. It is clear that under this system 
the voice of the Depressed Classes in the Constituent Assembly 
cannot count. In the third place, the present system of proportional 
representation by which the members to the Constituent Assembly 
are to be elected under the terms contained in His Majesty’s 
proposals cannot but result in the caste Hindus having virtually 
the right to nominate the representatives of the Depressed 
Classes to the Constituent Assembly. Such representatives of 
the Depressed Classes will be the tools of the caste Hindu. In 
the fourth place, the Constituent Assembly will be filled with the 
Congressites who will form the dominant majority party able to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


340 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

340 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

carry out its own programme. There is no doubt that Mr. Gandhi, 
whatever may be said about his endeavours in the matter of the 
social uplift of the Depressed Classes, is totally opposed to giving 
political recognition to the Depressed Classes in the Constitution as a 
separate and distinct element in the national life of India. That being 
the case, the programme of the majority party in the Constituent 
Assembly will be to wipe out the political safeguards already granted 
to the Depressed Classes in the present Constitution. Any one, who 
realises what is implied in the Constituent Assembly, will admit that 
His Majesty’s Government by their proposals have literally thrown 
the Depressed Classes to the wolves. It may be said that while 
there is the Constituent Assembly which may deny constitutional 
safeguards to the Depressed Classes, His Majesty’s Government 
have been careful to include in their proposals the provisions for 
a treaty with the Constituent Assembly the object of which is to 
secure the interests of the Depressed Classes. This proposal of a 
treaty is evidently borrowed from the plan adopted by His Majesty’s 
Government for the settlement of the Irish dispute. The proposal 
regarding the treaty does not say what are the safeguards His 
Majesty’s Government will decide to include in the treaty. This is 
an important point because there may be a difference of opinion 
between His Majesty’s Government and the Depressed Classes on 
the nature, number and method of the political safeguards that may 
be necessary to protect the interests of the Depressed Classes under 
the new Constitution. The second and equally important question 
about the treaty is what is going to be the sanction behind the 
treaty. Will the treaty be a part of the Constitution framed by the 
Constituent Assembly, so that any provision in the Constitution 
which is repugnant with the treaty will be null and void ? Or, 
will the treaty be just a treaty between the two governments; the 
Indian National Government and His Majesty’s Government, as 
any trade treaty ? If the treaty is to be of the former kind, it will 
be the law of the land and will have legal sanction of the Indian 
Government behind it. If, on the other hand, the treaty is to be of 
the latter kind, it is obvious it will not be the law of the land and 
will have no legal sanction behind it. Its sanction will be political 
sanction. Now a treaty cannot override the Constitution framed 
by the National Government for the obvious reason that such a 
thing, as was found in the case of Irish Free State, is incompatible 
with Dominion Status. The only sanction behind such a treaty will 
be political sanction. It is obvious that the use of such sanction 
must depend upon the colour of the Government and the state of 
public opinion. Given this fact, the questions that arise are two: 
(1) What are the means which His Majesty’s Government will 
have at its disposal to enforce the treaty obligations? (2) Secondly, 
will His Majesty’s Government be prepared to use these means to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


341 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX IX 341 

coerce the Indian National Government to abide by the terms of the 
treaty ? With regard to the first question, it is obvious that the means 
for enforcing the treaty are twofold — use of force and trade war. As 
to the military force, the Indian army will not be available. It will 
be entirely transferred to the control of the new Indian National 
Government. His Majesty’s Government will have therefore lost this 
means of enforcing the treaty. It is impossible to believe that His 
Majesty’s Government will send its own army to compel the National 
Government to obey the treaty. A trade war is not possible. It is a 
suicidal policy and the experience of the Irish war with the Irish 
Free State for the recovery of land annuities shows that a nation 
of shopkeepers will not sanction it even though it may be for their 
interest and honour. The treaty therefore is going to be an empty 
formula, if not a cruel joke, upon the Depressed Classes. His Majesty’s 
Government has sent out these proposals to be welcomed by Indians. 
But neither His Majesty’s Government nor Sir Stafford Cripps have 
offered any explanation as to why they are offering to Indians the 
very proposals which His Majesty’s Government had been condemning 
in scathing terms only a few months ago. A year ago, His Majesty’s 
Government said that they would not grant Constituent Assembly 
because that would be a coercion of the minorities. His Majesty’s 
Government is now prepared to grant Constituent Assembly and to 
coerce the minorities. A year ago, His Majesty’s Government said that 
they will not allow Pakistan because that is Balkanization of India. 
To-day, they are prepared to allow the partition of India. How can 
the Government of a Great Empire lose all sense of principle ? The 
only explanation is that His Majesty’s Government has, as a result 
of the course of the war, become panic-stricken. The proposals are 
the result of loss of nerve. How great is the panic that has overtaken 
His Majesty’s Government can be easily seen if one compared the 
demands made by the Congress and the Muslim League and the 
concessions made to them by these proposals. The Congress demanded 
that the Constitution should be framed by a Constituent Assembly 
by a mere majority vote. On the other hand, when the Viceroy 
announced that the British Government will not be a party to the 
coercion of the minorities involved in the demand by the Congress, 
the Working Committee of the Congress at its meeting at Wardha 
held on August 22, 1940, passed the following resolution : — 

“The Committee regrets that although the Congress has never 
thought in terms of coercing any minority, much less of asking 
the British Government to do so, the demand for a settlement of 
a Constitution though through a Constituent Assembly of duly 
elected representatives has been misrepresented as coercion and 
the issue of minorities has been made into an insuperable barrier 
to Indians progress.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


342 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

342 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Working Committee added : — 

“The Congress had proposed that minority rights should be 
amply protected by agreement with the elected representatives 
of the minorities concerned.” 

This shows that even the Congress did not demand that the 
decision of minority rights should be included in the purview of 
the Constituent Assembly. His Majesty’s Government has, however, 
given them the additional right to decide this minority rights 
issue by a bare majority vote. With regard to the question of 
Pakistan, the same attitude is noticeable. The Muslim League did 
not demand that Pakistan must be conceded immediately. All that 
the Muslim League had asked for was that at the next revision 
of the Constitution, the Mussalmans should not be prevented 
from raising the question of Pakistan. The present proposals have 
gone a step beyond and distinctly give to the Muslim League 
the right to create Pakistan. These are constitutional proposals. 
They are intended to lead India to wage a total war in which 
Hindus, Mussalmans, Depressed Classes and Sikhs are called upon 
wholeheartedly to participate. Yet Sir Stafford Cripps, either with 
the consent or without the consent of His Majesty’s Government, 
has been making discrimination between major parties and minor 
parties. The major parties are those whose consent is necessary. 
Minor parties are those with whom consultation is believed to be 
enough. This is new distinction. Certainly it was never made in 
the prior pronouncements either of His Majesty’s Government or 
of the Viceroy. The pronouncement spoke of the “consent of the 
principal elements in the national life of India.” 

So far as the Depressed Classes are concerned, I am not aware 
of any pronouncement in which the Depressed Classes were placed 
on a lower plane than the one given to the Mussalmans. I quote 
the following from the speech of the Viceroy made in Bombay on 
January 10, 1941, from which it will be seen that the Depressed 
Classes were bracketed with the Mussalmans : 

“There are insistent claims of the minorities. I need refer only 
to two of them ; the great Muslim minority and the Scheduled 
Classes — there are the guarantees that have been given to 
the minorities in the past, the fact that their position must 
be safeguarded and that those guarantees must be honoured.” 

This invidious distinction now sought to be made is a breach of 
faith with those minorities whose position has been lowered by this 
discrimination. From a constitutional point of view of total war, it 
is bound to cause more disaffection and disloyalty in the country. 
It is for the British to consider whether in this attempt to win the 
friendship of those who have probably already decided to choose 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


343 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX X 343 

other friends, they should lose those who are their real friends. 
The proposals show a sudden volte face on the part of His 
Majesty’s Government. The putting forth of those proposals 
which were denounced by them as an invasion of minorities’ 
rights is an indication of their complete surrender of right to 
win might. This is Munich Mentality the essence of which is 
to save oneself by sacrificing others and it is this mentality 
which is writ large on those proposals. My advice to the British 
Government is that they should withdraw these proposals. If 
they cannot fight for right and justice and their plighted word 
they should better make peace. They can thereby at least save 
their honour. 


Appendix X 

CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN LORD WAVELL AND 
MR. GANDHI, 1944 

1. Letter from Mr. Gandhi to Viceroy on July 15th, 1944. 
“Dear Friend, 

You have no doubt seen the authentic copies, now published 
in the Indian Press, of the statements given by me to 
Mr. Gelder of the News Chronicle. As I have said to the Press, 
they were meant primarily to be shown to you. But Mr. Gelder, 
no doubt with the best of motives, gave the interview premature 
publicity. I am sorry. The publication will nevertheless be a 
blessing in disguise, if the interview enables you to grant at 
least one of my requests contained in my letter of June 17, 
1944. 

I am yours, etc., 

(Sd.) M. K. Gandhi.” 

2. Viceroy’s reply to Mr. Gandhi, dated 22nd July 1944. 

“Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

Thank you for your letter of July 15. I have seen the 
statements you have made to Mr. Gelder, and your subsequent 
explanation of them. I do not think I can usefully comment at 
present, except to repeat what I have said in my last letter 
that if you will submit to me a definite and constructive policy, 
I shall be glad to consider it. 

Yours sincerely, 

(Sd.) Wavell.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


344 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

344 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

3. Gandhis letter to the Viceroy, dated 27th July 1944. 

“Dear Friend, 

I must admit my disappointment over your letter of 22nd instant. 
But I am used to work in the face of disappointment. Here is my 
concrete proposal. 

I am prepared to advise the Working Committee to declare that 
in view of changed conditions, mass civil disobedience envisaged 
by the resolution of August 1942, cannot be offered and that full 
cooperation in the war effort should be given by the Congress, if a 
declaration of immediate Indian independence is made and a National 
Government responsible to the Central Assembly be formed subject 
to the proviso that, during the pendency of the war, the military 
operations should continue as at present but without involving any 
financial burden on India. If there is a desire on the part of the 
British Government for a settlement, friendly talks should take the 
place of correspondence. But I am in your hands. I shall continue to 
knock so long as there is the least hope of an honourable settlement. 

After the foregoing was written, I saw Lord Munster’s speech 
in the House of Lords. The summary given by him in the House of 
Lords fairly represents my proposal. This summary may serve as 
a basis for mutual friendly discussion. 

I am, 

Yours sincerely, 

(Sd.) M. K. Gandhi.” 

4. Viceroy’s reply to Mr. Gandhi, dated 15th August 1944. 

“Dear Mb, Gandhi, 

Thank you for your letter of July 27. Your proposals are : — 

(i) that you should undertake to advise the Working Committee : 
(a) “that in view of changed conditions mass civil disobedience 
envisaged by the resolution of August 1942, cannot be offered” 
and (6) “that full co-operation in the war effort should be 
given by the Congress provided 

(ii) that His Majesty’s Government (a) declare immediate 
Indian independence, and (6) form a “National Government” 
responsible to the Central Assembly “subject to the proviso 
that during the pendency of the war the military operations 
should continue as at present but without involving any 
financial burden on India.” 

His Majesty’s Government remain most anxious that a settlement 
of the Indian problem should be reached. But proposals such as 
those put forward by you are quite unacceptable to His Majesty’s 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


345 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX X 345 

Government as a basis for discussion and you must realise this if 
you have read Mr. Amery’s statement in the House of Commons on 
July 28th last. They are indeed very similar to the proposals made 
by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to Sir Stafford Cripps in April 1942 
and His Majesty’s Government’s reasons for rejecting them are the 
same as they were then. 

3. Without recapitulating all these reasons in detail, I should 
remind you that His Majesty’s Government at that time made it clear: 

(а) That their offer of unqualified freedom after the cessation 
of hostilities was made conditional upon the framing of a 
Constitution agreed by the main elements of India’s national 
life and the negotiation of the necessary treaty arrangements 
with His Majesty’s Government: 

(б) That it is impossible during the period of hostilities to bring 
about any change in the Constitution by which means alone 
a “National Government” such as you suggest could be made 
responsible to the Central Assembly. 

The object of these conditions was to ensure the fulfilment 
of their duty to safeguard the interests of the racial and 
religious minorities of the Depressed Classes and their treaty 
obligations to the Indian States. 

4. It was upon the above conditions that His Majesty’s 
Government invited Indian leaders to take part in an interim 
Government which would operate under the existing Constitution. 
I must make it quite clear that until the war is over responsibility 
for defence and military operations cannot be divided from the other 
responsibilities of Government and that until hostilities cease and 
the new Constitution is in operation, His Majesty’s Government and 
the Governor- General must retain their responsibility over the entire 
field. So far as the question of India’s share of the cost of the war 
is concerned, this is essentially a matter for settlement between 
His Majesty’s Government on the one hand and the Government 
of India on the other, and existing financial arrangements can only 
be reopened at the instance of one or the other. 

5. It is clear in these circumstances that no purpose will be 
served by discussion on the basis which you suggest. If however the 
leaders of the Hindus, the Muslims and the important minorities 
were willing to co-operate in a transitional Government established 
and working within the present constitution, I believe good progress 
might be made. For such a transitional Government to succeed, 
there must before it is formed, be agreement in principle between , 
Hindus and Muslims and all important elements as to the method 
by which the new Constitution should be framed. This agreement 
is a matter for Indians themselves. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


346 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

346 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Until Indian leaders have come closer together than they are 
now, I doubt if I myself can do anything to help. Let me remind 
you too that minority problems are not easy. They are real and 
can be solved only by mutual compromise and tolerance. 

6. The period after the termination of hostilities for which 
the transitional Government would last, would depend on the 
speed with which the new constitution could be framed. I see no 
reason why preliminary work on that Constitution should not 
begin as soon as the Indian leaders are prepared to co-operate 
to that end. If they can arrive at a genuine agreement as to the 
method of framing the Constitution, no unnecessary time need be 
spent after the war in reaching final conclusions and in agreeing 
treaty arrangements with His Majesty’s Government. There 
again the primary .responsibility rests on the Indian leaders. 

Yours sincerely, 

(Sd.) Wavell.” 


Appendix XI 

POLITICAL DEMANDS OF SCHEDULED CASTES 

Resolutions passed by the Working Committee of the All- 
India Scheduled Castes Federation held in Madras on the 
23rd September 1944 under the Presidentship of Rao Bahadur 
N. Shiva Raj, B.A., B.L., M.L.A., outlining the safeguards for 
the Untouchables in the new Constitution. 

Resolution No. 1 

Subject : — Recognition of the Scheduled Castes as a separate 
element. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation has found a section of the Press in India making 
the allegation, that the statement made by H. E. the Viceroy 
in his letter Mr. Gandhi dated the 15th August 1944 to the 
effect that the Scheduled Castes are one of the important and 
separate elements in the national life of India and requiring 
that the consent of the Scheduled Castes to the Constitution 
of India was a necessary condition precedent for transfer of 
power to Indians, is a departure from the position of His 
Majesty’s Government as defined in the Cripps Proposals. 
The Committee cannot help expressing its indignation at this 
propaganda and takes this occasion to state in most emphatic 
and categorical terms that the Scheduled Castes are a 
distinct and separate element in the national life of India and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


347 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XI 347 

that they are a religious minority in a sense far more real than the 
Sikhs and Muslims can be and within the meaning of the Cripps 
Proposals. The Working Committee desires to point out that what 
has been stated by Lord Wavell in his letter to Mr. Gandhi has been 
the position of His Majesty’s Government from the very beginning 
and was enunciated in clear terms as early as 1917 by the authors of 
the Montagu-Chelmsford Report simultaneously with the enunciation 
by them of Responsible Government as the goal of India’s political 
evolution and has been confirmed by subsequent action of His 
Majesty’s Government such as the grant of separate representation 
to the Scheduled Castes at the Round Table Conference, Joint 
Parliamentary Committee and in the Government of India Act, 
1935, as a recognized minority, separate from the Hindus. The 
Working Committee has, therefore, no hesitation in saying that it is 
a false and malicious propaganda to allege that this is a departure 
from the policy of His Majesty’s Government and regards it as a 
manoeuvre on the part of the enemies of the Scheduled Castes 
to defeat their just claims for constitutional safeguards and calls 
upon Indian political leaders and particularly the Hindu leaders to 
accept this fact, in the interests of peace and good-will between the 
Hindus and the Scheduled Castes, and for the speedy realization 
of India’s political goal. 


Resolution No. 2 

Subject : — Declaration by His Majesty’s Government relating to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Constitution. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation welcomes the declaration made by His Majesty’s 
Government and recently reiterated by His Excellency the Viceroy 
that His Majesty’s Government regards the consent of the Scheduled 
Castes, among others, to the Constitution of a free India, as a matter 
of vital importance and as a necessary condition precedent to the 
transfer of power to Indian hands. At the same time, the Working 
Committee wishes to draw the attention of His Majesty’s Government 
to the attitude of the Congress and other political organizations in 
the country which treats this declaration of His Majesty’s Government 
as not being a bona fide declaration and made without any intention 
to honour it and as a mere matter of tactics adopted to postpone 
transfer of power, and which is in all probability responsible for the 
unwillingness of the Majority Community to seek for a settlement 
with the Scheduled Castes. The Working Committee regards this 
allegation as baseless and calls upon His Majesty’s Government not 
to give any ground for such suspicion and make it clear that they will 
stand by the declaration at all times and under all circumstances. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


348 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

348 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Resolution No. 3 

Subject : — Nature of Constitutional Safeguards. 

The Working Committee declares that no Constitution shall be 
acceptable to the Scheduled Castes unless : — 

(a) it has the consent of the Scheduled Castes ; 

(b) it recognizes the Scheduled Castes as distinct and separate 
element; 

(c) it contains within itself provisions for securing the following 
purposes : 

(1) For earmarking a definite sum in the Budgets of the 
Provincial and Central Governments for the Secondary, 
University and Advanced Education of the Scheduled 
Castes. 

(2) For reservation of Government lands for separate 
settlements of the Scheduled Castes through a 
Settlement Commission. 

(3) For Representation of the Scheduled Castes according 
to their needs, numbers and importance : — 

(i) in the Legislatures, 

( ii ) in the Executive, 

(iii) in Municipalities and Local Boards, 

(iv) in the Public Services, 

(v) on the Public Service Commissions. 

(4) For the recognition of the above provisions as 
fundamental rights beyond the powers of the Legislature 
or the Executive to amend or alter or abrogate. 

(3) For the appointment of an Officer similar in status to 
that of the Auditor-General appointed under Section 166 
of the Government of India Act of 1935 and removable 
from office in like manner and on the like grounds as 
a judge of the Federal Court to report on the working 
of the provisions relating to Fundamental Rights. 

Resolution No. 4 

Subject : — Communal Settlement. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Caste Federation, 
while it is most eager for a settlement of the Communal problem, 
wholly disapproves of the secret negotiations which are being carried 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


349 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XI 349 

on by Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah for a settlement between the 
Hindus and the Muslims. The Working Committee is of opinion 
that Communal settlement of a sectional character is harmful 
in every way. It is harmful because it ignores the vital interests 
of other communities. It is harmful because it creates a feeling 
of suspicion in other communities that dishonest deal is being 
made between two communities to defeat their interests. It is also 
harmful to the general interests of the country, inasmuch as the 
singling out of one special community from others for conferring 
special privileges, not necessary for its protection but demanded 
on the basis of prestige, creates differences in status which from 
the point of view of maintaining equal citizenship for all, are 
unjustifiable and must be deplored. The Working Committee is 
surprised that Mr. Gandhi who has time and again proclaimed 
himself as an opponent of secrecy in public life should have entered 
into secret diplomacy to bring about Hindu-Moslem Settlement. 
The Committee expresses its emphatic opinion that the proper 
procedure to settle the communal question, which would give a 
sense of security and ensure fair and equal treatment to all is to 
discuss the demands put forth by each interest in public and in 
the presence of and with the representatives of other interests. 

Resolution No. 5 

Subject : — Revision of the Constitution. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation is of opinion that the provisions in the existing 
Constitution relating to minority representation are not based on 
any intelligible principle. The Committee finds that as the system 
now stands, some minorities have not received even their population 
ratio of representation, while other minorities have been given 
weightage over and above their population ratio as a concession 
to their claims based on historical and military importance. The 
Working Committee regards the recognition of such claims to be 
harmful to the interests of other minorities and inconsistent with 
the ideal of social and political democracy, which is the goal of all 
Indians and that they should never be tolerated. In this connection, 
the Committee wishes to draw attention to the fact that the 
principle of giving weightage to specially selected minorities has 
been condemned by the authors of the Montagu-Chelmsford Report 
and also by the Simon Commission. The Committee demands that 
in view of the fact that the next Constitution of India will be for 
India as a Dominion, the provisions of the Constitution relating 
to minorities should be revised and should be brought in accord 
with the principle of equal treatment of all minorities. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


350 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

350 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Resolution No. 6 

Subject : — Representation in the Legislatures and in the Executive. 

The Working Committee of the All-India, Scheduled Castes 
Federation desires to state in categorical and emphatic terms that 
the Scheduled Castes will not tolerate any discrimination between 
one community and another in the matter of representation and 
will insist upon their claim for seats in the Provincial and Central 
Legislatures and in the Provincial and Central Executive being 
adjudged in the same manner and by the same principles that 
may be made applicable to the claims of the Muslim Community. 

Resolution No. 7 

Subject: — Electorates. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation is of opinion that the experience of the last elections 
held under the Government of India Act has proved that the 
system of joint electorates has deprived the Scheduled Castes of the 
right to send true and effective representatives to the Legislatures 
and has given the Hindu Majority the virtual right to nominate 
members of the Scheduled Castes who are prepared to be the tools 
of the Hindu Majority. The Working Committee of the Federation 
therefore demands that the system of joint electorates and reserved 
seats should be abolished and the system of separate electorates 
be introduced in place thereof. 

Resolution No. 8 

Subject : — Framework of Executive Government. 

The working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation takes note of the fact that not only all wealth, property, 
trade and industry are in the hands of the Majority Community, 
but even the whole administration of the State is controlled by 
the Majority Community whose members have monopolized all 
posts in the State services both superior and inferior. The Working 
Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation regards 
this as the most dangerous situation which cannot but cause great 
apprehension to the minority communities since the combination 
of these circumstances gives the majority the fullest power to 
establish its stranglehold upon the minorities. This fear of a 
stranglehold is greatly augmented by the Constitutional provisions 
relating to the Executive contained in the Government of India 
Act of 1935 which permits the majority in the Legislature to form 
a Government without reference to the wishes of the minorities, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


351 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XI 351 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation feels that while, in the absence of an alternative system, 
the Parliamentary system of Government may have to be accepted, 
the Committee is definitely opposed to the system of Parliamentary 
cabinet inasmuch as it automatically vests the Executive authority 
in the Majority Community and thereby strengthens the hold of the 
Majority Community which has entered into the steel frame of the 
administration and thus has become a source of great danger to 
the Minorities. The Working Committee has, therefore, come to the 
conclusion that the system of Parliamentary Cabinet is not suited to 
Indian conditions and that a different system under which Executive 
Government would be formed in consultation with the wishes of the 
Minorities must be designed to give them a better sense of security. 

The Working Committee insists that the Executive in the 
Provinces as well as in the Centre should be constituted in the 
following manner: — 

(i) The Executive should consist of a Prime Minister and other 
ministers drawn from general community and from minority 
communities in a proportion to be specified in the Constitution. 

(ii) The Prime Minister and Ministers drawn from the general 
community shall be elected to the Executive by the whole 
house by single transferable vote. 

(iii) The Ministers representing the minority communities shall be 
chosen by the members representing the different communities 
by single transferable vote. 

(iv) The Members of the Executive shall be members of the 
Legislature, shall answer questions, vote and take part in 
debates. 

(v) Any vacancy in the Executive shall be filled in accordance 
with rules governing the original appointments. 

(vi) The period for Which the Executive shall hold office shall be 
co-terminus with the life of the Legislature. 

Resolution No. 9 
Subject : — Public Services. 

While it is desirable to plan for a Government which will be a 
Government of Laws and not of men, it cannot be forgotten that no 
matter how Government is organized, it must remain a Government 
of men. That being so, whether Government is good or bad — as 
distinguished from a merely efficient Government — and how far the 
administration of public affairs will be non-political and impartial 
must depend upon the spirit and outlook and sense of justice of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


352 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

352 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

men who are appointed to administer the Law. The Working 
Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation is 
convinced that the Scheduled Castes can never get protection, 
justice or sympathy from the present administration which is 
controlled by men full of caste consciousness, narrow-mindedness, 
absence of sense of justice and having a hatred and contempt 
for the Scheduled Castes. The Working Committee, therefore, 
demands that the Constitution must recognize the right of the 
Scheduled Castes to reservation in the Public Services in the 
same proportion as may be applied to the claims of the Muslim 
Community. 


Resolution No. 10 
Subject : — Provision for Education. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation feels that unless persons belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes are able to occupy posts which carry executive authority, the 
Scheduled Castes must continue to suffer, as they have been doing 
in the past all the injustices and indignities from the hands of the 
Government and the Public. The Working Committee, therefore, 
regards the spread of higher and advanced education among the 
Scheduled Castes as of vital importance to them. But, it cannot be 
denied that such advanced education is beyond the means of the 
Scheduled Castes. The Committee regards it as essential that a 
definite liability in this behalf should be imposed on the State to 
provide funds for that purpose and demands that the Constitution 
should impose an obligation upon the Provincial Governments and 
the Central Government to set apart adequate sums, as may be 
specified by the Constitution, exclusively for advanced education 
of the Scheduled Castes in their annual budgets and to accept 
such provisions as a first charge on their revenues. 

Resolution No. 11 
Subject : — Separate Settlements. 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation holds: — 

(a) that so long as the Scheduled Castes continue to live on 
the outskirts of the Hindu village, as an alien people, with 
no source of livelihood and in small numbers as compared 
to Hindus, they will continue to remain Untouchables and 
subject to the tyranny and oppression of the Hindus and 
will not be able to enjoy free and full life, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


353 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XI 353 

(6) that for the better protection of the Scheduled Castes from 
the tyranny and oppression of the Caste Hindus, which 
may take a worse form under Swaraj, and to enable the 
Scheduled Castes to develop to their fullest manhood, to 
give them economic and social security as also to pave 
the way for the removal of untouchability, the Working 
Committee demands that the Constitution should provide — 

(1) For the transplantation of the Scheduled Castes from 
their present habitations and form separate Scheduled 
Caste villages away from and independent of Hindu 
villages; 

(2) For the settlement of the Scheduled Castes in new 
villages a provision shall be made by the Constitution 
for the establishment of a Settlement Commission ; 

(3) All Government land which is cultivable and which 
is not occupied and land which may be reclaimed 
shall be handed over to the Commission to be held 
in trust for the purpose of making new settlements 
of the Scheduled Castes. 

(4) The Commission shall be empowered to purchase new 
land under the Land Acquisition Act from private 
owners to complete the scheme of settlements of the 
Scheduled Castes. 

(5) The Constitution shall provide that the Central 
Government shall grant to the Settlement Commission 
a minimum sum of rupees five crores per annum to 
enable it to carry out their duty in this behalf. 

Resolution No. 12 

“The Working Committee of the A.I.S.C. Federation 
unanimously resolves that it places its complete confidence 
in Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and authorises him to negotiate on its 
behalf and oil behalf of Scheduled Castes with other political 
parties or their leaders as and when necessity arises.” 


Communed Distribution of Population by Minorities in the Provinces of British India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


354 


354 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



s-L 


CJ 

S’ 

LO 

04 

CO 

CO 

CO 



05 


00 

1 — 1 

05 

CO 

04 

1 



1—1 

1—1 

1—1 

1 — 1 

LO 

LO 

LO 


£ 

0 

CJ 

i — l 

04 

o 

oi 

o 

o 

o 

o 


i—l 

0 

q 

1—1 

O 

q 

CO 

1—1 

1 




q 



q 


q 

CO 

< 


R2 

o 





GO 

i—i 

CO 

i— i 

CD 



00 

05 

04 

1—1 


1—1 

LO 



05 

CD 

0 

CD 

05 

55 




CD 


CD 

i — 1 

00 

i—i 

i— i 

05 


UO 

i — 1 

GO 

CO 

0 


1—1 



co 

CO 

CD 

co 

05 



« 


00 



05 

04 

04 

o 

05 


i-H 


05 

04 



0 


1—1 

04 

0 

t> 

04 

O 

CO 







CO 

i — 1 

CD 

CO 

oo 



CD 






rH 

04 

LO 

CO 

0 

04 

04 

CD 

CD 



5* 





i— i 

i—i 

1—1 


i—l 

£; 

1—1 


LO 


LO 

> 

CO 

CO 

LO 


1—1 

1—1 


04 




o’ 

















04 

i-H 





04 




Oh 















CO 











CO 


■Hi 

0 

00 

CO 


U0 

04 

o 

CD 

CO 

O 

1—1 

CD 

04 

CO 

t> 

1—1 

CO 

04 



04 

CO 

04 

CO 

00 

K 

.0 

-Hi 

£ 

0 ) 

CJ 

S’ 


04 




o 

i—l 


04 

i-H 

O 



1—1 




i—l 

q 





q 

£ 


£ 


























o 


o 


LO 

05 

O 

CO 

CO 

CO 

04 

o 

05 


04 

CD 


00 

CD 

04 

t> 

CO 

1—1 

04 

LO 

LO 

05 

00 




05 


LO 

CO 

oq 

05 

i— i 

CD 

O 

05 

00 

04 

00 

CO 

1— 1 

CO 

04 

LO 

LO 


CO 

04 



C 


0 


00 

t> 

l> 

CD 

05 

CD 

00 

04 

CO 


0 


LO 

0 

04 

04 

CO 


CD 

O 

1—1 

i-H 

LO 

i> 

0 




CO 


t> 

oq 

O 


oo 

00 

CO 

O 

1—1 

LO 

CD 

CD 


CO 

1—1 

LO 

04 

04 

04 

CD 

O 

0 

33 

2 


s 




CO 


i—i 

04 

CO 



1—1 

0 


04 

00 


1—1 

CO 


i-H 

1—1 



04 

1—1 







i—l 


CO 




0 ^ 

04 " 






1—1 

04^ 

CO 





i—l 



sL 


CJ 

§> 



CD 

o 

o 

CO 

05 

1—1 

CO 

CO 

Tt 1 


04 



10 

CO 

05 

CD 

CD 

05 

04 

CD 

04 


£ 

1 

1 

CD 

1—1 

CO 

c6 

oo 

co 

UO 

CO 

CD 

| 




4 

1—1 

CO 

CO 

LO 

t> 

05 

05 

CD 








i— i 

1 — 1 


1— 1 

i-H 

1—1 

i — l 


1—1 


1— 1 


04 

1—1 

i-H 


1—1 

1—1 

1—1 

04 

a 




























o 




























■33 






rH 

04 

o 

05 

oo 

CO 

0 

CO 

04 


1—1 

LO 

00 


00 


05 

O 

CD 


CO 

LO 







05 

O 

l> 

l> 


1—1 


05 

05 


t> 

co 

1—1 

CO 

LO 


i-H 

CD 

CO 

l> 

0 

LO 

a 




CN>.' 


04 

i— i 

05 

CO 

i-H 



CD 



i-H 

CD 

05 

CD 

1—1 


CD 

t> 

00 

LO 

00 

CO 






§ 

CD 

UO 

00 

o 

LO 

1—1 

UO 

1—1 

00 


00 

co 


1 — l 

I> 

05 

05 

O 

05 

1—1 

00 

GO 



a 



L" 


l> 


LO 

LO 

04 

04 

CD 


CO 



05 

1—1 

1—1 

1— 1 

04 

LO 

05 

1—1 

05 



S’ 




CD 


00 

00 

00 

o 


i—l 

O 

04 

04 


i—l 

t> 

05 

05 


CO 

CD 

0 

CD 

co 


Oh 






t> 


1—1 

CO 



00 


1—1 

1—1 



1—1 

i-H 

O 

CO 


04 


00 

CO 


sL 

e 

CJ 

S’ 



t> 

UO 


05 

04 


00 

04 

05 

00 

t> 

0 

00 

04 

CO 

05 


CO 


CO 

04 

UO 


£ 

LO 

CO 

CO 

t> 


04 

05 


00 

00 

t> 

1—1 

1—1 

t> 


04 

LO 

CD 


0 

CO 

05 

iO 

LO 

CO 

s 

o 

1 — 1 

04 

CO 

oo 

LO 

i—l 




CO 


05 


LO 


l> 

1—1 

04 

i—l 




1—1 

1—1 


C 


05 

10) 

05 

o 



00 


O 

1—1 

04 

t> 

1—1 

04 

i—l 

LO 

00 

CO 

O 


00 

05 

04 

CD 

CO 


•2 


05 

o 

t> 

CO 

CO 

i—l 

CD 

05 

00 

h- 

LO 

05 

O 


LO 

CO 

0 

CD 



04 

CD 

CD 






00 

o 


05 


CO 

CO 

CD 

l> 

05 


t> 

CO 

04 

04 

CD 

CO 

00 


00 

LO 

i-H 

O 

04 





05 

oo 

04 

00 

LO 

CD 

o 

CO 



CD 

00 

CD 

O 



CD 


00 


00 

LO 

1—1 

LO 



a 


oo 



CO 

CO 

i—l 

04 

00 

1— 1 

CO 

05 

00 


1—1 


LO 

1—1 


CD 



CO 

CO 

00 



S’ 






o 


05 



CO 

00 

t> 

i-H 

04 


0 


CO 

i—l 

LO 


CO 

04 

1—1 



Oh 




CO 


CO 


1—1 




CO 

04 


CD 


CO 

00 

05 





CD 

04 








CO 









1—1 













R? 


CO 

00 

CO 

1—1 

UO 

i—l 

o 


CD 

05 

0 

I> 


05 

t> 

T— 1 

I> 

LO 

04 

05 

00 

CD 

l> 

O 



O 


05 

CD 

CO 

CO 

04 

to 


00 

04 

CO 

1—1 

CD 


1—1 

CD 

04 

1— 1 

CO 

O 


1—1 

CD 





to 


CD 

t> 

t> 

CD 

UO 

1—1 

00 

UO 

t> 

05 

00 

O 

LO 

00 

04 

04 

CD 

05 

00 

CO 

t> 

00 

i-H 




0 


CO 

CO 


1— 1 

CD 

o 

05 

CO 

00 

t> 

1—1 

GO 

00 

00 

LO 

05 

0 

04 

CO 

CD 

00 


CD 



r o 



00 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 



1— 1 

CD 

1—1 


CO 

04 

1—1 


04 

04 

CO 

04 

1—1 

CO 

C 5 

CO 

rH 





lo 


04 

UO 

CO 

CO 

00 

00 

i—l 

05 

CO 

O 

t> 



04 

O 

LO 

00 

LO 

04 

CD 

05 

i—l 



n O* 




o 


o 

CD 

o 

CD 



05 

CO 

00 

co 



LO 

LO 

GO 

O 

CO 

CO 

O 




Oh 




1—1 


CD 

CO 

04 

i—l 






04 



LO 

05 

04 


1 — 1 



i—l 






















04 


















-1- 






































d 














































Sh 

0 










0 

H 









CJ 









ffl 



















g 



Sh 


fl 

d 













-H- 










o 


d 

d 


+-» 













CO 










O 








CJ 









0 










S 


d 

£ 

o 

CJ 


2 

CJ 




£ 












S-i 









SH 

a; 

2 






o 

Sh 









> 

O 



a 

bo 









S 

G 

d 


m 




Q-t 




Oh 





P 



d 

£ 









Sh 

0 

£ 

a 

d 

a 

03 

CO 

A 

CO 

’-H> 

2 

be 

* 

Sh 

d 

pi; 

d 

45 

a 

a 

Sh 

-H> 

£ 

be 

Sh 

0 

2 

d 

Sh 

T3 

d 

g: 

d 

CO 

CO 

hQ 

d 

’a* 

2 

4H 

"0 

Sh 

"d 

0 

+H 


Sh 

d 

£ 

d 

+H 

0 

p 

Sh 

aj 

Sh 

cC 

Sh 







£ 

CO 

Sh 

0 


O 

0 

0 

0 


Sh 

3 




S 


r ) 

0 

be 






< 

< 

< m 

w 

P 

m 

u 

u 

p 2 

2 0 eu 

p 

m 

P 


* 

O 

++ 

ffl c 0 


Communal Distribution of Population by Minorities in Indian States 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


355 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIII 355 





LO 


CM 

1—1 


i—l 

1 

i—l 

i—l 

CD 

CO 

CD 

1 


1—1 

LO 


CD 

CD 

1 

1 

oo 

LO 




cu 

'M 

q 

O 

q 

O 

O 

o 

o 

1 

o 

o 

o 

q 

q 

1—1 

1 

o 

o 

03 

o 

o 

CM 

i—i 


1 

1 

q 

O 

o 

i—l 


Oh 8 

0 



























1—1 

CD 

CD 

00 

i—i 

i> 

03 

CM 

CM 

CM 

o 

CO 

LO 

03 

CM 

1— 1 

LO 

03 

CD 

1—1 

i—l 

i—i 

03 

CD 

*a 



oo 

CM 

CD 

CM 

CO 

o 


CM 

00 


CO 

o 


CD 


LO 

00 

CO 

03 


CO 

CO 

CO 



o 


CO 

rH 

LO 


i> 

LO 



1—1 

CO 

CO 

03 


CM 


1—1 

CD 

l> 

oo 



L> 

CM 

CO 

35 

■to 






CM 





CM 

LO 

LO 





CM 


i—i 





CD 

e 













CD 






i—i 

00 





CM 




















co 







LO 





























& 


















i—i 







i— 1 


a, 





























CD 

i—l 

CO 

CO 

i—l 

CO 

i—i 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

CM 

CO 

CM 


i—i 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

i—l 

CD 

i— 1 

cc 

iL -js 


CO 

o 


q 



oo 



q 

1—1 

q 


1—1 

i — i 

q 


q 

q 

q 

CM 


o 

cd 

K 

■2 

•S2 

n, 8 

§P 







CM 














CO 






CO 

o 

CM 


CM 

o 


CD 

LO 

CM 

03 

03 

CD 

o 

i—l 

03 

CM 

00 

03 


1—1 

i—l 

LO 

CM 




I— 1 


00 

CD 

00 

CM 

03 

CO 

1—1 

LO 

00 

h- 

O 

00 



LO 

00 


CO 

03 

00 

o 

I'- 

o 



03 


1—1 

LO 

LO 

CO 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CO 

03 

o 

00 

LO 

LO 

CM 

03 

i—i 

CO 



CM 

1—1 

03 



LO 


03 


t> 

1—1 

03 

l> 


1 — 1 

LO 

CO 

o 

00 


CM 

CD 




00 

i — l 

CO 

CM 

s; 

0 


CM 





I—l 

03 

i—l 



1—1 


CM 

03 







LO 



03 


"a 

ft 








CO 




CM 










1—1 



l> 

cm" 


o 



























a, 






























CM 

i—l 

CD 

I> 

03 

03 

O 

00 

1 

03 

00 

00 

CM 

1 

CD 


03 

1 

CD 

LO 

LO 

CO 

t> 

CO 

^ a 

cu 

S’ 



oo 

CM 

CO 


03 


CO 


l> 

CM 

CD 

03 



CD 




CD 

CD 

t> 

03 

40 

CO 

o 

ft, 8 




i—l 

1—1 

i—l 


i—i 



i—l 


t-H 

i—l 


i—l 


CM 




T— 1 





LO 

LO 


03 

03 

CM 


00 



oo 


Tt< 

r-» 


00 

CM 



CD 

CM 


00 

o 




CD 

CD 

03 

CM 

o 

CO 

LO 

03 

o 



CD 

CO 

CD 


00 

CD 

L'- 


l> 

LO 

CM 

CO 

00 

O 


CM 



l> 

o 

i-H 

i-H 

00 

CM 


o 


l> 

o 

1 

o 

03 

t> 



03 

03 

o 

CO 






o 

03 

l> 

CO 

i—l 

CD 

LO 


00 

CO 

CO 

LO 


CM 

03 

CO 



LO 

CM 

00 

CM 

a 

0 




CO 

CD 

CM 

00 


O 

LO 


CM 

1—1 

00 

o 


LO 


CO 



03 

LO 

LO 

03 






CM 

CM 

CD 


i-H 

CO 


1 


1—1 




CO 

CO 

CM 

1 


CO 

i—l 

CO 

00 

*a 

O 

CO 

s 






i—l 






CM 



1—1 










oo" 





CM 

00 

CO 

03 

o 


LO 

03 

o 

00 


o 

CD 


o 

03 

CO 

LO 


CM 

LO 

CM 

03 


£ "SS 

S’ 


i- 



LO 

o 

t> 

CD 

CO 

CD 

CM 

cd 

CD 

CD 



O 


03 


t> 

03 

CM 

cd 


ft, 8 


03 


1—1 







i—l 

l> 




o 




o 


CM 

i—l 

1—1 

a 



CM 

i—l 

o 

CO 

O 

CO 

00 

CD 

o 

CO 

LO 

o 

CO 

O 

00 

LO 

03 

oo 

1—1 

CO 

O 

LO 

O 

CO 




CD 

LO 

1—1 

1—1 

LO 


00 

CO 

o 

o 



CD 

CO 

CD 

LO 

LO 

i> 


00 

LO 

CM 


03 


o 


CD 

CM 

CD 

1—1 

00 

i> 

1— 1 

O 

o 

03 


LO 

CM 

CM 

o 

CO 


CD 

00 


1—1 

CD 


LO 


■Ki 


i—l 


CO 

CM 

03 

00 

03 

CM 

00 

o 

l> 

CO 

O 

LO 

CM 


i—l 

CD 

t> 



CO 

o 

03 


e 


CO 


CM 

I'- 

CO 

CM 

o 

00 

LO 


03 

h- 

CO 

00 

CM 

i—i 

LO 


03 


CO 

[> 

o 

LO 





CO 

CM 

CO 



1— 1 

i-H 


CM 

O 

o 





CM 


CM 



CM 

CD 

CD 


l 












CM 

CO 





CM 


i—l 





CM 

i—l 


», 





























LO 


O 

03 


o 

LO 

00 

CM 

03 


CD 


o 

I s - 

i—i 



00 

o 

00 

o 

CD 

i— i 




LO 

© 

i—l 

CM 

CM 

C 3 

t> 

CM 

O 

LO 

CO 

1—1 

LO 


CD 

CO 

LO 


o 

CM 

l—l 


LO 

O 


a 


CD 

CM 

o 

00 


O 

00 


t> 

i — l 

LO 

CD 

t> 

1—1 

CM 

t> 

LO 

CD 

CM 

LO 

o 


i—l 

03 


o 


LO 

CD 

LO 

T}H 

CD 

O 

CM 

LO 

00 

CD 

CO 

i—i 

00 

03 

CD 

CO 

CO 

O 

O 

i—l 

o 

00 


t> 


^ 40 


CM 

LO 

LO 


O 

LO 

CM 

00 

LO 

O 

CO 

CM 

03 

CM 


CM 

o 

03 

t> 

CM 

t> 

CM 

o 

LO 


s ^ 


t> 

CO 

00 

1—1 

LO 

o 


t> 


o 

CO 

O 


CO 


o 

LO 

O 

CD 

rH 

o 

03 

03 

00 


tS a 




CM 

CM 

I> 


i—l 

CM 

rH 


CD 





CO 

LO 

i—i 

CO 


CD 



o 


& 












1—1 








1—1 





03 


n, 






















































CO 

CJ 

a 













01 


























S-! 

O 

43 












Id 


cd 

"on 









S 

ft 




03 

r 0 












Eh 











cd 




0 



























Q) 























o 




Ijh 














e 






cd 



W 




r 0 







































CO 

■to 

Q 

40 

CO 


a 

a 

CO 

s 

Co 

+3 

CO 

2 

o 

J3 

oj 

T3 

C 

13 

w> 

S 

'B 

S 

i—i 

Sh 

-M 

s 

rs 

Hi 

a 

be 

CO 

43 

43 

03 

A 

S 

2 

o 

o 

Deccan (and 
Gujarat 
Gwalior 
Hyderabad 
Kashmere ai 

Madras 
Mysore 
N.W.F.P 
Orissa ... 

rft 

_a3 

’s’ 

£ 

rO 

’s’ 

03 

s 

03 rH 

-H S 

s .3 

ft ^3 
c? tA 

Q) 

?H 

o 

o 

S 

03 

> 

03 

cq 

S 

i — i 

s 

*H 

0) 

4-3 

CB 

Q3 





<c 

pq 

w 

CQ 

u 

u 

u 

Oh 


Ph CO 

Eh 

33 




z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


356 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

356 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Appendix XIV 

Particulars of Scheduled Castes Constituencies in regard to 
seats and voting strength Province by Province : — 

Appendix XIV : (1) Madras 

(2) Bombay 

(3) Bengal 

” ” (4) U. P. 

(5) Punjab 

(6) Bihar 

(7) C. P. & Berar. 

(8) Assam 


(9) Orissa 


Appendix XIV (1) Madras 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


357 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIV 357 


-g 


£ j 


f J 

k ^ I 

£ $ 

^3 to 


5*0 


ON^ONOcO' , 3-</'>NOO'>OCNroO'OroO<riOr-~NOOOl~~NOOcONOO\-Hro>/i 

0'0-H^^o-Hoomfn(jiomiD'Oot s -oo , too-H'Ot s -0' ; tn--''0’t^ 

o\ , t--'0'tooo’t'OmN , tmfnomr''nOM3'M v O'tooinaMnooo 


n m (N • 


m o r^- o • 


| On m 'O 0\ • 


o no on on n rf ■ 


> no <N <N Tf 00 O 


MfSo , tNr'’-' , tt s -Ntrih-int s -ONtNi'HiDmNiNtoinmixi'HONt s -ONON 

-H-H'OooinciTiONONNOO'oor'fnMmNOoo-HMvooNin^Ofnot^ON 

rOO-MNj-'OOOO'tOOONOOOMONOOONtMXlOOnr-TtNO-HCNl’t'On 






Co O 




• <N <N <N <N <N <N 


? § 
o> a 


£ "S 3 

S ° 

Co 




£* 

u « 
g 8 
2 S 

T3 O 

2 U 


, P 03 !- (D P 

! -a § a 

a g ^ § “ 3 ’B „ 

•?OBfflOOUfc 


fr _ 
3 e 


■a B. S 

c o - ■ 


13 £ u 

£ £ 2 s 

2 s s.h 

a c3 g o 
ra > E 

1 > 


g .as S3T3 s.gs.g 

CQ^HUhfliHHUhhSA&H 


& C8 


P 3 
S P 

Q CL 

c - 


£ 

c« .x o ™ ^ ^ 

wMo-ZU2 


Appendix XIV (2) Bombay 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 358 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
358 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


CD 


CO 




a 6 

3 


£ 


^3 co 
© 5*. 

bo d) 

a 

e & 


£ 


^ _ o 


-2 <0 

a co 
cd Q 

o 

cj 

CO 


O 


o 


05 lO 00 

i — l CM i — I 


o 

CD 

CO 

i-H 

a 

CO 


<N 

i—i 

CD 

<M 

i-H 

CO 

03 

lO 


i-H 

oo 

CO 

(N 

CD 

i—i 


co 

o 

03 


(N 

O 

CD 

GO 

(N 

03 

<N 

CO 

00 

00 

<N 

CD 

t> 

LO 

00 

°l 

of 

o' 

rH 

C D 

co" 

cnT 

'cf 

rf 

00" 

t> 

cd" 

cd" 

(N 

i—( 

t> 


co" 


1— 1 

O 

00 

1—1 

CO 

LO 

CO 

t> 

t> 

03 

o 

t> 

1—1 

o 

00 

CO 

O 

00 

l— 1 

o 

CD 

CO 

1—1 


CO 

1—1 

o 

o 

03 

o 

00^ 

r— 1 

CO 

t> 

o 

o 

[> 

LO 

1—1 

00 

<N 

LO^ 

co 

Tf 

03^ 

1—1 

l— 1 

(N 

l— 1 

cm" 

cd" 

cd" 


co" 

t>" 

cd" 

03" 

(N 

03" 

i— i 

CD 

t> 

03 

iO 


CO 

LO 



LO 

CO 



LO 

<N 


**- co 

s ■§ 

►3 « 

^ s 

s 5 

£ 


i. 3 CO 

-c » 
o e 

co o 




5 a 

c» <33 

§ CO 

o 


CO ^ CD CO ^ b 


^ lO CO co ^ 


v. $0 
-o ^ K 
fc c a 
s •"* 


"Q 

<$ 

5*. "a 


Q 

< O 

O w 

CO 


a 

^3 o 

CO o 


o ^ 

£ c 

^ cd 

e> 


<M(NCOCO(N<MCOCO<NCO(NCO(NCOCO 


& 

a 


a 

c3 


I 


a 

cd 

03 

"§ 

co 

>> 

cd 

rO 

a 

o 

P 

T3 

£ 

cd 


O 


cd 

Ph 

£ 

03 


K*5 

P 


O 


33 

O 

gq 

u 

o3 

biD 

o3 


o3 

w 


T3 

s 

o3 


o3 

w 

^ A 


o 

£ 


o 

£ 


>» 

cd 

^3 

-M 

U 

K*^ 

03 

rO 

Q 

03 

p 

4-4 

cd" 

c! 

fl 

T3 

03 

& 

r% 

cd" 

cd 

33 

a 

cd 

a 

33 

cd 

a c3 
a ^ 

rH 

’5o 

cd 

a 


a 


cd 

?H 

— 

cd 

a 

03 

"co 

33 

o 

cd 

o 

rbe 

& £ 

Ch 

-M 

o 

• r-H 

o 

cd 

33 

P 

P 

cd 

cd 

o 

cd 

,£3 

© 


cd 

P 

Q 

ra 

w 

m 

H 

< 

W 

z, 

Ph 

m 

m 

CQ 

P W 

P 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


359 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIV 359 




0 0 


? S 




^CMCO^CMCMCOCO 


CO Cd LO LO , 
LO CO CM 00 ! 




^ O (N 
CO CO CO 


t> Cd CO l> 


a 

0 

c 

0 

^d 




























a 

*Sa CO 


O 

CO 

Cd 

CO 





o 

CO 



CM 

LO 

o 

00 

o 


Od 

Od 

Od 

CO 

LO 

CO 

LO 

LO 

o 


a *> 


LO 

o 

l> 

CO 


LO 

t> 

LO 

o 

LO 

Od 

CM 

CO 

CM 

00 

LO 

LO 

LO 


CO 



Od 



HHJ 

^ co 



LO 

CM 

CO 


CM 


LO 


Od 

co 


LO 

t> 

00 

CO 

t> 

TP 

L> 

o 


Od 

00 


0 

a 

< O 



c o' 

00 

Cd 

Cd 

cT 

CM 

CM 

t> 


o 

i—i 

CO 


CM 

Od 


00 

i—i 

CO 

o 

Od 

co 

t> 



o 


i—l 


i—i 

1—1 

i— i 

CM 

co 

CM 

CM 

i— i 


LO 

CM 

CO 

UO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CM 

i> 

CO 

CM 

s 

o 

OD 
























































0 


*0 



t> 

Cd 

LO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 



t> 

CM 

CO 

Od 

CO 

LO 


t> 

Od 

o 


l> 

CM 


oo 



p. 


Od 

1— 1 

CO 

i—i 

CO 

Od 

cd 

CM 


1—1 


CM 

CO 

CO 

i—l 

00 

Od 

co 

1—1 


CO 

CO 

l> 

Od 

K 



Co 

CM 

oo 

LO 

l— 1 

Od 

LO 

LO 

LO 

CO 

CM 

CM 

i—l 

Od 

CO 

Od 

Od 



LO 

00 

Od 

CM 

LO 


oo 





LO 

1—1 

(N 


LO 

o 

LO 

00 


CM 

CO 

CO 

o 

1—1 

O 

LO 

Od" 

1—1 

i—i 

00 


CM 

CO 

CO 

LO 



C5 


CO 


LO 


l>- 


co 

CO 

CM 


LO 


LO 


CO 

CM 

CM 


CO 



CO 

CM 

CO 



^ a 





























^ s CO 



























P, 

0 

CO 

0 

£■§ a 

-a co 

52 

CO 

CO 

CO 


CM 


co 

CO 

CO 



CO 

CM 

CO 


CM 

00 

LO 





oo 




a 

_o 8 



























S 


CO O 



























,3 

*3 

Si 

CJ 
























































"q 

H« 

£ 

For 

eneral 

Seat 


CM 

(M 

CO 

i—l 

CM 

CM 

co 

CM 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 


CO 

CM 

i—l 

CO 

CM 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

1—1 

CO 



O 



























CO 


^3 



























« 

ft 

»s « 



























CO 

si 

S~ a -S 
o P3 « 


i-H 

1—1 

1— 1 

i— 1 

1—1 

1—1 

i—i 

1—1 

1—1 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

1—1 

CM 

i—l 

CM 

CM 

CM 

1—1 

1—1 

i-H 

i— i 

CM 

1—1 

1— 1 



ks, 0 Cd 



























o 


•S o 



























p. 

CO 

co 



























pO 

si 




























5 

a 

a 




























2 

0 

-*? 

Cd 



























"q 

HHl 

s? 

E C 

^ 0 

§ 

i—l 

1—1 

1 — 1 

i—l 

1—1 

1—1 

i—i 

1—1 

1—1 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

1—1 

1—1 

i—l 

i—l 

1—1 

i— 1 

1—1 

rH 

i—l 

rH 

i— i 

rH 

1—1 



e> 




























3 

a 

z 

H 

PQ 

co 

> 

X 


Q 

Z 

H 

Ph 

Ph 

<1 


& 

e 


s 

a 


£ 


t a -C 

pH 

+n Ph 
£ £ 
O 
r d 

cS 

II 

T3 n 
Ph Ph 

3 o 
ffl PQ 


03 
-M 
r— H 03 
CC r£ I 

£ o 1 

; Sh JH 1 

0 £ 

o 


o 

2; 


B £ 

i-M X 

4= ' 


cd 


so ■£*„ 
s o 

SfflSoS 


OS £ 

: H > 

' pP pP 

+n +n 

5 o 
: cq £ 

cc cc 
cd oj 
S £ 
cd cd 
be be 

Ph Ph 


A 

p^ cd cd 
£ Plh Plh 


' ^ * 

cd 

■S 

•rH 0 

: pC Ph 


bJD 


cd 

w jP 
Ph M 0 


3 

cd .£< 
cd S 


cd 

ti 

' rn 

: cd 

Ph 

rt CO 
£ Cd 

! 3 W 


£ * 

. > w 

J r d 

be be 

£ 


: 0 
£ 


, 3 
■ o 

1 m 


be 0 

O od i 


H TO 

ft “ 

"S a 

Sh 

co rt 


Sp^tfppggpcqH 


Appendix XIV (4) U. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 360 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
360 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


t»o CD Q 

Q 2 O S 

0 ^ ... 0 


£ e 


^ CO 
^ CO 

e 

CO 


O 


CO O) C4 ^ ^ 

CM CM CM CM i-h t— i 


t— I LO LO O 


03 CO (N N CD lO 
H (N ^ (M H CO 


1—1 

CM 

00 

CM 

CD 

CO 

O 

CO 

3 

LO 

o 

CM 

r- 

00 

CD 

CD 

t> 

Tt< 

CD 

LO 

CO 

00 

LO 

LO 

CD 

LO 

CO 

05 

CD 

05 

t> 

05 

CD 

CO 

i-H 

CO 

CM 

05 

O 

00 

05 

CM 

00 

00 

CD 

00 

LO 

CO 

o 

00 

CM 

C 05 
CD 

CO 

i- 1 

CO 

cd" 

CO 



lo" 

t> 

O 

cm" 

co" 


t> 

l> 

T— 1 

O 

rH 

00 

o 

r— 1 


i—( 

CO 

LO 

LO 

CO 

CO 

Tt< 

O 

Tt< 

CO 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

i-H 

o 

O 

o 

I> 

CO 

t> 

CO 

00 

o 


LO 

CO 

CO 


CD 

C.0 

O 

i-H 

05 


Of) 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CD 

LO 

i— l 


00 

CO 

o 


CM 

o 

t> 

00 

00 

i-H 

T— 1 

LO 

CO 

CO 

i— i 

CO 

CD 

05 

05 

05 

t> 

I> 

t> 

(N 

CO 

j— H 

CM 

o 

CD 

LO 

t> 

CD 

CO 

00 

LO 

00 



CM 


CM 

04 

CM 

CO 

CO 

Tf< 

CO 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

05 

CO 

Tf< 





Pm 


S 72 

0 CD 

-o 

is 
*■§ 
1 CJ 


^ § 
Sm 3 CO 
r O ^ 

o Q 
CO O 




O ^ 

£ Si 

o 


CO Cl (N 


(N^COCO^NWINNCOCONCO^NIN 


0 cc 

»0 c* 

^ js 


co 


^ CC 

a ^ 

r O "Q cc 
kn CD Q 

< o 

CD w 

CO 


o ^ 

k: c 

^ (D 

e> 


& 

e 


o 


I 


o 

0 


= -m a 

O -nH h 

au s 

C< . o 

> cc3 ^ 

> 5 -. 

cd bJD 


>> Q 

+j Q 

•rH 1 1 -+J 

O % A .« 
3 cd 5 h 
a o -p 

a m .2 

cs t 3 n 

5m £ M 
^ cd 


* A 

cd 


co qjj ; — i cd '■-> bo lJD 

o < < m « < S 


•a .2 p 

~8 P n 

3 3 ] 

§ 

£ N Cd 


Q 

A 


o 

S O 


n .q 
<3 < 


cd 

CQ 


oS 

Pm 


b .a 

'S« 

.2 3 
Q S 
«3 £ 

^ 03 
£ 5m 

o cd 
O PQ 


Appendix XIV (5) Punjab 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


361 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIV 361 


£ 


Sr c/3 

S | 

s a 

a 


£ 


tar Q 

■+o >3 kP ^ 

QJ CD 

SO 
« co « 

^ ^6 ■“ 


S CD 

^3 co 

^ o 

O w 

CO 


o 


oo 

<N 


<N 


o 

CD 


iO 

<M 


<N 

GO 


oo 

03 

CD_ 

<N 




CD 


03 

03 

<N 


Tf 

lO 

t> 

o 

CO 

oo 

LO 

co' 


t> 


CO 

03 

t> 


o 

03 

t> 

CO 

T— 1 

00 

CD 

CO 

1—1 

o 

rH 

<N 

03 

iq 

cq 

CO 

cq 

03_ 

t> 

co" 

cd" 

t> 

(N 

o' 

i—i 

co" 

<M 

CM 

<N 

<N 

i—l 

<N 

oq 

i—l 


S*. CC 
CD 

-o ■« 

II 

e a 
£ 


■S 8 

i. a co 

a~§ « 

o 8 

co o 


O ^ 
^ <33 

C3 


co 


%'S S 

Sea 

►3 '“ •- 

2; » ti 


e 

<13 O 

GQ o 


^ CO 

^ a ^ 

r O ^ CO 

fen » Q 
< O 

CD W 


a 


e> 


& 

e 


C 

c3 


I 


o 

<3 


rS 

be 

Sh 


| 

P 

O 

A 

-M 

m 


u 


4D» 

CO 

a 

o 

£ 

p 

a 

W 

p _ r 

r^H 

A 

CtJ 


+J 

p 

rD 

p 

o 

03 

a 

m 


< 


p 

a 

03 

IS 

CD 

o 

X 


3 

P 

>~s 


p 

a 

03 


03 

"0 

p 

03 

a 

P 

'£ 

T3 

P 


O 


m 

p 

aJ 


bfl 

P 

Cv3 

X 

l- b 

'P 

P 

a 

Sh 

P 
r a 

K*3 


Appendix XIV (6) Bihar 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 362 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
362 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Appendix XIV (7) C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


363 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIV 363 


<d> 


CO 


"Q co 
S S 

§ o 


^ CD CM ^ CM 
N N H N H 


^ CO Q 00 00 1> CO 
lO lO ic ^ CO H 
























"2a CO 



i—l 

on 

cm 

03 

03 

03 

1—1 

t> 

LG 

oo 

CO 

CD 

00 

CO 

CO 

CD 

03_ 

CM 

CO 

i-H 

CD_ 

CO 

1—1 

CO 

1—1 


CM 


v 


LG 

00 

c X ) 

CM 

1—1 

h- 

CD 

CM 

CD 

03 

00 

CD 

LG 

03 

CD Q 
CD W 


LG 


o 

LG 

03 

LG 

CD 


03 


CD 

LG 

1—1 

O' 

03 

l> 


oo 

UD 

co" 


CO 

i—l 


co" 

i—l 

o’ 

1—1 

1—1 

O 

i—l 

o’ 

1—1 

co“ 

i—l 

00 

00 

cm" 

cm" 

i—l 

CM 

to 






















"3 


CD 

LG 

LG 

t> 

O 

t> 

t> 

03 

CO 

03 

LG 

CO 

CM 

CO 

CO 

03 

CM 

03 

CM 

1—1 

So 


i—l 

03 

i> 



CD 

00 

CD 

o 

O 



i—l 

o 

03 

00 

CD 

CM 

LG 

t> 


CD 

oo 

t> 

ON 

o 

o 

CD 


o 

00 

CM 

o 

CO 


co 


00 

00 

LG 

O 

03 


w 


O 

iG 

1—1 

CM 

CO 

CO 

03 

1—1 

O 

I> 

CM 


00 

CO 

00 

1—1 

O 

i—i 

oo 

e> 


co 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

i— 1 

CM 

CM 

CD 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CM 

T3 "§ 
-2 § 






















fc. 3 to 






















t§"S 2 

LG 







CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

i—l 




CO 

CO 






















"S3 co 






















o 0 
COO 












































For 

ener 

Seat 

2 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

CO 

CO 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

LG 

O 






















~o 

a s-8 























CO 





















&s e 






















-^o 

CJ w 






















to 






















3s 






















f. S>. 
O *> 
£ S3 

cm 

i—l 

1—1 

i—l 

1—1 

1—1 

i—i 

1—1 

1—1 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

i—l 

1 — 1 

i—l 

1—1 

1— 1 

1—1 

i—l 

e> 

























c 

S cS 

a 


£ 


S' CO 

-o *« 

s -g 
a ^ 
> 

^ a 

S3 

£ 


&"S3 

rO 1+0 
;> 

tO 

^ e 
o 


c 

C0CJ 


& 

S3 


c 

cS 


I 


03 

nd 

oj 

: : ® 

JUl J ’ i ! s ij 

S E S S « 2 H »P 

1^1 ffl * .. g h 3 S % 

3 a S-3l|g^ g s j ais 

S m g 1 § 2 £ ^ a “.& = jj § g 1 “ § I a ^ 


Appendix XIV (8) Assam 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 364 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
364 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


S 


-o 


s 

s<3 
I 




eS^s 
8 o 


^ CC 

a ^ 

0 Q 
o 
<0 


CD 


CD 

l> 


CO 

ID 

t> 

oq 

ID 

CO 

o 

CM 

o 

i—i 


(N 

00. 

lD 

LO 

CD. 

CO 

1— 1 

i— 1 

CD 

cd~ 

t>" 

t>" 


00 

LO 


1— 1 

CO 

ID 

t> 

oo 


03 

o 

t> 

00 

o 

<M 

’ 1 

LD 

ID 

1— 1 

o 

°l 

CD. 

CD 


t> 

co" 

<N 

id" 

of 

a* 

ID" 

i— l 

1—1 

1—1 

1—1 

1—1 

rH 


S*. cc 
0 0) 

S-2 

^■g 


^ s 

1. aCO 

•5 8 
coo 


O ^ 

fc c 

CD 


co 


0-a ih 

S RS § 

a 

> CO** 

^ a* «M 

Ksi O CO 






^ cc 
v. a ^ 
r o^ 
^ Q 
0 
CO 


o ^ 
fc a 

CD 


& 

a 


a 

a 


£ 


a 

0 

O 


3 

o 

co 


T3 

o3 

CO 

Oh 

0 


03 

w 


P! 

0 

o 


o3 

w 


o 

g, 

be 

a 

o 

be 

£ 

o 

£ 


0 

C 

0 

O 


o 

& 

+-> 

03 

A 

o 

■-s 


0 

PI 

0 

O 


s 

cj 

be 


o3 

fl 

CO 


0 

£ 

0 

O 


o 

£ 


Pi 

o3 

.be 

'£ 

o3 

ffi 


0 

C 

0 

o 


oj 

& 

’S’ 

c3 

be 


o3 

w 


P! 

0 

o 


03 

A 


CO 


Appendix XIV (9) Orissa 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


365 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XIV 365 




S 2 
■o § 

ScS 

3 


S' a **. 

|«8o 

a, 'SO~ 


^3 

^ cc 

cc 

Q 

o w 
CO 


s5 


e? 



h. a co 
-G CO 

o 0 
CO O 


^§8 
,° S » 
fc< geo 

o 


t. a « 
r o73 w 
«h « e 
-SO 

o w 

to 


£ 


e? 


& 

S2 


e 

c3 


i - 1 

<N CO 


tO 


CO 


Cd 

00 

<N 

t> 

(N 

to 

to 

o 

00 

co 

to 

t> 

i—i 

00 

1—1 

04 

1— 1 




co~ 

1— 1 

UO 

1—1 


oo 

00 

CO 

Cd 

l> 


oo 

CO 

o 


co 

1—1 

04 

CO 

oo_ 

00 

i—i 

Cd 

t> 

t a 

co~ 

04 

co" 

rf 

i—l 

i—i 

i—i 

<N 

1—1 

(M 


<N <N r-i CO ^ 


(N CO ^ CO (N <N 


T5 

cd 

m 


P 

o 


o 


P 

.ft 

c? 

•“3 


cd 

W 


T3 

a 

CO 


p 

Plh 


o 

£ 


cd 

idD 


03 

CQ 


cd 

W 


44 

cd 

Sh 

T3 

cd 

CQ 


a 

T3 

cd 

?H 

P 

m 

cd 

r— 4 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


366 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

366 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Appendix XV 

Particulars regarding Election to seats reserved for Scheduled 
Castes Province by Province : 


Appendix XV: 

(1) Madras 

” 

(2) Bombay 

” 

(3) Bengal 

” 

(4) U. P. 

» 

(5) Punjab 

» 

(6) Bihar 

” 

(7) C. P. & Berar 

” 

(8) Assam 

» 

(9) Orissa 


N.B . — All figures except those in column 8 are actuals. Those 
in column 8 are calculated as actuals are not obtainable. They are 
calculated on the assumption that the percentage of Scheduled 
Caste Voters and of Hindu Voters who went to the polls was the 
same. How far the assumption is justified, it is not possible to say 


Appendix XV (1) Madras 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


367 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XV 


3 | 
"0 


CO £ 


o 


p 

w Q 
Q* 73 
co P 

* e 

£ 5 

V3 


I *2 I 


O coco.. 

CO 03l>£ 
co coaA 


2 a “j oi co iz co 


rj c<n> fQ cd o o 
^lo^Soico , 02 
3 co<N°j co ^ <o 
co rf ,-oq' t> rnol of co" 


Of^^ 00 ^cococo; 

I “ i .®q®o (5| . co ® ri . 

2 g 3"2 co io 2 ill 'll 2 c 


co co 

CO (M 
O 10 


CO ■'d* l>G0 1> G3 03 O3O00H 
^ OOI>^^O(NiH7oC0^ 
00 OCOI>01>^01^H “ o 03 10 

- ^03 ~l> 


^ lO (MCOTfTfr 


lO CO'W^oq CO 


I OTIX3 conh_^' — ^ rH ° 3C - )r ^ 

co" oo"2 2 oq" co" r-T c-q" o 

H 


03 <N ^ lO CO I> CO --I 03 (M CO in CO 02 oq CO 
I CO ^ I 2 CO i-H CO OQ CO I-H CO CO ^ (M CO 02 
|cOt> | to . 02L0C0C0I>OC002 ^ico 02 CO CO 

t>" 03" 2 03" oo" ^ ^ Oq" co" <0 


COOqiO-^CO-n^.n^i 
C0020-HCOg02^3 
I>(N 02^tO^2 T- 
(NHOodoVcD ,V 
Oq rH CO r-1 -I 03 - 


l«g I 




^^co-^ 

, O2C0CO 




Q 

o 

73 8 , 

cu ■« ■ 
3 £ ' 
p 


O oq 
co ^ 
co t> 


(M LOC0C0-^'-lO2(MCO^t>O2(MCO 
I CO C0^H02C0C0 t-HC 0C02OC0^02 
U002L0(MC<n>OC002 02 CO CO 


oq 02 I> 02CO-^CO^^LO-^^CO(NCOCO 02 


oq 

CO 02 02 CO iH l LO LO 

i 02 o co p 02 o oq io <-1 
I r- Uo 

NHH 03 00 r-UXN 


. H S Q 
h 8S 

- CJ p 

e 

c. CO Q 


i co m hto ha to ho i. . 

J0 02 02 02 0303d2 03 03 d3d3d2?r03zr0303ri J 0303030302Q2 03 03 02 03 Q2 
5h Sh Sh Sh SH^-l^fHSHSHS-(f-lC^CHS-(SHC3^^SHSH&-lf-lfHSHSHS-(fH 
bcbcbJDbJDbJDbDbfibcbJDbJDbfibCO bco bJDbJDO hfihchcbJDbBbAhchJDhcbJDbB 

■ OOOOOOOOOOOO'O-OO ■ ooooooooooo 

Sgggggggggggg So goo sggggggggggg 


£ 




S 02 $ 


O P 

O o 


O CO CO o CO COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOOCOOCOCQCOCOCOCOCOCOCO 
ft <12 02 ft 02 a2Q2 03 G2 02 02 02 02 02 03 02 Q3 02ft03ft020202020302020302 

0 .+J+J Q^+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J Qj+J Q.+J +J+J- 4-J-U+J-M+J+J 

osddoddflGrtdddfinndfidoaortaafisciGdSfi 

d o o d o ooooooooooooododooooooooo 

Sgg^gggggggggggggg^gpggggggggg 


33 

02 

iS co 

_ K> CO 

cd a> p 

Sh 

+^:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::cos 
g cd cd 

£ DO 

: : : : :::::::::::::::::::::::: :p co 

P Q2 co 


c 


he 


I 


P cd . 

ednb . 3 b 

ft d d 


a £ 

5 cd cd r=l 

Ch ^,0 >> 


CC > ^ cdp 


fl'o i 

. cd ft S o 
. Cd ft U ' 


S oP cd £ 3 3 § 02 Sppp cd.^l.Sp.M cd2 u cd "cd o op °in ^ 

<ohcqooq(1hW^hohp^hhohh2<(1hcoW(1h^;gSh 


367 


Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes ... ... ... ... ... ... 321,616 

Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Congress Candidates ... ... 126,152 

Scheduled Caste Votes secured by Non-Congress Candidates ... ... ... 195,464 


Appendix XV (2) Bombay 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


368 


368 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Q S 


^ 5) A 

h ^ ^ 


O) io H 
t> CD CD 
Oi 05 o 


s; * s :s 

I 11 

S 


Ut) CO CO 05 05 


P N “ 

05 co co co 

~ ~ ~ 1C o 


co co 


. d 


_ Q 

. ^ 
e 

£ tS 
V3 


e 

I 


CO CO lO 05 
I-H oq 05 1 -H 
05 <N t> lO 
t> •'tf co" 05 


ic 1C 

I>' LO 


s 

e 


£ S3 S £ ^ £ 

<M 


£ 2 2^-2 


O Q 

co O 


CO CO 05 05 

iH O 05 i-l 

°l °„ ^ l O 

i> ^ co" 05 " 


H. 10 r> 
5 05 " co" 


10 CO LCD 

rf of 10 " 


jj >2. a 

I 8 5 

C W vs 
^ o 

- CJ 

4“ 3 e 
s- CO Q 
£ 


CO CO CO CO CO CO 

CO CO CO CO CO CO 

05 05 05 05 0 05 

Sh Sh U H H u 

ho be bo be be ho 

d d d d d d 


be be $ be 


UOOUOO O UO 


O 


O d o O fl 




2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ; 2 2 


c? 

<3> "S 

O O 


r 0 r O r 0 l "C r O r 0 '"0 

05 05 05 05 05 05 05 

+j +j +j +j +j 

co co co co co co co 

05 05 05 05 05 05 05 


o o 


r d r d ,- d ""d 

05 05 Q5 05 

+j +j +j +j 

co co co co 

05 05 05 05 

-*— ■ -*— > H — ' -I— » ' -I—* -t-> +J+J+J+J 

ddddddd d s3 s3 d s3 
0000000 o 0000 

OOOOOOO O OOOO 


05 

■+J 

O 

: ::::>$ 

1 ®1 

as rs 

Ph • • ■ • • “ T5 

• • • • • Co rj 

°a u « 

AO 


I 


z a 

>> c 
*i a 

o -S 

« I 

a CO 


cC 


>> 

ffl 


CCS 




as 

H 

43 


05 co 
r -] co 
d 05 
■"C S-c 


>> Q Q 

CO 

^5 aS -M 

s .& g 

O w 0 

CQ W co 


S £ S5 


z z 


aS . cS q 

H Z A 


43 

m 


03 


2 


oS 


PQ ffl W Ph Eh 


Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes ... ... ... ... ... ... 171,047 

Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Congress Candidates ... ... 12,971 

Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Non-Congress Candidates ... ... ... 158,076 


Appendix XV (3) Bengal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


369 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XV 


J3 3 

d -9 


■2a O 


^ 1 Oh 


CQ 


CO Q 

s r § 

' 


HC0t>C0t>O5G5lOr 


OliOO 

lOCDCNCO 

OOOOLO 


CD CO 
<NI> 
lOCD 


i>Lo^coi> c $^ia)^coai'-i 0 i. C W, ^ 

- -oo - -oo - -i> - - -—i r~) 

<N<M T-li-l i—i to incoin" r; r-l 


f— , LN 

05 O „03 u i 


IO CD 00 r 


>> 00 o 




cooqc^i-irHr-Hoo^aiSaiai^SS 01 

cococooioocoLGO^^c^r:^. Sn 

co co oo CO co i-i cd °Vcn °*.<m io - 'P. cm 

1 infvfQ ^ cnT 


, CM ^NCONON ^1000 
rH HOHININTMNHCO 

cm aiLOTfooocooiioco 




O Q 

CO o 


CO <M<M O 1-1 TH 00 £2 os 3 05 05 9° ^3 £os 
oococooiot>coLoo^^i(M°? s: S csj 

CO CO CO 1-1 00 1-H CD „C<J U 1(M IO - - - (M 

cnT oa do i-T hh° rV' T ^ lo cm? *9 £3 cnT 


xh , (M rt 1 (N CO (N O (M ^lOOO 

, ^ IT i—i i — l O i— i <N (N <N 1-H00 

<N ^ <N 05^10 rf 00 1> CO 05 lOCO 

cd" £. of hoVhoV LO'0’05' 

iH i-H H 1 — I -— 1 1 — I ,— I (M (M 1 - 


^ 05 

£ S J 

^ cj ^ 

- 00 
^ 3 3 
s- CO Q 


CO CO CO CO coco coco 

CO CO CO CO coco coco 

PPPtflPaiaiPPco^co cn 


CO CO CO 

co co co 
05 a> 05 


CO CO CO CO 

co co co co 
05 05 05 05 


Sm Sh Sh Sh Sh Sh Sh 


OOObOObObOOObOOObObO 

uqo co cc coo ecoo scoaouuoo 

g g go guo g go g goo e e s € e s 6 


o o 


o 


o o o o o o o 


o o o o o o o 


co co co co cn co 
co co co co co co 
05 05 05 05 05 05 
Sh >h Sh Sh Sh Sh 
bo bo be tox) bo bj> 
PC PC PC PC PC PC 
o o o o o o 
OOOOOO 

ec ec ec pc ec ec 
oooooo 

zzzzziz; 


CO CO CO 
CO CO CO 
05 05 05 
Si ^ Si 

bo bo bo 
EC PC PC 
o o o 

uua 

pic EC PC 
O O O 
£££ 


SC S 
o 

o ^ 


p O '"0 r O p O r O p O f "0 '"O p O r O r O r O r O 

05050505050505050505050505 

+J+J-M+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J 

cocncocncococococococncocn 

05050505050505050505050505 

+j+j+j+j+j+J+J+J+J+J+J+J+J 

PCpCpCpCpCPCPCPCPCECPCPCpC 

ooooooooooooo 

OOOOUQOUOOOUQ 


U U 


O O 


'■d , "d , "d i "d 
05 05 05 05 

+J 4J +J +J 

CO CO CO CO 
05 05 05 05 
■P-P-P+J 

SC EC PC PC 
o o o o 

aouo 


o 


TC73 
05 05 
+H +J 
CO CO 
05 05 
+J +J 

PC PC 
o o 

oo 


I 


-M +3 

Q5 o 


^c^c 

+J 4 1 

3 ? 


-M £5 

s®i 


O 

io! 

, - £-c 
’o 3-g 

C c" d li 3 S' 2 * ffl S 

c 3 a 3 S s-1 pi, C 3 - 4 C bo bo .3 m 

^ ^ 3 P cc as Sh ^c g 

c-3 ffl o sphPhtj a g 
3 3-3 O 04 ,^ a 3 “ 
CQpqpqpqgPSEKoKM^g^ 


o ^ 

co^; 

CO CO 
oS CCS 

EC EC 




2 

_a 

c? 

PC 


PC 
-Q 
CCS 

Ph^^C-C 

S os.g.g 

CH'cncn 
V - PC PC 
CCS C3 2 2 

Si o C Ei 

g’S 

maSS 


cS T5 

° S 

1 co 

t5 -g o 

J® CO 

^ : pc s 

4P T3 . - 
+J 0 ) b£ 

g -4C g 

O • C5 o 

co ‘m O 


D 

T3 


WH E-i 


369 


Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes ... ... ... ... 684,443 

Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Congress Candidates 59,646 

Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Non-Congress Candidates ... 624,797 


Appendix XV ( 4 ) U. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


370 


370 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pm 


*3 

02 

-S3 

O 

CO ■ 


^3 


£ 


CO 0 
O O -is 
S3 p? 
§ C3 


o e 

co "§ 

« c 

£ CJ 

** 
S3 


£ 


£ 

S3 

S3 


^3 ^ 

^ CO 


0 Q 
CO O 


CO ;s 
CO rS 
0 _a 


^3 


S3 

a 


S3 

o 

cj 

£ 


S3 

a 


I 


CM 


o 

CM 

CM 

oo 

o 

co 

o 00 

is. 


CD 

O 00 

oo 

LO 

vM 

O 

oo 

to 

<N 

oo 

<N 

lO 


to 

tO | 

o oo 

o 

tr- 

1—1 


CN 

CM 

iq 

t> 

02 

C9 | 

V. 

co" 

io" 



16 

cd" 

io" 

cd" 

of 2 


02 

o" co" 

(N i—i 

oo 

rH 


l> 


t> 

o 

(N 

0 

1— 1 

02 

I> 

i-H 

(N 

1 2 1 

LO 

, co 
10 

CO 

oo 

o 


LO 

0 

LO 


LO 

02 

1 & 

(N 

CO 


CD_ 

(N 


Of D 

(N 

LO 

t> 




02" 

lo" 

02" 

co" 


i—l 

co" 

i—l 

co" 

cn" 

1 02 1 

C\f 

rH 


h H 03 lO 
CM O 00 00 S73 
CO 02^ CO <N £ 
CM" rf Tf of 


t> rc3 cm ^ 
n] * CO ►-7 
iO 02 A ^ 


£ £ 


O CO CO (N CO H t> t> H 
HOOHSlOlOlOHlOQ 
02 O GO oq oq cq_ 00 LO l> 

i-T Tf r-T co" co" t-h" cm" r-T co" 


CN 

CD 

t> 

02 1 

LO 

, 00 
Lq 

l—l 

t> 

t> 

CD 

CM 

O 

02 

0 

CD„ 

(N 

02 1 

cn" 

1—1 

lo" 

co" 

cm" 

10 


bO 
S 
o 

Jh U Sh £1 5h U O 

bo bo bo bo bo bo > 

a c a a a a g 

O O O O O O .0 


0 CO 
CO CO 
0 CD 


CO CO CO CO 

CO CO CO CO 

0 0 0 0 


CO CO 
CO CO 
CD 0 


CO CO 
CO CO 
CD <D 


CO CO 
CO CO 
CD 0 
H Sh 

bo bo 
S3 S3 
o o 

o o 


H Sh Sh h H H Sh 

bobobobobobobo^ 
C3c3S3c3S3Cc3gg 
0000000 . 0.0 


bo 

uoouou^uouooouZ^uoZu 


<D 

CO CO ^ 
CO 03 S 

0 0-9 
Sh Sh O 

bo bo ■ 
S3 S3 g 
00.0 


G T3 G 

CD 0 CD 


CO CO CO CO CO CO 

000000 


4J 


000000 


S3 S3 S3 

OOO 

OOO 


T3 

0 td 
0 0 
O -+J 
a M 

§ g 


T3 

0 'u 
0 0 
o 

a M 
& ^ 

§ g 


T3 T3 . 
0 0“ 
0 0 0 
o o 

sal 

5 § g 


OpOpOpPOOpO 


l—l 

CM 

r— - 

00 

10 

CO 

1—1 

CD 

0 

1 5 

1 $£ 1 

, 10 


CO 

cd 

+-> 

0 

CO 

CO 

CD 

l—l 

CO 



CM 

1 00 

0 

CO 

l—l 

0 

CD 

cq 

L£D 


cq 

00 

1—1 
1 00 

1 2 1 

LO 

1 02 

CM 

| cq 

H 

l—l 

co" 


cm" 

cm" 


cm" 




0- 



CD 

cm 

o 

00 " 


0 
0 

:::::::: : -£ 0 

£| 

OJ 3 

:::::::: : S ? 

cs B 

9 o 
^ 0 

4^ +3 , _a> co 

0 

’fi 


►>5 VO 

.t 3 P 

O 


+^> o3 

rQ 

cS 


ft o 
& £ a 

o3 bo 


Sh ,X3 

9 13 

S3 0 
ctf 'G 
Sh c3 

s § 

pCj 

cd .5 


1 « 
S o 

T 1 

4J 0 H 

.1*0 

O 2 g 
M s^ 2 

cC S c^ 

f_i ^ 

fi CD OJJr-j C3 D 5 

00<^c«CQ<§CQ 


0 +j 


0 


- Q .0 
P ^ ^ 

5h S 0 

G ft ^ 
ftin Q 

Cd ^ irH 
N K 4J 

S-i Sh 0 .. _ 

u3 O Cd N r—H 

§ O PQ < < 


0 .a 
O.-S 
"S p 

cc5 

c N 
B o 

Cj g 


0 


Q * £ ,B 

0 Sh 
1-H 0 ' J-l +J 

rz 3 ^ Q 0 
0 P M ^ 

S x £ g 

P3 M O 


P sC 
r C hi 

cu a 
* o 
o O 

W > 
«H rO 

° T3 

3 p 

o g 

H 0 


Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes ... ... ... ... ... ... 132,180 

Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Congress Candidates ... ... 52,609 

Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Non-Congress Candidates ... ... ... 79,571 


Appendix XV (5) Punjab 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


371 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XV 371 


^ *§ iP "Q 
•« l 'Q ES 

..O Q) d) Q 

co £ 


(5 


£ 


» 8 
> O 
s pa 


"Q 

o e 
ftn T3 

CO "8 

^ s 

la 

'Jl 

b CO 
O 




£ 

3 

.3 


^ | 
3 > 

*3 CO 

<j Q 

CO O 


•3 § « 

8 S 

3 S3 
k ^ Q 


Q ta 


& 

s 


e 

a 


a 



o 

1— 1 

t> 

1—1 


CD 


CD 

o 


co 

o 

CD 

00 

(M 

t> 

05 

I> 

CO 

3 

i—l 

cd 

o" 

1—1 

o" 

c o' 

ud 

of 

rH 

1—1 

CM 

1—1 

CD 


05 

i—I 

O 

CD 


CO 

05 

i—l 

CO 

O 

(M 

1 ^ 

(N 

05 

i— i 

O 

1—1 

r— 1 


i—l 

of 

cd" 

of 


00 

t> 

05 

Ud 

CO 

oo 

CO 

1—1 

CO 

05 

Ud 

1 o 

CO 

04 

Ud 

r ~ 1 

04 

05 

cd" 

ud 

oo" 

CO 

1—1 


of 


< < < < < 


00 


05 

Ud 

CO 

oo 

CO 

i-H 

co 

05 

Ud 

1 o 

CO 

04 

Ud 

r ~ i. 

Of 


co" 

ud 

oo" 

CO 

1—1 


of 


be 

£ 

o 

o 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


o 

a 

a 

o 

£ 

!3 


£ 

o 

O 


£ 

o 

O 


£ 

o 

O 


£ 

o 

O 


£ 

o 

O 


o 

a 

a 

o 

£ 


£ 

o 

cd 

be 

?h 

£ 

O 


cd 

W 


£ 

o 

m 


o 

£ 

"cd 

£ 

cd 

w 


m 

£ 

cd 


cd 

-a 


£ 

a 

5 

cd 

3 

CO 

o 

ffi 


£ 

£ 

3 

*~3 


£ 

a 

<D 


CD 

cd 

£ 

cd 

3 

"■£ 

£ 


o 


m 

^d 

£ 

cd 


£ 

o 

O 


o 

H 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 


be 

£ 

cd 

3 

>"d 

£ 

cd 

t-4 
£ 
p a 

3 


cd 

OQ 


O 

> 


£ 

Td 


o 

H 


cd 

3 

3 

£ 

cd 

O 


CD 

£ 

o 

a 

t>~a 

£ 


be 

£ 

o 

O 

£ 

o 

£ 

a 


cd cd a) 
O O -g 
Td Td > 


£ 


Appendix XV (6) Bihar 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


372 


372 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


^3 


2 

^3 


S rC O 
cj 
CQ 


^3 


CC Q 

0 "S3 
> o -is 
^ ^3 

S3 r* 

§ J 


^3 

K> 

o Q 

0. :s 

w T3 

- S 

£ <3 


<0 

O ^ 

1 1 

r2 co 




1—1 

02 

LO 

1 1 I ’ -H 


02 

t> 

t> | 1 | 

co 

CO 


O | 

| ^ 02 

co 

ic 

<N 

CO 


CD 

<N 


£ 

S3 

^3 

.S3 


^3 § 

^ >P 
S3 ^ 
^3 

0 0 

ra to 

7~ co 

CO cS 


i—l 

02 


o 

LO 

02 


t> 

I> 1 1 1 

1 1 1 o 


CD 

CO 

LO 

3, 

9, 1 

lilt' 

<D 

3 

9 

9 

<N 

CO 


<N 

CO 

<N 

co" 


CO H 
§ :§ 
8 ^ 
£ co § 




o "S 

0 0 
a cc 
0 ) 0 

to to 
CG £ 

^ O 

e e 

r° 9 
O ^ 


& 

S3 


S3 

6 


I 


02 

^ 1 1 1 

o 

02 

1—1 

<Ji 

1—1 

00 

MIS. 

O 

fr- 

02 

<3 

t> 

CO 

o 

1—1 

i—i 

ee 


lo" 

o' 

CO 


02 

o 

02 

CD 

CO 

a3 

-p> 

i—i 

i—i 

^f 1 

fr- 

ee 

<N | | | 

iii° 

CD 

t> 

O 

co 

LO 

1—1 

9 1 1 1 

1 9 

9 

(N 

CD 

05 

H 

o 

CD 

<N 

i—i 

i—i 

i—( 


i—i 


CO 

oo" 

(N 


co co 
co fr- 
co oo 


CO 


CO CO 
CO CO 

0 0 

rn rr, bo bo 

CO CO rl H 

co co 5 5 

0 CD O o 

^ ^ O O 

be be ■ ■ 

fl fl g g 

o 0 . 0.0 


Z o a 2 !z o 


CO CGCOCQCGCOCOCO 

CO COCOCOCOCOCOCO 

a) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

be be be be be be be be 

S £ S S2 £ S2 

o ooooooo 

o OOOOOOO 


be 

£ 

o 

o 

b 

o 

£ 


r d '■o r o r o r 0 r o '"O '"O '■o 

O ® O ® ® ® a) 0) (0 ® r O r O D r O r O 

0 CO 0 CO CO CO CO COCGCO<D<DCO<D<D 

O +- > O O O O 000+ J + J 0't- 3 + J 

M a M a a a a aaa^^a^^ 

oooooo o oooodOod 
o G o G G G *2 flCfloortoo 

0£o£££ £ ppp oopoo 

CO CO 

0 0 

: : : . . . : -p -p 

o d 

> 9 

: : i i i i : : i i : : : i © 9 

-»-> S 

T3 H *h 2 *5 

c <3 -0 33 ^ O 

42 a sh ^ o 

2 ^ c 3 rf c 3 9 co 

42 , co fR O^cld 00 

• * * 43 * 2 r £p£-£'§cc 5 : 333 bX) 

„ * 9 Ph •« il 6 

| £ 111 1 |1| gl 111“^ 

a°^r50 ffl I §WMg ) ^VH 1 H= ST3 

W M £ W ^ £ W Q(CO)Sai020H S 


> 


cd 

o 

T3 

0 

3 

T3 

0 

42 


o 

Eh 


o 3 

3 

3 

C3 

oj 

o 


be 

o 

O 

>> 

42 


O 

> 


cd 

o 

T 3 

0 

3 

T3 

0 

42 


o 

Eh 


a 3 

3 

3 

01 

oj 

o 


be 

01 

o 

O 

05 

o 

>» 

rQ 

T3 

0 


o 

> 


o3 

O 

T 3 

0 

3 

T3 


Appendix XV ( 7 ) C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


373 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XV 


■ cc 


£ 


s ats. 

■8 a 

3 r 8 

coo 


00 


GO 

CO 


o 

o 


t> 


CO 


rH 

'X 

LO 

CC 

07 

cq 

CO 

07 

LO 


CO 

CVJ 

CD 

07 

o 

v~ 


t-H 

O 

CD 

LO 



CC 

O 

CO 

o 

Cl 

07 

CD 

cq 

00 

q 

LO 


q 

rH 

o 

LO 

TO 

IQ 

TO 

o 

rH 

TO 

LO 

cq 

TO 

<N 

CC 

of 

co" 

cq 

lo" 


rH 

lO 


r-T 

of 

t> 

id 


t> 

O 

cf 

co" 

r-T 

cd 












rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 






CO 


■KS to i 
£ ^ 


I> 


CO 


LO 

CC 

l> 

CC 

O 

cq 

rH 

LO 

o 

07 

i> 

CD 

CD 



cd 

-m 

o 

CC 

V- 

07 

CD 

CO 

07 

rH 

LO 

X 

CO 

LO 

LO 

CO 

07 

07 

X 

cq 

CD 

X 

Eh 


i> 


t> 

O 

rH 

q 

07 


00 


q 


cq 

rH 


[> 

X 

rH 


cd 

cf 

co” 

rH 


rH 

rH 



rH 


rH 


cd 

LO~ 

cd 

rH 


cq" 



"o ® 
cc 

“ C 

£ c3 


Q 

I 


CDI>COCOI>OCDlOOOCOCOOI>H 
OJCONCOt'OJOOHHiOHOlOH 
t> X <N rH Tt q CO rH 00 ^ t-H q CO 
t> CO CO LO rH cf cf CO rH CO" X" r-T LO cf 


CD t> CO O ^ 

H 05 (M lO 03 

07 CD 00 ^ rH rH 

t> rH rH rH cf 


a 

e 


^ ^ (N ^ ^ o ^ 


g ? s § ? g g § g 


Q 


r-w- 

a o> 

■§ « 
r£i "CO 


CDt>-^COtHCOCDCDCOCDCOOt>rH 
DD0COhl>COiCl(NiOHOiOH 
t> Cq 07 rH Tt Tt q o O CO rH q cq ^ 
t> CO cf LO rH of CO rH CO" X" rH iO of 


CD l> CO O 'cf 

rH 07 CM LO 05 

q cq cq rH rH 

t> rH rH rH of 


•*/ 

m 

o ;q 
cj a 

3 ss 
b CO 33 


CQ CO CO CO CO 

CO CQ CO CQ CO 

d7 d7 d7 d7 d7 

H ?h H H H 

be be be be be 

Ph 

o o o o o 

O O O O O 


CO CO CQ 
CO CO CO 
GOG 

KCOCQCOCOfflHHri 

COCOCOCOCOCOSHhHh 

07 Q 7 07 07 07 07 ° ° ° 

be be be be be be - 

O O O O O 0.000 


CO CO CO CO CO 

CO CO CO CO CO 

07 d7 07 d7 07 

H H H H H 

be be be be be 

§ a c a a a 

m O O O O O 

k o o o o o 

£ C C £ G C 

o ,o ,o ,o o ,o 




^ 72 

07 07 

CC H 

£ o 
H o 
o £ 

o b 


r 0 r O l "0 l- 0 '"O r O r O r O r O r O '"O r O r O r O 07 r O r O r O '"O r O 
070707070707070707070707Q707C00707070707 


cocococococococococococococo 

0707070707070707070707070707 

gggggggggggggg 

oooooooooooooo 


CO CO CO CO CO 

07 07 07 07 07 

-H> -H H> -H> 

ti £ ti £ £ 

O O O O O 


oooooooooooooobooooo 


o 


I 


cd • • • o 

-£ > 

Oj “ 0) 

Sh m ^ 

: 5 s a :g:::::: 2 : : : O 

£d 3 to cd £ —j 

Jill, 3 iL| S l 

g.g.Sc.g.S as-s & g>-5SMS^7ss^- 

bn be h cs S h S h . 2 ^ cd « cd -2 oo ^-2 

D 3 cd ^ cd edrq^ ^ 07^0 


bx 

o 

O 

> 

rO 

Td 


373 


Total of Scheduled Caste Votes ... ... ... ... ... ... 134,861 

Total of Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Congress Candidates 19,507 

Scheduled-Caste Votes secured by Non-Congress Candidates ... ... ... 115,354 


Appendix XV (8) Assam 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 374 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
374 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Q © 
■te ^3 ^ 

o a 

coO 


'o co Q 

£ 

O) *h 2? 

■is co b 

£ ^ 


© 0) 

"o e 

(5^ 

wts 
48 s 

£<5 

Xg. 

s V 
.5 SS 


C) 


e 

£ 


£ 

3 

■B 

S 


"S3 

at* 

■Sa 
-S § 
<*>o 


'S.s « 
^ »"S 
K 

>© © 

■O a s 

kGO-S 


05 £» 

£ o 
e S 
<o,c 
O^ 


o 


CD 

CM 

<N 

<N 


■X 

CM 

00 


<N 

LO 

CM 


<N 

CO 

00 


CD 

05 

LO 


<N 
L O 
05 


CN 

LO 

<N 


CO 

•*£ 


CM 

LO 

<N 


be 

Eh 

o 

O 


ho 

Sh 

o 

O 


ho 

in 

O 

o 


CL 

£ 

O 

O 


be 

ti 

o 

O 


Sh 

o 

O 


3 

o 

O 


C5 

o 

O 


ft 

ft 

o 

o 


ti 

o 

O 


fl 

o 

O 


O 


0 

o 

CO 


'O 

03 

co 

ft 

0 

Ch 

I 

Co 

w 


o 


o3 

W 

Jh 

O 

g, 

be 

ti 

Sd 

£ 


o 


o3 

.3 


o 


a 

o 

co 


O O 


o3 

W 


s 

o3 

be 


LO 

<N 

<N 


CO 

O 


CO 

O 


(M 


be 

Eh 

c 

O 


be 

a 

o 

O 


O 


£ 

o3 

be 


a 

w 


cb 

Sh 

05 

Sh 

© 

o 


cd 

^3 


co 


co © 
© +2 
■+J Co 

** 'ft 
© fl 
CG r P 
cdO 
O cc 
' co 
■■a a5 
05 Sh 
'03 

'O § 

JP 
© >, 
CO„Q 

‘S'tf 
° © 

cd 3 

gl 

H co 


ss 

o3 

o 


£e 

Sh 

O 

O 


> > 


03 

O 

'O 

© 

3 


03 

o 


0 

'■© 


'O 

03 

O 


be 

Sh 

c 

O 

fl 

o 

£ 

rD! 

T3 


o3 

o 


3 

T3 


Appendix XV (9) Orissa 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


375 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XV 375 


^ . o 
3 4 


u e 

co o 


13 


a 


£ 


co Q 
0 ^ 
i CJ 

§ J 


•O 


o Q 

CO "Q 

la 


CO 

it co 
O 

‘■S y 
a § 
r2 


£ 


£ 


3 ~ 
a £ 

1 - 
CO 

JO Q 

CO o 


^3 


^3 oa 
0 0 




St 

a 


I 


oo 

LO 

02 

CO 

UO 

oo 

LO 

o 

LO 


cq_ 

t> 

o 

o 

3 

CO 

LO - 

02 

3 

1—1 


CO 

CO 


^ o 

CO ^ 


oo 

LO 

02 


00 


1—1 

1 O 

o 

LO 

3 

1— 1 


<N 

O 

CO 


1 

"S« 

Sh g ^2 


CO 

0 

Ph 

bo 

G 

CO 

CO 

0 

Ph 

CO 

CO 

0 

?H 

CO 

0 

Ph 

bo 

G 

CO 

0 

0 

?H 

-S 13 

■& a s 
~ co e 

s 

o 

be 

be 

o 

be 


O 

CJ 

o 

£ 

£ 

o 

O 

G 

o 

O 

O 

G 

o 

£ 

£ 

o 

O 


T3 

<0 

x 

O 

Oh 

Oh 

O 

0 


CD 


0 

o 

o 


CD 


0 

o 

O 


T3 

0 

CO 

o 

Oh 

Oh 

O 

0 

P 


T3 

CD 


0 

o 

O 


T3 

d 

m 


o 

o 


o 

£ 


0 

Oh 

C? 

•"3 


d 

W 


T3 

c3 

m 


o 

Ph 


o 

£ 


03 

bC 


a 

PQ 


o3 

w 


44 

TO 

PH 

T3 

o3 

rO 

PQ 


CD 

£ 


rH 

03 


T3 

CD 


0 

o 

o 


o3 

T3 

oj 

in 

0 

m 

03 

44 


O 

H 


oo 

CO 



oo 

i—l 

o 


t> 

LO 

02 

3 


Sc 

00 

co" 

1— 1 


LO" 


be 

0 

o 

O 


co CO 

0 a) 
+f +5 
o cC 
> T3 


0 


T3 
0 
co o3 

5° 

■ CO 

T3 co 
0 0 


0 bo 
T* 0 

0 o 

CD 5>> 

«« ■“ 
O 

0 

Ph 

o3 3 

1 S 

H co 


LO 

oo 

LO 


o 

> 


o3 

O 

3 

0 

3 

"O 

0 

43 


o 

H 


oo 

lO~ 


03 

3 

3 

0 

cc3 

o 


be 

0 

o 

O 

40 


> 


d 

o 

3 

0 

3 

0 

4P 


03 m 


o 

Eh 


cc3 

3 

3 

0 

d 

o 


be 

0 

o 

O 

0 

o 

£ 

>% 

40 


t> 


d 

o 

3 

0 

3 

0 

4Q 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


376 


376 


Appendix XVI 

THE WAVELL PLAN 

(i) White Paper presented to Parliament on 14th June 1945 
by the Secretary of State for India, containing His Majesty’s 
Government’s Proposal relating to the Government of India. 

1. During the recent visit of Field-Marshal Viscount 
Wavell to this country His Majesty’s Government reviewed 
with him a number of problems and discussed particularly 
the present political situation in India. 

2. Members will be aware that since the offer by His 
Majesty’s Government to India in March 1942 there has 
been no further progress towards the solution of the Indian 
constitutional problem. 

3. As was then stated, the working out of India’s new 
constitutional system is a task which can only be carried 
through by the Indian peoples themselves. 

4. While His Majesty’s Government are at all times 
most anxious to do their utmost to assist the Indians in the 
working out of a new constitutional settlement, it would be 
a contradiction in terms to-speak of the imposition by this 
country of self-governing institutions upon an unwilling 
India. Such a thing is not possible, nor could we accept the 
responsibility for enforcing such institutions at the very time 
when we were, by its purpose, withdrawing from all control 
of British Indian affairs. 

5. The main constitutional position remains therefore 
as it was. The offer of March 1942 stands in its entirety 
without change or qualification. His Majesty’s Government 
still hope that the political leaders in India may be able to 
come to an agreement as to the procedure whereby India’s 
permanent future form of government can be determined. 

6. His Majesty’s Government are, however, most anxious 
to make any contribution that is practicable to the breaking 
of the political deadlock in India. While that deadlock lasts 
not only political but social and economic progress is being 
hampered. 

7. The Indian administration, over-burdened with the 
great tasks laid upon it by the war against Japan and by 
the planning for the post-war period, is further strained by 
the political tension that exists. 

8. All that is so urgently required to be done for agricultural 
and industrial development and for the peasants and workers of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


377 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XVI 377 

India cannot be carried through unless the whole-hearted co- 
operation of every community and section of the Indian people 
is forthcoming. 

9. His Majesty’s Government have therefore considered 
whether there is something which they could suggest in 
this interim period, under the existing constitution, pending 
the formulation by Indians of their future constitutional 
arrangements, which would enable the main communities and 
parties to co-operate more closely together and with the British 
to the benefit of the people of India as a whole. 

10. It is not the intention of His Majesty’s Government to 
introduce any change contrary to the wishes of the major Indian 
communities. But they are willing to make possible some step 
forward during the interim period if the leaders of the principal 
Indian parties are prepared to agree to their suggestions and 
to co-operate in the successful conclusion of the war against 
Japan as well as in the reconstruction in India which must 
follow the final victory. 

11. To this end they would be prepared to see an important 
change in the composition of the Viceroy’s Executive. This is 
possible without making any change in the existing statute 
law except for one amendment to the Ninth Schedule to the 
Act of 1935. That Schedule contains a provision that not less 
than three members of the Executive must have had at least 
10 years’ service under the Crown in India. If the proposals 
I am about to lay before the House meet with acceptance in 
India, that clause would have to be amended to dispense with 
that requirement. 

12. It is proposed that the Executive Council should be 
reconstituted and that the Viceroy should in future make his 
selection for nomination to the Crown for appointment to his 
Executive from amongst leaders of Indian political life at the 
Centre and in the Provinces, in proportions which would give 
a balanced representation of the main communities, including 
equal proportions of Moslems and Caste Hindus. 

13. In order to pursue this object, the Viceroy will call into 
conference a number of leading Indian politicians who are the 
heads of the most important parties or who have had recent 
experience as Prime Ministers of Provinces, together with a few 
others of special experience and authority. The Viceroy intends 
to put before this conference the proposal that the Executive 
Council should be reconstituted as above stated and to invite 
from the members of the conference a list of names. Out of 
these he would hope to be able to choose the future members 
whom he would recommend for appointment by His Majesty 
to the Viceroy’s Council, although the responsibility for the 
recommendations must of course continue to rest with him, and 
his freedom of choice therefore remains unrestricted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


378 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

378 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

14. The members of his Council who are chosen as a 
result of this arrangement would of course accept the position 
on the basis that they would whole-heartedly co-operate in 
supporting and carrying through the war against Japan to 
its victorious conclusion. 

15. The members of the Executive would be Indians with 
the exception of the Viceroy and the Commander-in-Chief, 
who would retain his position as War Member. This is 
essential so long as the defence of India remains a British 
responsibility. 

16. Nothing contained in any of these proposals will affect 
the relations of the Crown with the Indian States through 
the Viceroy as Crown Representative. 

17. The Viceroy has been authorised by His Majesty’s 
Government to place this proposal before the Indian Leaders. 
His Majesty’s Government trust that the leaders of the 
Indian communities will respond. For the success of such 
a plan must depend upon its acceptance in India and the 
degree to which responsible Indian politicians are prepared 
to co-operate with the object of making it a workable interim 
arrangement. In the absence of such general acceptance 
existing arrangements must necessarily continue. 

18. If such co-operation can be achieved at the Centre 
it will no doubt be reflected in the Provinces and so enable 
responsible Governments to be set up once again in those 
Provinces where, owing to the withdrawal of the majority 
party from participation, it became necessary to put into 
force the powers of the Governors under Section 93 of the 
Act of 1935. It is to be hoped that in all the Provinces 
these Governments would be based on the participation of 
the main parties, thus smoothing out communal differences 
and allowing Ministers to concentrate upon their very heavy 
administrative tasks. 

19. There is one further change which, if these proposals 
are accepted, His Majesty’s Government suggest should follow. 

20. That is, that External Affairs (other than those tribal 
and frontier matters which fall to be dealt with as part of 
the defence of India) should be placed in the charge of an 
Indian Member of the Viceroy’s Executive so far as British 
India is concerned, and that fully accredited representatives 
shall be appointed for the representation of India abroad. 

21. By their acceptance of and co-operation in this scheme 
the Indian leaders will not only be able to make their 
immediate contribution to the direction of Indian affairs, but 
it is also to be hoped that their experience of co-operation in 
government will expedite agreement between them as to the 
method of working out the new constitutional arrangements. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


379 


WHAT CONGEESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XVI 379 

22. His Majesty’s Government consider, after the most 
careful study of the question, that the plan now suggested 
gives the utmost progress practicable within the present 
constitution. None of the changes suggested will in any 
way prejudice or prejudge the essential form of the future 
permanent constitution or constitutions for India. 

23. His Majesty’s Government feel certain that given 
goodwill and a genuine desire to co-operate on all sides, both 
British and Indian, these proposals can mark a genuine step 
forward in the collaboration of the British and Indian peoples 
towards Indian self-government and can assert the rightful 
position, and strengthen the influence, of India in the counsels 
of the nations. 

(ii) Broadcast Speech by His Excellency the Viceroy at New 
Delhi on 14th June 1945. 

I have been authorised by His Majesty’s Government to 
place before Indian political leaders proposals designed to 
ease the present political situation and to advance India 
towards her goal of full self-government. These proposals are 
at the present moment being explained to Parliament by the 
Secretary of State for India. My intention in this broadcast 
is to explain to you the proposals, the ideas underlying them, 
and the method by which I hope to put them into effect. 

This is not an attempt to obtain or impose a constitutional 
settlement. His Majesty’s Government had hoped that the 
leaders of the Indian parties would agree amongst themselves 
on a settlement of the communal issue, which is the main 
stumbling-block; but this hope has not been fulfilled. 

In the meantime, India has great opportunities to be taken 
and great problems to be solved, which require a common 
effort by the leading men of all parties. I therefore propose, 
with the full support of His Majesty’s Government, to invite 
Indian leaders both of Central and Provincial politics to 
take counsel with me with a view to the formation of a new 
Executive Council more representative of organised political 
opinion. The proposed new Council would represent the main 
communities and would include equal proportions of Caste 
Hindus and Moslems. It would work, if formed, under the 
existing Constitution. But it would be an entirely Indian 
Council, except for the Viceroy and the Commander-in-Chief, 
who would retain his position as War Member. It is also 
proposed that the portfolio of External Affairs, which has 
hitherto been held by the Viceroy, should be placed in charge 
of an Indian Member of Council, so far as the interests of 
British India are concerned. 

A further step proposed by His Majesty’s Government is the 
appointment of a British High Commissioner in India, as in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


380 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

380 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dominions, to represent Great Britain’s Commercial and other 
such interests in India. 

Such a new Executive Council will, you realise, represent a 
definite advance on the road to self-government. It will be almost 
entirely Indian, and the Finance and Home Members will for the 
first time be Indians, while an Indian will also be charged with 
the management of India’s Foreign Affairs. Moreover Members 
will now be selected by the Governor- General after consultation 
with political leaders; though their appointment will of course be 
subject to the approval of His Majesty the King-Emperor. 

The Council will work within the framework of the present 
constitution ; and there can be no question of the Governor-General 
agreeing not to exercise his constitutional power of control; but it 
will of course not be exercised unreasonably. 

I should make it clear that the formation of this interim 
Government will in no way prejudice the final constitutional 
settlement. 

The main tasks for this New Executive Council would be : 

First, to prosecute the war against Japan with the utmost 
energy till Japan is utterly defeated. 

Secondly, to carry on the Government of British India, with all 
the manifold tasks of post-war development in front of it, until a 
new permanent constitution can be agreed upon and come into force. 

Thirdly, to consider, when the Members of the Goverment think 
it possible, the means by which such agreement can be achieved. 
The third task is most important. I want to make it quite clear 
that neither I nor His Majesty’s Government have lost sight of the 
need for a long-term solution, and that the present proposals are 
intended to make a long-term solution easier. 

I have considered the best means of forming such a Council; 
and have decided to invite the following to Viceregal Lodge to 
advise me: 

Those now holding office as Premier in a Provincial Government ; 
or, for Provinces now under Section 93 Government, those who 
last held the office of Premier. 

The Leader of the Congress Party and the Deputy Leader of 
the Muslim League in the Central Assembly; the leader of the 
Congress Party and the Muslim League in the Council of State; 
also the leaders of the Nationalist Party and the European Group 
in the Assembly. 

Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah as the recognised leaders of the 
two main political parties. 

Rao Bahadur N. Siva Raj to represent the Scheduled Classes. 

Master Tara Singh to represent the Sikhs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


381 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XVI 381 

Invitations to these gentlemen are being handed to them today and it 
is proposed to assemble the Conference on 25th June at Simla where 
we shall be cooler than at Delhi. 

I trust that all those invited will attend the Conference and give me 
their help. On me and on them will lie a heavy responsibility in this fresh 
attempt to make progress towards a final settlement of India’s future. 

If the meeting is successful, I hope that we shall be able to agree on 
the formation of the new Executive Council at the Centre. I also hope 
that it will be possible for Ministries to re-assume office and again 
undertake the tasks of government in the Provinces now administered 
under Section 93 of the Constitution Act and that these Ministries will 
be coalitions. 

If the meeting should unfortunately fail, we must carry on as at 
present until the parties are ready to come together. The existing 
Executive Council, which has done such valuable work for India, will 
continue it if other arrangements cannot be agreed. 

But I have every hope that the meeting will succeed, if the party 
leaders will approach the problem with the sincere intention of working 
with me and with each other. I can assure them that there is behind this 
proposal a most genuine desire on the part of all responsible leaders in 
the United Kingdom and of the British people as a whole to help India 
towards her goal. I bel eve that this is more than a step towards that 
goal, it is a considerable stride forward, and a stride on the right path. 

I should make it clear that these proposals affect British India only 
and do not make any alteration in the relations of the Princes with the 
Crown Representative. 

With the approval of His Majesty’s Government, and after 
consultation with my Council, orders have been given for the immediate 
release of the members of the Working Committee of Congress who are 
still in detention. I propose to leave the final decision about the others 
still under detention as the result of the 1942 disturbances to the new 
Central Government, if formed, and to the Provincial Governments. 

The appropriate time for fresh elections for the Central and Provincial 
Legislatures will be discussed at the Conference. 

Finally, I would ask you all to help in creating the atmosphere 
of goodwill and mutual confidence that is essential if we are to make 
progress. The destiny of this great country and of the many millions who 
live in it depend on the wisdom and good understanding of the leaders, 
both of action and of thought, British and Indian, at this critical moment 
of India’s history. 

India’s military reputation never stood higher in the world 
than it does at present; thanks to the exploits of her sons drawn 
from all parts of the country. Her representatives at International 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


382 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

382 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

conferences have won high regard for their statesmanlike attitude. 
Sympathy for India’s aspirations and progress towards prosperity 
was never greater or more widespread. We have thus great assets 
if we can use them wisely. But it will not be easy, it will not be 
quick ; there is very much to do, there are many pitfalls and dangers. 
There is on all sides something to forgive and forget. 

I believe in the future of India, and as far as in me lies will 
further her greatness. I ask you all for your co-operation and goodwill. 

(iii) Mr. Gandhi’s Statement. 

As soon as I read the broadcast, I sent a wire to His Excellency 
the Viceroy drawing his attention to the fact that I have no locus 
standi as the “recognized representative of the Congress.” That 
function belongs to the President of the Congress or whoever is 
appointed to represent the Congress on a particular occasion. 

For several years, I have acted unofficially as an adviser to the 
Congress whenever required. The public will remember that I went 
with the same unrepresentative character for my talks with the 
Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah, and I can take up no other position with the 
British Government, in this instance represented by the Viceroy. 

There is one aspect of the Viceregal broadcast which certainly 
offends my ear and, I hope, will offend that of every politically- 
minded Hindu. I refer to the expression “caste Hindus.” I claim that 
there is no such person, speaking politically, as a “Caste Hindu,” 
let alone the Congress which seeks to represent the whole of India 
which is yearning after political independence. Does Veer Savarkar 
or Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee of the Hindu Mahasabha represent 
caste Hindus ? Do they not represent all Hindus without distinction 
of caste ? Do they not include the so-called untouchables ? Do they 
themselves claim to be caste Hindus ? I hope not. Of all politically- 
minded Hindus, I know that even the revered Pandit Malaviyaji, 
though he observes caste distinction, will refuse to be called a caste 
Hindu, as distinguished from the other Hindus. Modern tendency 
in Hinduism is to abolish all caste distinctions and this I maintain 
in spite of my knowledge of reactionary elements in Hindu society. 
I can only hope, therefore, that the Viceroy has allowed himself to 
make use of the expression in utter ignorance. I want to acquit him 
of knowingly wounding the susceptibilities of the Hindu society or 
dividing it. I would not have dwelt on this matter but for the fact 
that it touches the political mind of Hindus in its sensitive spot 
and carries with it political repercussions. 

The proposed conference can do much useful work if it is put in 
its proper political setting and is at the very outset rendered immune 
from any fissiparous tendency. Undoubtedly all invitees might 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


383 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

APPENDIX XVI 383 

appear as Indians conjointly bent on achieving India’s natural goal 
and not as persons representing several sections of Indian society. 

That is how I have viewed the Bhulabhai-Liaquat Ali 
understanding which I suppose laid the foundations for the 
forthcoming Viceregal conference. Sri Bhulabhai Desai’s proposal 
has no such colouring as the Viceregal broadcast would seem to 
have. I am not ashamed of the part I have played in advising 
Sri Bhulabhai Desai when he consulted me about his proposal. 
Sri Bhulabhai Desai’s proposal, as I understood it, attracted me as 
one interested in solving the communal tangle, and I assured him 
that I would use my influence with the members of the Working 
Committee and give reasons for acceptance of his proposal and 
I have no doubt that, if both parties to the proposal correctly 
represent their constituents and have independence of India as 
their common goal, things must shape well. 

At this point, I must stop and the Working Committee has to 
take up the thread. It is for its members to declare the Congress 
mind on the impending questions. — A.P.I. 


• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


384 


INDEX 


Ambedkak, Dr. B. R. 

Memorandum to Minority Sub- 
Committee of R.T.C., Text 41-52. 
Interview with Gandhi (footnote), 56. 
Fight against Gandhi’s Attempt at 
R.T.C. to bypass Depressed Classes, 
58-62. 

On Gandhi’s Claim to represent 
Depressed Classes, 64-65. 
Agreement with Mr. Gandhi — Poona- 
Pact, 88-89. 

Statement on Temple Entry Bill, 108- 
113 

Association with Harijan Sevak Sangh, 
113 

Proposals for conducting anti- 
Untouchability League on right 
lines, 134-140 

Supplementary Memorandum on 
Political Safeguards for Depressed 
Classes, 58 ; Text, 304-306 
Statement on Gandhi’s Fast, 311-317 
Objections to Cripps’ Proposals, 336-343 
Apthekar, Herbert 

On Negroes in Civil War, 173-174 
Betrayal of Negroes, 176 
Asaf Ali 

On Congress Resolution on Depressed 
Classes, 2-3 

Bannerjee, Surendranath 

Congress and Social Reform, 9-10 
Bannebjee, W. C. 

Congress and Social Reform, 8-9 
Besant, Annie 

On Admission of Depressed Class 
boys to common school, 3-7 
Birla, G. D. 

Statements on programme and objects 
of Anti-Untouchability League, 
126-129, 140-141 
Chandavarkar, Sir Narayan 

Meeting of Depressed Classes under 
his chairmanship, 14-15, 17-18. 
Congress, Indian National 

Resolution and Speeches on removal 
of disabilities of Depressed 
Classes, 1-3 

Addresses of Presidents re attitude to 
social reforms, 7-10 
Genesis of Resolution on Depressed 
Classes, 14-18 

Absence of action on resolution, 18 
Bardoli social amelioration 
programme, 19-20 

Fate of programme re Untouchables, 
21-22 


Reasons for abandoning responsibility 
for welfare of Untouchables, 23-24 
Part in elections to seats reserved for 
Untouchables, 93-94. 

Policy of exclusion of Untouchables 
from Cabinets, 97-98 
Principles in selecting candidates for 
elections, 100-101, 222 
Prevents Untouchable Congressmen 
from ventilating grievances, 101- 
102 

Examination of its claim to be majority 
party, 146-149, 201. 

Examination of its claim to represent 
Untouchables (tables 10-16), 155- 
161 

Sanctions it forged, 166 
Fight for freedom or power, 167, 169, 
177-178 

Fallacies in denying separate political 
entity of Untouchables, 185-189 
Fighting for whose freedom, 201-202, 
204, 231, 236, 238 

Gandhi on its financial resources, 208 
Outrageous use of despised 

communities to ridicule elections, 
210-211 

Promises to servile classes of social 
amelioration in Swaraj, 212 
Puts Brahmin and Bania in power in 
1937 elections, 217-224 
Connection between — and governing 
classes, 233-234 
Cripps, Sir Stafford 

His proposals (text), 334-336; See also 
Ambedkar 
Democracy 

Grote on the essentials of, 202-203 
Causes of the failure of, 203 
Errors in views of western writers on, 
203 

Realistic approach to, 204 
And Gandhism, 283-285 
Depressed Classes 

Reaction to Montford scheme, 14-16, 17 
Scheme of political safeguards for the 
protection of , 41-52 
Gandhi s explanation of Congress 
attitude to, 56-57 
Gandhi's claim to be their 
representative, 64-65 
Gandhi’s reaction to recognition of 
separate political entity of, 68-69, 
70-71 

Communal decision regarding, 80-82 
Benefits from Poona Pact and from 
Communal Award to, 90-91 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


385 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

INDEX 385 


Lossin elections under Poona Pact, 95 
Non-representation in Provincial 
cabinets, 95-97 

Difficulties in contests with Congress, 
162-165 

Non-participation in the ‘ fight for 
freedom,’ 167-168 

Their conception of freedom, 168-170 
Constitutional safeguards condition 
precedent to co-operation with 
Congress, 170, 171-173 
Fight for freedom of negro slaves, 
lesson thereof, 173-177 
Suspicions about Congress fight 
for freedom without communal 
settlement, 178 

Want Congress to put to test British 
promise, 179-180 
Real issue of controversy with 
Congress, 181, 232 
Are they Hindus ? 183-189 
Their own view of their own problem, 
189-191 

— and social divisions in Europe — a 
difference, 191-194 
Is Untouchabilty vanishing ? 194-196, 
198 

Slavery versus their economic tutelage, 
196-197 

— and Indian press, 200 
Reasons for not challenging Congress 
propaganda, 200 

View of governing classes’ ridicule of 
communal reservation, 228-230 
Do they need safeguards, 232-233 
Mahad and Nasik Satyagraha, 247 
Reasons for safeguards demanded at 
R.T.C., 248-249 

Reasons for regarding Gandhi neither 
earnest, honest and- sincere nor 
friend and ally, 254, 257, 260 
Lot under rule of Gandhism, 293-294, 
296-297 

Minorities Pact, 307 
Pronouncements of British Government 
recognising their separate entity, 
323-331 

Political demands, 346-353 
Constituencies, seats and voting 

strength Province by Province, 356- 
366 [vide also Election] 

Dksai, Bhulabhai 

Support, to Congress resolution on 
Depressed Classes, 2 
Dicey, A. V. 

Limitations on sovereignty of 
Independent States, 213-214 
Elections 

Primary elections under Poona Pact, 
91-92 

Congress Parliamentary Board’s 
principles in selecting candidates 
for 100-101, 222 


Congress strength in Provincial 

Assemblies and Councils according 
to 1936— (Tables, 6-7), 147 
Abstract of votes cast for Congress and 
non-Congress parties (Table, 8), 148 
Disabilities of non-Congress candidates 
in, 149 

Explanation of Indian electoral system, 
150-155 

Examination of the returns of, 156-161 
Joint electorate versus separate 
electorate, 191 

Classification of Congress members of 
Provincial Assemblies by castes and 
occupations (tables), 219-220 
Composition of cabinets in Congress 
provinces (table), 221 
Classification of Parliamentary 

secretaries in Congress provinces 
(table), 223 

Particulars re — to seats reserved 
for Scheduled castes Province by 
Province, 366-368 
Fischer, Louis 

Congress finances, 208, 209 
Foreigner 

Attitude to Congress, 167 
Charge against Untouchables and its 
falsity, 167 

Reasons of support for Congress, 
199,201-202 

Basic considerations of Indian politics 
he must know, 231-234 
Three groups, 234 
Indifference of foreign radicals to 
Indian Depressed Classes, 235-238 
Gandhi, M. K. 

Transformation of Congress policy, 19, 
166-167 

Bardoli programme, 19-20, 243-244 
Profession and practice re abolition of 
Untouphability, 36-39 
As representative to R.T.C., 55-56 
Attitude to Untouchables in Federal 
Structure Committee, 56-57 
Attempt to bypass Untouchables by 
pact with Muslims, 58-67, 71-74 
Reaction to Minorities Pact, 68-69 
Opposition to claims for political 

safeguards to Untouchables, 70-71, 
249, 269-270, 272-273 
Threat to revive Civil Disobedience 
movement and arrest, 77 
Letter to Secretary of State opposing 
claims of Untouchables, 77-79 
Attempt to get Communal Award 
revised — letter to Prime Minister 
and reply, 82-87 
Protest by fast, 87-88, 259 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


386 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


386 

Determination to exclude Untouchables 
from cabinets, 98-100 
His Depressed Class welfare activity, 
104-107 

Opposition to Untouchables entering 
Hindu temples before 1932, 107 
Reasons for support to Temple-entry 
movement, 107 

Unrealised threat of fast re Guru-vayur 
temple satyagraha, 115-117, 250 
Temple Entry Bill, a touchstone of his 
sincerity, 117-125, 250 
Establishment of Harijan Sevak Sangh, 
126, 250 

Collection of funds for Harijan Sevak 
Sangh, 129 

Justification of exclusion of 

Untouchables from management of 
Harijan Sevak Sangh, 142 
Content with Provincial autonomy at 
R.T.C. (footnote), 179 
On Congress resources, 208 
Propaganda about him to beguile 
Untouchables, 239-240 
First realisation of sin of Untouch- 
ability, 240-241 

A Biographical note, 242-243,244-245 
Opportunity to advance anti-Un- 
touchability campaign lost, 246 
Condemns satyagraha by Untouchables 
to establish rights, 247-248 
Fourteen questions on his anti- 

Untouchability activities, 251-254 
Examination of earnestness, honesty 
and sincerity of attitude to 
Untouchables, 254-258, 260 
Admits Depressed Classes to be 
minority, 257-258 
Was the fast heroic ? 259-260 
Failure of anti-Untoucliability 
campaign, 261-262 
Kavitha incident, 264-265 
Attitude to Untouchables contrasted 
with Lincoln’s to Negro question, 
271-272 

What is Gandhism, 274-275 
Views on Caste system and their 
examination, 275-277, 286-289 
Upholding of Varna system, 277-278, 
289-290 

Opposition to machinery and modern 
civilisation, 278-279 
Elimination of class war and strikes, 
279-281 

Views on relationship between 
landlords and tenants, 281 
Nothing new in Gandhian analysis of 
economic ills, 282-283 
Anti-Democratic nature of Gandhism, 
283-285 

Idea of trusteeship by the rich, 286-291 


Idealisation of poverty and degrading 
professions, 291-293 
Scope of his programme for removal of 
Untouchability, 294-295 
Gandhism same as orthodox Hinduism, 
295-296 

As God on earth, 296 
Correspondence with Lord Wavell, 
343-346 

Statement on Wavell Plan, 382-383 
Governing Classes 

Their anti-democratic role, 208-209 — of 
India, 204 

Attitude of the people to Brahmins, 
205-206 

In Malabar (footnoted), 205 
Preponderance of Brahmins in gazetted 
posts (table), 206, 207 
Alliance of Brahmin with Bania, 206, 
208 

Congressmen of — conscious of their 
destiny to rule, 208-209 
Philosophy of Brahmanism, 215 
Brahmin support to social wrongs and 
evils, 216 

Bania, the parasitic governing class, 
216-217 

— in India and in other countries — a 
comparison, 225-226, 232-233 
— in India ridicule Communal 
reservation, 226-229 
How they obtained, power in India, 
230-231 

Why in vanguard of Congress 
movement, 233-234 
Hammond Committee 
Its task, 91 

Hindu contention before, 92-93 
Harijan Sevak Sangh 
Establishment of, 126 
Aims and programme, 127, 250 
Proposed annual budget, 127-130 
Summary of its activities, 129-131 
Its board, 133 

Causes of hostility of Untouchables to, 
131-132, 

Why Ambedkar retired from the Board, 
133-140 

Departure from the original aims, 140, 
143-144 

Discrimination against Mahar 
community, 144 
Languishing institution, 251 
The evil results of, 266-269 
Hindus 

Evidence before Franchise Committee 
on Depressed Class population, 
75-77 

Demand for compulsory distributive 
vote for Depressed Classes, 91-93 
Confirm Poona Pact, 103 
A communal majority, 169-172 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


387 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

INDEX 387 


Are Depressed Classes — ? 183-189 
Adaptability of their religion, 195-196 
Economic gains from Untouchability 
196-197 

Gandhism and their religion, 295-296 
Iyer, Rama 

On Congress Resolution on Depressed 
Classes, 2 
Minorities 

— Pact, genesis of, 67-68 
— Pact text, 307-311 
— and weightage, Montford Report on, 
332 

Report of the Indian Statutory 
Committee on ,333-334 
Communal Distribution of Population 
in Provinces and States (tables), 
354-355 

Naoroji, Dadabhai 

On Congress attitude to social reform, 
7-8 

Natesan 

On Congress Resolution re Depressed 
Classes, 1 

Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal 

Conscious of his Brahmin origin 
(footnote), 208-209 
Nehru, Pandit Motilal 
See Shradhanand 
Pandit, Vijayalaxmi 

Pride in Brahmin origin (footnote), 209 
Paranjpe, Db. R. P. 

Parody ridiculing demands of servile 
classes for communal reservations 
(footnote), 226-229 
Patel, Vallabhbhai 

Contempt for low castes, 209 
Poona Pact 
Text, 88-89 

Comparison of gains from, with those 
from Communal Award, 90-91 
Origin of, 249 
Prime Minister, 67 

Instructions to Franchise Committee, 
75-76 

Communal Decision, 80-82 
Reply to Mr. Gandhi re Depressed 
Classes, 83-86 
Rajah, Diwan Bahadur M. C. 

Support to Temple Entry Bill, 113-114 
Ranga Iyer 

On fate of his Temple Entry Bill, 120- 
124, 

Round Table Conference 
Inauguration of, 40 

Attempt of Minority Sub-Committee to 
solve communal question, 41 
Extracts from report of Minority Sub- 
Committee, 52-54 
Federal Structure Committee on 
representations of Untouchables to 
legislatures, 54 
Congress attitude to, 55 


Extracts from proceedings of 

Minorities Committee re Depressed 
Classes, 58-67 
Communal Decision, 80-82 
See also Ambedkar 
Shradhanand, Swami 

Correspondence with Nehru on Bardoli 
programme for Untouchables, 299- 
303 

Shbinivasan, Rao Bahadub R. 

On Temple entry, 113 
Supplementary memorandum on 
political safeguards for Depressed 
Classes, 304-306 
Social Conference, Indian 
National 

Origin of, 1 1 
Opposition to, 12-13 
Untouchable support to, 190 
Social Reform Party 
Formation of, 12 
Sub- Committees of, 12-13 
Social Reform versus Political Reform, 
12-14 

Temple Entby 

Reports of, 104-106 
Ambedkar on the Bill for, 108-113 
Rao Bahadur R. Shrinivasan on, 113 
Results of the campaign for, 114-115 
Guruvayur Temple satyagraha, 115- 
117 

Bill for, 117-125 
Nasik satyagraha, 247 
Thakker, A. V. 

Statements on the programme and 
objects of Anti-Untouchability 
League, 126-129, 140-141 
Attempt to punish Mahar community 
for anti-Congress sentiments, 144- 
145 

Tilak, B. G. 

Conscious of being a Brahmin, 208 
Advice to low. castes not to aspire to 
power, 209 

Tilak Memorial Swaraj Fund 
Objects of starting, 19 
Total receipts (table), 25 
Grants from, 26-32 
Distribution (tables), 32-33 
Analysis of grants from and 
management of 32-33, 34-35 
Grants from for Untouchable uplift 
work, 35-36 
Tyabji, Hon. B. 

On Congress attitude to question of 
Social Reform, 8 
Wavell, Lord 

Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, 
343-346 

His Plan, 376-379 

Broadcast speech on the Plan, 379-382 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 388 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


389 



MR. GANDHI 

AND THE EMANCIPATION OF 
THE UNTOUCHABLES 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 390 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


391 


MR. GANDHI 
AND 


THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


392 


■ Thackar & Co.’s 

First Edition : December 1943 

■ Government of Maharashtra’s 
Reprint: 1990 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


393 


Mr. GANDHI 

AND THE 

EMANCIPATION 

OF THE 

UNTOUCHABLES 


By 

The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR 
M. A., Ph. D., D. Sc, Barrister-At-Law 
Member, Governor-General’s Executive Council. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 394 


blank 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK SJ+YS 30-9-20 1 3/VS- 14-1 1-2013 395 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PAGE 

PREFACE ... ... ... ... 397 

CHAPTER I- TOTAL POPULATION OF THE ... 399 

UNTOUCHABLES 

CHAPTER II- THE IMPORTANCE OF THE ... 401 

UNTOUCHABLES 

CHAPTER III- THE POLITICAL DEMANDS OF THE ... 403 

UNTOUCHABLES 

CHAPTER IV- HINDU OPPOSITION ... ... 407 

CHAPTER V- JOINT V/S SEPARATE ELECTORATES 412 

CHAPTER VI - THE EXECUTIVE ... ... ... 415 

CHAPTER VII - PUBLIC SERVICES ... ... ... 417 

CHAPTER VIII - SEPARATE SETTLEMENTS ... 419 

CHAPTER IX - CASTE AND CONSTITUTION ... 423 

CHAPTER X - SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS 425 

AND THEIR FRIENDS 


INDEX 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 396 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


397 


PREFACE 

In response to the invitation of the Chairman of the Indian 
section of the Institute of Pacific Relations, I wrote in August 
last year a Paper on the Problem of the Untouchables of India 
for the Session of the Conference which was due to be held on 
December 1942 at Mont’ Tramblant in Quebec in Canada. The 
Paper is printed in the proceedings of the Conference. Ever 
since it became known that I had written such a Paper, the 
leaders of the Untouchables and Americans interested in their 
problem have been pressing me to issue it separately in the 
form of a book and make it available to the general public. 
It was not possible to refuse the demand. At the same time I 
could not without breach of etiquette publish the paper until 
the proceedings of the Conference were made public. I am now 
told by the Secretary of the Pacific Relations Conference that 
the proceedings have been made public and there can be no 
objection to the publication of my Paper if I desired it. This 
will explain why the Paper is published nearly 10 months 
after it was written. 

Except for a few verbal alterations the Paper is printed 
as it was presented to the Conference. The Paper will speak 
for itself. There is only one thing I would like to add. It is 
generally agreed among the thoughtful part of humanity that 
there are three problems which the Peace Conference is expected 
to tackle. They are (1) Imperialism, (2) Racialism, (3) Anti- 
semitism and (4) Free Traffic in that merchandise of death 
popularly called munitions. There is no doubt these are the 
plague glands in which nation’s cruelty to nation and man’s 
inhumanity to man have their origin. There is no doubt that 
these problems must be tackled if a new and a better world 
is to emerge from the ashes of this terrible and devastating 
war. What my fear is that the problem of the Untouchables 
may be forgotten as it has been so far. That would indeed be a 
calamity. For the ills which the Untouchables are sufferings if 
they are not as much advertised as those of the Jews, are not 
less real. Nor are the means and the methods of suppression 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


398 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

398 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

used by the Hindus against the Untouchables less effective because 
they are less bloody than the ways which the Nazis have adopted 
against the Jews. The Anti-semitism of the Nazis against the 
Jews is in no way different in ideology and in effect from the 
Sanatanism of the Hindus against the Untouchables. 

The world owes a duty to the Untouchables as it does to all 
suppressed people to break their shackles and to set them free. 
I accepted the invitation to write this Paper because I felt that 
it was the best opportunity to draw the attention of the world to 
this problem in comparison to which the problem of the Slaves, 
the Negroes and the Jews is nothing. I hope the publication of 
this Paper will serve as a notice to the Peace Conference that 
this problem will be on the Board of Causes which it will have 
to hear and decide and also to the Hindus that they will have 
to answer for it before the bar of the world. 

22, Prithviraj Road 

New Delhi B. R. AMBEDKAR 

1st September 1943. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


399 


CHAPTER I 

TOTAL POPULATION OF THE 
UNTOUCHABLES 

The Decennial Census in India was at one time a very 
simple and innocent operation which interested only the 
Malthusians. None else took interest in it. Today the Census 
is a matter of a first rate concern to everybody. Not only 
the professional politician but the general public in India 
regards it as a matter of very grave concern. This is so 
because Politics in India has become a matter of numbers. It 
is numbers which give political advantage, to one community 
over another which does not happen anywhere else in the 
world. The result is that the Census in India is deliberately 
cooked for securing political advantages which numbers give. 
In this cooking of the Census the Hindus, the Muslims and 
the Sikhs have played their part as the chief chefs of the 
kitchen. The Untouchables and the Christians, who are also 
interested in their numbers, have no hand in the cooking of 
the Census, for the simple reason that they have no place in 
the administrative services of the country which deal with the 
operations of the Census. On the other hand the Untouchables 
are the people who are quartered, cooked and served by the 
Hindus, Muslims and the Sikhs at every Decennial Census. 
This has happened particularly in the last Census of 1940. The 
Untouchables of certain parts of the Punjab were subjected 
to systematic tyranny and oppression by the Sikhs. The 
object was to compel them to declare in the Census returns 
that they are Sikhs even though they are not. This reduced 
the number of the Untouchables and swelled the number of 
the Sikhs. The Hindus on their part carried on a campaign 
that nobody should declare his or her caste in the Census 
return. A particular appeal was made to me Untouchables. 
It was suggested to them that it is the name of the Caste 
that proclaims to the world that they are Untouchables 
and if they did not declare their caste name but merely 
said that they were Hindus, they would be treated just like 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


30-9-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


400 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

400 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

other Hindus and nobody would know that they were really 
Untouchables. The Untouchables fell a victim to this stratagem 
and decided not to declare themselves as Untouchables in the 
Census return but to call themselves merely as Hindus. The 
result was obvious. It reduced the number of Untouchables, and 
swelled the ranks of the Hindus. To what extent the cooking of 
the Census has taken place it is difficult to say. But there can 
be no doubt that the degree to which cooking was resorted to 
was considerable. The Census has been cooked all over. But it 
is the Untouchables who have suffered most from the cooking 
of the Census. That being so, the Census figure regarding the 
total population of the Untouchables in British India cannot be 
accepted as giving a correct total. But one cannot be far wrong 
if it was said that the present number of the Untouchables in 
British India is round about 60 million people. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


401 


401 


CHAPTER II 

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 

Most parts of the world have had their type of what Ward 
calls the lowly. The Romans had their slaves, the Spartans their 
helots, the British their villeins, the Americans their Negroes and 
the Germans their Jews. So the Hindus have their Untouchables. 
But none of these can be said to have been called upon to face a 
fate which is worse than the fate which pursues the Untoucables. 
Slavery, serfdom, villeinage have all vanished. But Untouchability 
still exists and bids fair to last as long as Hinduism will last. 
The Untouchable is worse off than a Jew. The sufferings of the 
Jew are of his own creation. Not so are the sufferings of the 
Untouchables. They are the result of a cold calculating Hinduism 
which is not less sure in its effect in producing misery than brute 
force is. The Jew is despised but is not denied opportunities to 
grow. The Untouchable is not merely despised but is denied all 
opportunities to rise. Yet nobody seems to take any notice of 
the Untouchables— some 60 millions of souls— much less espouse 
their cause. 

If there is any cause of freedom in this Indian turmoil for 
independence it is the cause of the Untouchables. The cause of 
the Hindus and the cause of the Mussalmans is not the cause 
of freedom. Theirs is a Struggle for power as distinguished from 
freedom. Consequently it has always been a matter of surprise 
to me that no party and no organisation devoted to the cause of 
freedom has so far interested itself in the Untouchables. There 
is the American Weekly called “The Nation”. There is the British 
Weekly called “Statesman”. Both are powerful. Both are friends of 
India’s freedom. I would mention the American Labour and British 
Labour among organized bodies among the supporters of India’s 
freedom. So far as I know none of these have ever championed the 
cause of the Untouchables. Indeed what they have done is what 
no lover of freedom would do. They have just identified themselves 
with the Hindu body calling itself the Indian National Congress. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


402 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

402 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now everybody in India, outside the Hindus, knows that whatever 
may be its title it is beyond question that the Congress is a body 
of middle class Hindus supported by the Hindu Capitalists whose 
object is not to make Indians free but to be independent of British 
control and to occupy places of power now occupied by the British. 
If the kind of Freedom which the Congress wants was achieved 
there is no doubt that the Hindus would do to the Untouchables 
exactly what they have been doing in the past. In the light of 
this apathy the Indian branch of the Institute of International 
Affairs may well be congratulated for having invited a paper for 
submission to the Institute of Pacific Relations, discussing the 
position of the Untouchables in India in the New Constitution. I 
must confess that this invitation for a statement on the position 
of the Untouchables under the new constitution came to me as an 
agreeable surprise and a great relief and it is because of this, that 
notwithstanding the many things with which I am preoccupied, 
I agreed to find time to prepare this paper. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


403 


CHAPTER III 

THE POLITICAL DEMANDS OF THE 
UNTOUCHABLES 

The problem of the Untouchables is an enormous problem. 
As a matter of fact I have been for some time engaged on a 
work dealing with this problem which will run into several 
hundred pages. All that I can do within the limits of this 
paper is to set out in a brief compass what the nature of 
the problem is and the solution which the Untouchables 
have themselves propounded. It seems to me that I cannot 
do better than begin by drawing attention to the following 
Resolutions which were passed at the All-India Scheduled 
Castes* Conference held in the city of Nagpur on the 18th 
and 19th July 1942 

Resolution No. II 

CONSENT ESSENTIAL TO 
CONSTITUTION 

“This Conference declares that no constitution will be 
acceptable to the Scheduled Castes unless, 

(i) it has the consent of the Scheduled Castes, 

(ii) it recognises the fact that the Scheduled Castes 
are distinct and separate from the Hindus and 
constitute an important element in the national 
life of India, and 

(iii) contains within itself provisions which will give 
to the Scheduled Castes a real sense of security 
under the new constitution and which are set 
out in the following resolutions.” 

*Under the Government of India Act of 1935 the Untouchables are designated 
as ‘Scheduled Castes’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


404 


404 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Resolution No. Ill 

ESSENTIAL PROVISIONS IN THE 

NEW CONSTITUTION 

“For creating this sense of security in the Scheduled 
Castes; this Conference demands that the following provisions 
shall be made in the new Constitution 

(1) That in the budget of every provincial Government 
an annual sum as may be determined upon by 
agreement be set apart for promoting the primary 
education among the children of the Scheduled 
Castes and another annual sum for promoting 
advanced education among them, and such sums 
shall be declared to be the first charge on the 
revenues of the Province. 

(2) That provision shall be made by law for securing 
representation to the Scheduled Castes in all 
Executive Governments-Central and Provincial- 
the proportion of which shall be determined in 
accordance with their number, their needs and their 
importance. 

(3) That provision shall be made by law for securing 
representation to the Scheduled Castes in the Public 
Services the proportion of which shall be fixed in 
accordance with their number, their needs and their 
importance. This Conference further insists that 
in the case of security services such as Judiciary, 
Police and Revenue, provision shall be made that 
the proportion fixed for the Scheduled Castes shall, 
subject to the rule of minimum qualification, be 
realized within a period of ten years. 

(4) That provision shall be made by law for guaranteeing 
to the Scheduled Castes representation in all 
Legislatures and Local bodies in accordance with 
their number, needs and importance. 

(5) That provision shall be made by law whereby 
there presentation of the Scheduled Castes in all 
Legislatures and Local Bodies shall be by the method 
of Separate Electorates. 

(6) That provision shall be made by law for the 
representation of the Scheduled Castes on all Public 
Service Commissions, Central and Provincial.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


405 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

THE POLITICAL DEMANDS OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 405 

Resolution No. IV. 

SEPARATE SETTLEMENTS 

“It is the considered opinion of this conference, 

(a) that so long as the Scheduled Castes continue to 
live on the outskirts of the Hindu village, with 
no source of livelihood and in small number as 
compared to Hindus, they will continue to remain 
Untouchables and subject to the tyranny and 
oppression of the Hindus and will not be able 
to enjoy free and full life. 

(b) That for the better protection of the Scheduled 
Castes from the tyranny and oppression of the 
Caste Hindus, which may take a worse form 
under Swaraj which cannot but be a Hindu Raj, 
and 

(c) to enable the Scheduled Castes to develop to their 
fullest manhood, to give them economical and 
social security as also to pave the way for the 
removal of untouchability.” 

This Conference has after long and mature deliberation 
come to the conclusion that a radical change must be made 
in the village system now prevalent in India and which is the 
parent of all the ills from which the Scheduled Castes are 
suffering for so many centuries at the hands of the Hindus. 
Realising the necessity of these changes this conference holds 
that along with the Constitutional changes in the system of 
Government there must be a change in the village system now 
prevalent, made along the following lines : 

(1) The constitution should provide for the transfer of the 
Scheduled Castes from their present habitation and 
form separate Scheduled Caste villages away from and 
independent of Hindu village. 

(2) For the settlemernt of the Scheduled Castes in new 
villages a provision shall be made by the constitution 
for the establishment of a Settlement Commission. 

(3) All Government land which is cultivable and which is not 
occupied shall be handed over to the Commission to be 
held in trust for the purpose of making new settlements 
of the Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


406 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

406 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(4) The Commission shall be empowered to purchase new land 
under the Land Acquisition Act from private owners to 
complete the scheme of settlement of Scheduled Castes. 

(5) The constitution shall provide that the Central Government 
shall grant to the Settlement Commission a minimum sum 
of Rupees five crores per annum to enable the Commission 
to carry out their duty in this behalf. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


407 


CHAPTER IV 

HINDU OPPOSITION 

The demands set forth in those resolutions fall into three 
categories (1) Political, (2) Educational and (3) Economic and Social. 

Taking the political demands first it is obvious that they ask 
for three safeguards 

(1) That the Legislature shall not be merely representative 
of the people but it shall be representative separately of 
both categories Hindus as well as Untouchables. 

(2) That the Executive shall not be merely responsible to 
the Legislature, which means to the Hindus, but shall 
also be responsible both to the Hindus as well as to the 
Untouchables. 

(3) That the administration shall not be merely efficient but 
shall also be worthy of trust by all sections of the people 
and also of the Untouchables and shall contain sufficient 
number of representatives of the Untouchables holding key 
positions so that the Untouchables may have confidence , 
in it. 

These Political demands of the Untouchables have been the 
subject matter of great controversy between the Untouchables 
and the Hindus. Mr. Gandhi, the friend of the Untouchables, 
preferred to fast unto death rather than consent to them and 
although he yielded he is not reconciled to the justice underlying 
these demands. It will be well if I set out at this stage what the 
Hindu or the Congress Scheme of representative Government is. 
It is as follows 

(1) The Legislature to be elected by Constituencies which are 
to be purely territorial. 

(2) The Executive to be drawn solely from the Majority party 
in the Legislature. 

(3) The Administration to be run by a public service based 
entirely upon considerations of efficiency. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


408 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

408 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Hindus of the Congress describe their own pet scheme 
as a National Scheme and call the scheme put forth by the 
Untouchables as the Communal Scheme. As I will show, there 
is no substance in this distinction. It is a case of damning what 
you do not like by the easy method of giving it a bad and a 
repelling name. Such tactics can’t give strength to a case which 
is inherently weak. To expose its weakness let me examine 
the merits of the socalled National Scheme. Before proceeding 
it might be desirable to note the points of agreement and the 
points of difference between the two. Both have the same object, 
inasmuch as both stand for a representative Legislature. The 
point of difference lies in the method of devising a scheme which 
will make the Legislature a truly representative Legislature. 
The so-called national scheme insists upon the territorial 
constituency as being both proper and sufficient for producing 
a representative Legislature in India. What is called the 
Communal Scheme denies that a territorial constitution can 
produce a truly representative legislature in India in view of 
the peculiar social structure of the Indian Society as it exists 
today. The issue can a purely territorial constituency produce 
a really representative legislature in India ? It is round this 
issue that the controversy has centered. 

The so-called National Scheme of the Hindus generally 
appeals to the Westerner and he prefers it to the so-called 
Communal Scheme. This is largely because the Westerner 
knows and is accustomed only to the system of territorial 
constituency. But there can be no doubt that this so-called 
National Scheme is on merits quite unsound and on motives 
worse than communal. 

That it is unsound will be quite obvious to any one who 
will stop to examine the assumptions which are involved in the 
alleged efficacy and sufficiency of the territorial constituency. 
What are these assumptions ? To mention only those which 
are most important, 

(1) It assumes that the majority of voters in a constituency 
represents the will of the constituency as a whole. 

(2) That it is enough to take stock of the general will of the 
constituency as expressed by the majority and mat the 
will of any particular section however much it may be 
in conflict with the will of the majority may be ignored 
without remorse and without being guilty of any inequity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


409 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

HINDU OPPOSITION 409 

(3) That the representative who is elected by the voters will 
represent the wishes and interests of the voters and that 
there is not the danger of the representative allowing 
the interest of his class to dominate and override the 
interests and wishes of the voter who elects him. 

Every one of these assumptions is a false assumption 
unjustified by any theory and unsupported by experience. 
The history of Parliamentary Government furnishes abundant 
proof in support of this assertion and even the history of 
England tells the same tale. It is wrong to suppose that the 
majority in all circumstances can be trusted to represent the 
will of all sections of people in the constituency. As a matter 
of fact it can never do so to any satisfactory degree. If at all, 
it can only give a very pale reflection of the general will and 
even that capacity for pale reflection must depend upon how 
numerous and varied are the interests which are consciously 
shared by the different sections of the constituency and how 
full and free is the intereplay between them. It is obvious that 
where, as in India, there are no interest which are shared, 
where there is no full and free interplay and where there are 
no common cycles of participation for the different sections, 
one section large or small cannot represent the will of the 
other. The will of the majority is the will of the majority and 
nothing more, and no amount of logical ingenuity can alter 
the fact and to give effect to it is to allow full play to the 
tyranny of the Majority. 

Again it is wrong to suppose that the representative elected 
to the Legislature will represent the wishes of the voters who 
elect him and forget or subordinate the interests of the class 
to which he belongs. The case of the representative is a case 
of divided loyalties. He is confronted with two-rather with 
three- conflicting duties (1) a duty to himself, (2) a duty to the 
class to which he belongs, and (3) a duty to the voters who 
have elected him. Omitting the first from our consideration 
it is common experience that the representative prefers the 
interests of his class to that of his voters. And why should 
any one expect him to act otherwise ? It is in the nature of 
things that a man’s self should be nearer to him than his 
constituency. There is a homely saying that man’s skin sits 
closer to him than his shirt. To the members of the Legislature 
it is true more often than not that his class is his skin 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


410 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

410 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and the constituency is a shirt which it is unnecessary to say 
is one degree removed than the skin. 

The Hindu therefore in relying upon the territorial 
constituency is seeking to base the political structure of India 
upon foundations which all political architects have declared 
to be unsound. The territorial constituency has long since been 
regarded even in European countries as a discredited piece of 
political mechanism. In great many European countries the 
representative system based on territorial constituency has 
been wound up and repalced by other systems of Government 
largely because the territorial system of representation 
produced neither good Government nor efficient Government. 
In other countries where representative institutions have 
survived there is an acute discontent with the result produced 
by the system of territorial constituencies. The proposals for 
occupational and functional representation, the proposals 
for referendum and recall all furnish proof, if proof is really 
wanted, that there is a great body of enlightened and intelligent 
opinion which is definitely against the system of territorial 
constituency. 

In these circumstances the question as to why the Hindu 
insists upon a political mechanism which is discredited 
everywhere excites a certain amount of curiosity. The 
reason he gives is that it is the only mechanism which is 
consistent with nationalism. I am not convinced that this 
is the real explanation. The real explanation to my mind is 
very different. The Hindu prefers the territorial constituency 
because he knows that it will enable him to collect and 
concentrate all political power in the hands of the Hindus, 
and who can deny that his calculation is incorrect ? In a 
purely territorial constituency the contest, the Hindu knows, 
will be between a huge majority of Hindu voters and a 
small minority of Untouchable voters. Given this fact the 
Hindu majority - if it is a purely territorial constituency - is 
bound to win in all constituencies. But the Hindus besides 
relying upon their majority can also rely upon other factors 
which cannot but work to strengthen that majority. Those 
factors have their origin in the peculiar nature of the Hindu 
Society. The Hindu Social system which places communities 
one above the other is a factor which is bound to have its 
efect on the result of voting. By the Hindu Social system the 
Communities are placed in an ascending scale of reverence 
and a decending scale of contempt. It needs no prophet 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


411 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

HINDU OPPOSITION 411 

to predict what effect these social attitudes will have on voting. 
No Caste Hindu will cast a vote in favour of an Untouchable 
candidate, for to him he is too contemptible a person to go to the 
Legislature. On the other hand there will be found many voters 
among the Untouchables who would willingly cast their votes for a 
Hindu candidate in preference to an Untouchable candidate. That 
is because he is taught to revere the former more than himself or 
his Untouchable kinsmen. I am not mentioning the other means 
which are often resorted to for catching votes of the poor, illiterate, 
unconscious, unorganised body of voters which the Untouchables 
are. A combination of all these circumstances is bound to work 
in the direction of augmenting the representation of the Hindus. 
Under a system of purely territorial constituencies it is quite 
certain the Hindus will have assured to them a majority. They 
can draw for their majority upon themselves as well as upon the 
Untouchables. It is equally certain that the Untouchables will 
lose all seats. They must; firstly because they are a minority, 
and secondly because the Hindus can successfully exploit the 
weaknesses of the Untouchables which makes them offer their 
votes to the Hindus as one offers burnt meat to his gods. 

Understood in the light of these forces which are sure to 
make the territorial constituency profitable to the Hindus by 
enabling them to loot the political power which the Untouchable 
would become possessed of if the Communal Scheme came into 
operation, there can be no doubt that the National Scheme is 
from the result side, if not from the motive side, worse than the 
Communal Scheme. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


412 


CHAPTER V 

JOINT V/S SEPARATE ELECTORATES 

The Hindus have after a long struggle accepted the view that 
a purely territorial constituency will not do in a country like 
India. In a sense the previous discussion regarding the controversy 
between territorial constituency and communal constituency as two 
rival methods of bringing about a truly representative legislature 
was unnecessary. But I stated the case for and against because 
I felt that the foreigners who are not aware of Indian Political 
conditions ought to know the basic conceptions underlying that 
controversy. Unfortunately, however, the fact is that although the 
Hindus have accepted the basic argument in favour of communal 
scheme of representation they have not accepted all what the 
Untouchables are demanding. The Untouchables demand that 
their representation shall be by separate electorates. A separate 
electorate means an electorate composed exclusively of Untouchable 
voters who are to elect an Untouchable as their representative 
to the legislature. The Hindus agree that certain number of 
seats are to be reserved for Untouchables to be filled only by 
Untouchables. But they insist that the Untouchables who is to be 
the representative of the Untouchables in the Legislature should 
be elected by a mixed electorate consisting both of the Hindus as 
well as of the Untouchables and not by an electorate exclusively of 
the Untouchables. In other words there is still a controversy over 
the question of joint versus separate electorates. Here again I want 
to set out the pros and cons of this controversy. The objection to 
separate electorate raised by the Hindus is that separate electorate 
means the fragmentation of the nation. The reply is obvious. First 
of all, there is no nation of Indians in the real sense of the word. 
The nation does not exist, it is to be created, and I think it will 
be admitted that the suppression of a distinct and a separate 
community is not the method of creating a nation. Secondly, it is 
conceded — as the Hindus have done — that Untouchables should be 
represented in that Legislature by Untouchable then it cannot be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


413 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

JOINT V/S SEPARATE ELECTORATES 413 

denied that the Untouchable must be a true representative of 
the Untouchable voters. If this is a correct position then separate 
electorate is the only mechanism by which real representation 
can be guaranteed to the Untouchables. The Hindu argument 
against separate electorate is insubstantial and unsupportable. 
The premises on which the political demands of the Untouchables 
are based are admitted by the Hindus. Separate electorate is 
only a consequence which logically follows from those premises. 
How can you admit the premise and deny the conclusion? Special 
electorates are devised as a means of protecting the minorities. 
Why not permit a minority like the Untouchables to determine 
what kind of electorate is necessary for its protection ? If the 
Untouchables decide to have separate electorates why should their 
choice not prevail ? These are questions to which the Hindus can 
give no answer. The reason is that the real objection to separate 
electorates by the Hindus is different from this ostensible objection 
raised in the name of a nation. The real objection is that separate 
electorate does not permit the Hindus to capture the seats reserved 
for the Untouchables. On the other hand the joint electorate does. 
Let me illustrate the point by a few examples of how joint and 
separate electorate would work in the constituency. Take the 
following constituencies from the Madras Presidency. 


Name of the 
Constituency 

Total 

number of 
seats for 
Hindus 

Seat 
reserved 
for the 
Untou- 
chables. 

Total No. 
of Hindu 
voters. 

Total No. 
of Untou- 
chable 
voters. 

Ratio of 
Hindu voters 
to Untou- 
chable voters. 

1. Madras 

2 

1 

40,626 

2,577 

16 to 1 

City South 

2. Chicacole 

2 

1 

83,456 

5,125 

16 to 1 

3. Vijayana- 

2 

1 

47, 594 

996 

49 to 1 

gram 

4. Amalapu- 

1 

1 

52,805 

7,760 

7 to 1 

ram 

5. Ellore 

1 

1 

51,795 

5,155 

9 to 1 

6. Bandar 

1 

1 

84,191 

8,723 

10 to 1 

7. Tenali 

2 

1 

1,32,107 

5,732 

24 to 1 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


414 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

414 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The figures of the voting strength given in the above table for 
the seven constituencies taken at random in the Madras Presidency 
are illuminating. A scrutiny of the above figures is sufficient to 
show any disinterested person that if there is a separate electorate 
for the Untouchables in these seven constituencies they whould 
be in a position to elect a man in whom they had complete 
confidence and who would be independent to fight the battle 
of the Untouchables on the floor of the Legislature against the 
representatives of the Hindus. If, on the other hand, there is a 
joint electorate in these constituencies the representative of the 
Untouchables would be only a nominal representative and not 
a real representative, for no Untouchable who did not agree to 
be a nominee of the Hindus and a tool in their hands could be 
elected in a joint electorate in which the Untouchable voter was 
out numbered in ratio of 1 to 24 or in some cases 1 to 49. The 
joint electorate is from the point of the Hindus to use a familiar 
phrase a “rotten borough” in which the Hindus get the right to 
nominate an Untouchable to set nominally as a representative 
of the Untouchables but really as a tool of the Hindus. It will 
be noticed that the Hindu in opposing the so-called Communal 
Scheme of the Untouchables with his so-called National Scheme 
is not fighting for a principle nor is he fighting for the nation. 
He is simply fighting for his own interests. He is fighting to 
have in his hands the undivided control over political power. His 
first line of defence is not to allow any shares to be drawn up so 
that like the Manager of the Hindu joint family he can use the 
whole for his benefit. That is why he fought for purely territorial 
constituencies. Failing that he takes his second line of defence. 
He wants that if he is made to concede power he must not lose 
control over it. This is secured by joint electorates and frustrated 
by separate electorates. That is why the Hindu objects to separate 
electorates and insists on joint electorates. 

The end of the so-called National Scheme may not be communal 
but the result undoubtedly is. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


415 


CHAPTER VI 

THE EXECUTIVE 

The second political demand of the Untouchables is that 
they must not only be represented in the Legislature but they 
must also be represented in the executive. This demand is also 
opposed by the Hindus. The argument of the Hindus takes two 
forms. One is that the executive must represent the majority of 
the Legislature and secondly the men in the Executive must be 
competent to hold places in the executive. I propose to deal with 
the second argument first. 

It is an argument which is fundamentally sound. But it is 
equally necessary to realize that in a representative Government 
this argument cannot be carried too far. Lor as Professor Dicey 
has argued, “It has never been a primary object of constitutional 
arrangement to get together the best possible parliament in 
intellectual capacity. Indeed, it would be inconsistent with the idea 
of representative Government to attempt to form a parliament 
far superior in intelligence to the mass of the nation.” 

The stress upon competency is needless. Nobody has said 
that ignorant people should be made Ministers simply because 
they are Untouchables. Given the right to representation in the 
cabinet the Untouchables, there is no doubt, will elect the most 
competent people amongst them— there are a number of them in 
every province— to fill those places. Again why apply this limiting 
condition to the Untouchables only ? Like the Untouchables the 
Muslims are also claiming the right to be represented in the 
cabinet. Why have the Hindus not insisted upon such a limiting 
condition against the Muslims’ claim? This shows that the objection 
of the Hindus is not based on reason. It is an excuse. 

Coming to the second argument the Hindus are simply misusing 
the words majority and minority. They seem to forget that majority 
and minority are political categories. As political categories there 
is no fixed majority or a fixed minority. Political majorities and 
political minorities are fluid bodies and what is a majority today 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


416 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

416 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

may become a minority tomorrow, and what is a minority today 
may become a majority tomorrow. The difference between the 
Hindus and the Untouchables cannot be said to be a difference 
of this sort. There is no endosmosis between the Untouchables 
and Hindus as there is between the Majority and Minority. There 
is another characteristic of a majority and minority relationship 
which would make them inapplicable to the relationship which 
subsists between the Hindus and the Untouchables. The majority 
and minority are divided by a difference only— difference in the point 
of views. They are not separated by a fundamental and deadly 
antagonism as the Hindus are from the Untouchables. There is a 
third characteristic of Majority and Minority relationship which 
is not to be found in the relationship that subsists between the 
Hindus and the Untouchables. A minority grows into a minority 
and a majority in becoming a majority absorbs so much of the 
sentiment of the minority that the minority is satisfied with the 
result and does not feel the urge of fighting out the issue with 
the majority. Now all these considerations are quite foreign to 
the relationship between the Hindu Majority and the Untouchable 
minority. They are fixed as permanent communites. They are not 
merely different but they are antagonistic. To speak of them as 
majority and minority would be as true and as useful as would 
be to speak of the Germans being a majority and the French 
being a minority. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


417 


CHAPTER VII 

PUBLIC SERVICES 

The Untouchables demand that a certain proportion of 
posts in the public services of the country shall be reserved for 
them, subject to the rule of minimum qualification. The Hindus 
object to this demand as they do to the other demands of the 
Untouchables. The stand they take is that the interests of the 
State require that capacity, efficiency and character should be 
the only consideration and that caste and creed should have 
no place in making appointment to public offices. There is no 
dispute regarding character as a necessary qualification. Nor is 
there any dispute regarding capacity and efficiency. The only 
point of dispute, and it is a very important point, is whether 
caste and creed should form a consideration which must be taken 
into account in the recruitment for public services. Relying upon 
the educational qualification as the only test of efficiency, the 
Hindus insist that public offices should be filled on the basis 
of competetive examinations open to persons of all Castes and 
Creeds. They argue that such a system serves both purposes. It 
serves the purpose of efficiency. Secondly it docs not prohibit the 
entry of the Untouchables in the Public Services of the country. 

The Hindus seek to give to their opposition to the demand of the 
Untouchable an appearance of fairness by relying upon efficiency 
and competitive examination. Here again the argument is quite 
beside the point. The question is not whether the competitive 
system of Examination is or is not the proper method of getting 
efficient persons in public services. The question is whether the 
competitive system simply because it is open to all castes and 
creeds will enable the Untouchables to get a footing in the Public 
Service. That depends upon the educational system of the State. 
Is it sufficiently democratic? Are the facilities for education 
sufficiently widespread and sufficiently used to permit persons 
from all classes to come forth to compete? Otherwise, even with 
the system of open competition large classes are sure to be left out 
in the cold. This basic condition is conspicuous by its absence in 
India. Higher education in India is the monopoly of Hindus and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


418 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

418 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

particularly of high Caste Hindus. By reason of Untouchability 
the Untouchables are denied the opportunity for Education. By 
reason of their poverty higher education necessary for higher 
posts in the public service— and higher posts in the public service 
are the only things that matter becauese they have a strategic 
value— is not within their reach. The State will not take the 
financial responsibility of giving them higher education— they are 
demanding it by their resolution— and the Hindus will not extend 
the benefit of their charities to the Untouchables— Hindu Charity 
being shamefully communal— so that to ask the Untouchables to 
rely upon the results of competitive examination for entry into 
the public services is to practise a fraud upon them. The position 
taken up by the Untouchables is in no sense unreasonable. They 
admit the necessity for maintaining efficiency. That is why in 
their resolution they themselves say that their demand shall be 
subject to the rule of miniumum qualification. In other words 
what the Untouchables demand is that a minimum qualification 
should be prescribed for every post in the public service and if 
two persons apply for such a post and the Untouchables has the 
minimum qualification he should be preferred to a Hindu even 
though the Hindu may have a qualification higher than the 
minimum qualification. It, of course, does mean that the basis for 
appointment should be minimum qualification and not the highest 
qualification. This may sound queer to those who do not mind if 
their test of efficiency gives certain communities a monopoly of 
public service. But did not Campbell-Bannerman say that self- 
government was better than good government ? What else are 
the Untouchables demanding? They are prepared to recognize the 
need of having an efficient Government. That is why they are 
ready to accept the requirement of minimum qualifications for 
entry in the public services of the country. What the untouchables 
are not prepared to do is to forego self-government for good 
government. Good Government based on highest qualification 
will be a communal government, for the Hindus alone can claim 
qualifications higher than minimum qualifications. This is what 
they do not want. What they say is that minumum qualifications 
are enough for efficient government and since it makes self- 
government possible, minimum qualification should be the rule 
for entry in Public Service. It ensures self-government as well 
as efficient government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


419 


CHAPTER VIII 
SEPARATE SETTLEMENTS 

Resolution No. IV Referred to in the foregoing part of 
this paper is to my mind quite self-explanatory and not much 
detailed comment is necessary to explain its purport. Nor is it 
possible in the compass of this short paper to deal with it in 
more than general terms. The demand for separate settlements 
is the result of what might be called “The New Life Movement” 
among the Untouchables. The object of the movement is to free 
the Untouchables from the thraldom of the Hindus. So long 
as the present arrangement continues it is impossible for the 
Untouchables either to free themselves from the yoke of the 
Hindus or to get rid of their Untouchability. It is the close-knit 
association of the Untouchables with the Hindus living in the 
same villages which marks them out as Untouchables and which 
enables the Hindus to identify them as being Untouchables. India 
is admittedly a land of villages and so long as the village system 
provides an easy method of marking out and identifying the 
Untouchable, the Untouchable has no escape from Untouchability. 
It is the village system which perpetuates Untouchability and 
the Untouchables therefore demand that it should be broken and 
the Untouchables who are as a matter of fact socially separate 
should be made separate geographically and territorially also, and 
be grouped into separate villages exclusively of Untouchables in 
which the distinction of the high and the low and of Touchable 
and Untouchable will find no place. 

The second reason for demanding separate settlements arises 
out of the economic position of the Untouchables in the village. 
That their condition is most pitiable no one will deny. They are a 
body of landless labourers who are entirely dependent upon such 
employment as the Hindus may choose to give them and on such 
wages as the Hindus may find it profitable to pay. In the villages 
in which they live they cannot engage in any trade or occupation, 
for owing to untouchability no Hindu will deal with them. It is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


420 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

420 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

therefore obvious that there is no way of earning a living 
which is open to the Untouchables so long as they live 
as a dependent part of the Hindu village. This economic 
dependence has also other consequences besides the condition 
of poverty and degradation which proceeds from it. The 
Hindu has a code of life, which is part of his religion. This 
code of life gives him many privileges and heaps upon the 
Untouchable many indignities which are incompatible with 
the sanctity of human life. By the New Life Movement which 
has taken hold of the Untouchables, the Untouchables all 
over India are fighting against the indignities and injustices 
which the Hindus in the name of their religion have heaped 
upon them. A perpetual war is going on every day in every 
village between the Hindus and the Untouchables. It does not 
see the light of the day. The Hindu Press is not prepared to 
advertise it lest it should injure the cause of their freedom 
in the eyes of the world. The silent struggle is however a 
fact. Under the village system the Untouchable has found 
himself greatly handicapped in his struggle for free and 
honourable life. It is a contest between the economically 
and socially strong Hindus and an economically poor and 
socially small group of Untouchables. That the Hindus most 
often succeed in pulling down Untouchables is largly due to 
many causes. The Hindu has the Police and the Magistracy 
on his side. In a quarrel between the Untouchables and the 
Hindus the Untouchables will never get protection from 
the Police or justice from the Magistrate. The Police and 
the Magistracy are Hindus, and they love their class more 
than their duty. But the chief weapon in the armoury of the 
Hindus is economic power which they possess over the poor 
Untouchables living in the village. The economic processes by 
which the Hindus can hold down the Untouchables in their 
struggle for equality are well described in the Report made by 
a Committee appointed by the Government of Bombay in 1928 
to investigate into the grievances of the Depressed Classes* 
and from which the following extracts are made. It illuminates 
the situation in a manner so simple that even foreigners who 
do not know the mysteries of the Hindu social system may 
understand what tyranny the Hindus can practise upon the 


*Before The Government of India Act 1935 the Untouchables were generally 
described as the Depressed Classes. The Act calls them Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


421 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

CASTE AND CONSTITUTION 421 

Untouchables. The committee said 

“Although we have recommended various remedies to 
secure to the Depressed Classes their rights to all public 
utilities we fear that there will be difficulties in the way 
of their exercising them for a long time to come. The first 
difficulty is the fear of open violence against them by the 
orthodox classes. It must be noted that the Depressed Classes 
form a small minority in every village, opposed to which is 
a great majority of the orthodox who are bent on protecting 
their interests and dignity from any supposed invasion by the 
Depressed Classes at any cost. The danger of prosecution by 
the Police has put a limitation upon the use of violence by 
the orthodox classes and consequently such cases are rare. 

“The second difficulty arises from the economic position in 
which the Depressed Classes are found today. The Depressed 
Classes have no economic independence in most parts of the 
Presidency. Some cultivate the lands of the orthodox classes 
as their tenants at will. Others live on their earnings as 
farm labourers employed by the orthodox classes and the rest 
subsist on the food or grain given to them by the orthodox 
classes in lieu of service rendered to them as village servants. 

We have heard of numerous instances where the orthodox 
classes have used their economic power as a weapon against 
those Depressed Classes in their villages, when the latter have 
dared to exercise their rights, and have evicted them from 
their land, and stopped their employment and discontinued 
their remuneration as village servants. This boycott is 
often planned on such an extensive scale as to include the 
prevention of the Depressed Classes from using the commonly 
used paths and the stoppage of sale of the necessaries of life 
by the village Bania. According to the evidence, sometimes 
small causes suffice for the proclamation of a social boycott 
against the Depressed Classes. Frequently it follows on the 
exercise by the Depressed Classes of their right to the use 
of the common well, but cases have been by no means rare 
where a stringent boycott has been proclaimed simply because 
a Depressed Class man has put on the sacred thread, has 
bought a piece of land, has put on good clothes or ornaments, 
or has carried a marriage procession with the bride-groom 
on the horse through the public street.” 

This demand for separate settlements is a new demand which 
has been put forth by the Untouchables for the first time. It is 
not possible to say as yet as to what attitude the Hindus will take 
to this demand. But there is no doubt that this is the most vital 
demand made by the Untouchables, and I am sure that whatever 
may happen with regard to the other demands they are not likely to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


422 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

422 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

yield on this. The Hindus are prone to think that they and 
the Untouchables are joined together by the will of God as the 
Bible says the husband is joined to his wife and they will say 
in the language of the Bible that those whom God is pleased to 
join let no man put asunder. The Untouchables are determined 
to repudiate any such view of their relations with the Hindus. 
They want the link to be broken and a complete divorce from 
the Hindus effected without delay. 

The only questions that arise are those of the cost it will 
involve in and time it will take. As to cost, the Untouchables say 
it should be financed by Government. It will no doubt fall for the 
most part on the Hindus. But there is no reason why the Hindus 
should not bear the same. The Hindus own everything. They 
own the land in this country. They control trade, and they also 
own the State. Every source of revenue and profit is controlled 
by them. Other communities and particularly the Untouchables 
are just hewers of wood and drawers of water. The social system 
helps the Hindus to have a monopoly of everything. There is 
no reason why they should not be asked to pay the cost of this 
scheme when they practically own the country. 

As to time, it matters very little even if the transplantation of 
the Untouchables to new settlements takes 20 years. Those who 
have been the bounden slaves of the Hindus for a thousand years 
may well be happy with the prospect of getting their freedom by 
the end of 20 years. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


423 


CHAPTER EX 

CASTE AND CONSTITUTION 

It might well be asked why should such questions as are 
raised by these demands of the Untouchables find a place in 
the Constitution ? Nowhere in the world have the makers of 
constitution been compelled to deal with such matters. This is an 
important question and I admit that an answer is required on the 
part of those who raise such questions and insist that they are 
of constitutional importance. The answer to this question is to 
my mind quite obvious. It is the character of the Indian Society 
which invests this question with constitutional importance. It is 
the Caste system and the Religious system of the Hindus which 
is solely responsible for this. This short statement may not suffice 
to give an adequate explanation to foreigners of the social and 
political repercussions of the Hindu Caste and Religious systems. 
But it is equally true that in the brief compass of this paper it is 
impossible to deal exhaustively with the repercussion of the caste 
system on the constitution. I would refer for a full and complete 
exposition of the subject to my book on the Annihilation of Castes 
which I wrote some time ago. For I believe it will shed sufficient 
light on the social and economical ramification of the Caste and 
Religious system of the Hindus. In this Paper I will content myself 
with making the following general observations. In framing a 
constitution the Social structure must always be kept in mind. 
The political structure must be related to the social structure. The 
operation of the social forces is not confined to the social field. 
They pervade the political field also. This is the view point of the 
Untouchables and I am sure this is incontrovertible. The Hindus 
are quite conscious of this argument and also of its strength. But 
what they do is to deny that the structure of the Hindu Socioety 
is in any way different from the structure of Europen society. They 
attempt to meet the argument by saying that there is no difference 
between the Caste system of the Hindus and the Class system in 
Western Society. This is of course palpably false and discloses a 
gross ignorance both of the Caste system as well as of the Class 
system. The Caste system is a system which is infested with the 
spirit of isolation and in fact it makes isolation of one Caste from 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


424 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

424 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

another a matter of virtue. There is isolation in the Class system 
but it does not make isolation a virtue nor does it prohibit social 
intercourse. The Class system it is true produces groups. But they 
are not akin to Caste groups. The groups in the Class System 
are only non-social while the Castes in the Caste system are in 
their mutual relations definitely and positively anti-social. If this 
analysis is true then there can be no denying the fact that the 
social structure of Hindu Society is different and consequently 
its political structure must be different. What the Untouchables 
are asking, to put it in general terms, is a proper correlation 
of means to ends. End may be the same. But because the end 
is the same it does not follow that the means must also be the 
same. Indeed ends may remain the same and yet means must 
vary according to time and circumstances. Those who are true 
to their ends must admit this fact and must agree to adopt 
different means if they wish that the end they have in view is 
not stultified. 

In this connection there is another thing which I would like 
to mention. As I have said, it is the Caste basis of Hindu society 
which requires that its political structure should be different 
and suited to its social structure. There are people who admit 
this but argue that caste can be abolished from Hindu society. 
I deny that. Those who advocate such a view think that caste 
is an institution like a Club or a Municipality or a County 
Council. This is a gross error. Caste is Religion, and religion 
is anything but an institution. It may be institutionalized but 
it is not the same as the institution in which it is embedded. 
Religion is an influence or force suffused through the life of 
each individual moulding his character, determining his actions 
and reactions, his likes and dislikes. These likes and dislikes, 
actions and reactions arc not institutions which can be lopped 
off. They are forces and influences which can be dealt with by 
controlling them or counteracting them. If the social forces are 
to be prevented from contaminating politics and perverting it to 
the aggrandizement of the few and the degradation of the many 
then it follows that the political structure must be so framed that 
it will contain mechanisms which will bottle the prejudices and 
nullify the injustice which the social forces arc likely to cause 
if they were let loose. 

So far I have explained in a general way why the peculiar social 
structure of the Hindu Society calls for a peculiar political structure 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


425 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

CASTE AND CONSTITUTION 425 

and why the marker of the Indian Constitution cannot escape 
problems which did not plague the makers of Constitution in 
other countries. Let me now take the specific question, namely 
why it is necessary that in the Indian Constitution the Communal 
Scheme must find its place and why in the Public Services for 
the Untouchables should be specified and should be assigned 
to them as their separate possession. The justification for these 
demands is easy and obvious. It arises from the undeniable fact 
that what divides the Untouchables from the Hindus is not mere 
matter of difference on non-essentials. It is a case of fundamental 
antagonism and antipathy. No evidence of this antipathy and 
antagonism is necesssary. The system of Untouchability is enough 
evidence of the inherent antagonism between the Hindus and the 
Untouchables. Given this antagonism it is simply impossible to 
ask the Untouchables to depend upon and trust the Hindus to do 
them justice when the Hindu get their freedom and independence 
from the British. Who can say that the Untouchable is not right 
in saying that he will not trust the Hindu ? The Hindu is as 
alien to him as a Europen is and what is worse the European 
alien is neutral but the Hindu is most shamefully partial to his 
own class and antagonistic to the Untouchables. There can be no 
doubt that the Hindus have all these ages despised, disregarded 
and disowned the Untouchables as belonging to a different and 
contemptible strata of Society if not to a different race. By their 
own code of conduct the Hindus behave as the most exclusive 
class steeped in their own prejudices and never sharing the 
aspirations of the Untouchables with whom they have nothing 
to do and whose interests are opposed to theirs. Why should 
the Untouchables entrust their fate to such people ? How could 
the Untouchables be legitimately asked to leave their interest 
into the hands of a people who as a matter of fact are opposed 
to them in their motives and interests, who do not sympathise 
with the living forces operating among the Untouchables, who are 
themselves not charged with their wants, cravings and desires, 
who are inimical to their aspirations, who in all certainty will 
deny justice to them and to discriminate against them and who 
by reason of the sanction of their religion have not been and will 
not be ashamed to practise against the Untouchables any kind of 
inhumanity. The only safety against such people is to have the 
political rights which the Untouchables claim as safeguards against 
the tyranny of the Hindu Majority defined in the Constitution. 
Are the Untouchables extravagant in demanding this safety ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


426 


CHAPTER X 

SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS 
AND THEIR FRIENDS 

In the midst of this political controversy one notices that the 
Hindus are behaving differently towards different communities. 
The Untouchables are not the only people in India who are 
demanding political safeguards. Like the Untouchables the 
Muslims and the Sikhs have also presented their political 
demands to the Hindus. Both the Mussalmans and the Sikhs 
can in no sense be called helpless minorities. On the contrary 
they are the two most powerful communities in India. They 
are educationally quite advanced and economically well placed. 
By their social standing they are quite as high as the Hindus. 
Their organization is a solid structure and no Hindu will dare 
to take any liberties with them much less cause any harm to 
them. 

What are the political demands of the Muslims and the 
Sikhs? It is not possible to set them out here. But the general 
opinion is that they are very extravagant and the Hindus 
resent them very much. In contrast with this the condition 
and the demands of the Untouchables are just the opposite of 
the condition of the Muslims and the Sikhs. They are a weak, 
helpless and despised minority. They are at the mercy of all 
and there are not a few occasions when Hindus, Muslims and 
Sikhs combine to oppress them. Of all the Minorities they need 
the greatest protection and the strongest safeguards. Their 
demands are of the modest kind and there is nothing in them 
of that over-insurance which may be said to characterize the 
demands of the Muslims and the Sikhs. What is the reaction 
of the Hindus to the demands of the Muslims, the Sikhs 
and the Untouchables? Notwithstanding the extravagance of 
their demands the Hindus are ever ready to conciliate the 
Mussalmans and the Sikhs, particularly the former. They 
not only want to be correct in their relationship with the 
Mussalmans, they are prepared to be considerate and even 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


427 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS AND THEIR FRIENDS 427 

generous. Mr. Rajagopalachari’s political exploits are too fresh 
to be forgotten. Suddenly he enrolled himself as a soldier of 
the Muslim League and proclaimed a war on his own kin 
and former friends and for what ? Not for their not failure 
to grant the reasonable demands of the Muslim but for their 
conceding the most extravagant one, namely Pakistan !! What is 
Mr. Rajagopalachari’s response to the demands of the 
Untouchables ? So far I am aware there is no response. He 
does not even seem to be aware that there are 60 million 
Untouchables in this country and that they too like the Muslims 
are demanding political safeguards. This attitutde of studied 
silence and cold indifference of Mr. Rajagopalachari is typical 
of the whole body of Hindus. The Hindus have been opposing 
the political demands of the Untouchables with the tenacity of 
a bulldog and the perversity of a renegade. The Press is theirs 
and they make a systematic attempt to ignore the Untouchables. 
When they fail to ingnore them they buy their leaders; and where 
they find a leader not open to purchase they systematically 
abuse him, misrepresent him, blackmail him, and do everything 
possible that lies in their power to suppress him and silence 
him: Any such leader who is determined to fight for the cause 
of the Untouchables he and his followers are condemned as 
anti- National. So exasperated the Hindus become by the political 
demands of the Untouchables that they in their rage refuse to 
recognize how generous the Untouchables are in consenting to 
be ruled by a Hindu Majority in return for nothing more than 
a few political safeguards. The Hindus are not aware of what 
Carson said to Redmond when the two were negotiating for a 
United Ireland. The incident is worth recalling. Redmond said 
to Carson “Ask any safeguards you like for the Protestant 
Minority of Ulster, I am prepared to give them; but let us have 
a United Ireland under one constitution.” Carson’s reply was 
curt and brutal. He said without asking for time to consider 
the offer “Damn your safeguards, I don’t want to be ruled by 
you”. The Hindus ought to be thankful that the Untouchables 
have not taken the attitude which Carson took. But far from 
being thankful they are angry because the Untouchables are 
daring to ask for political rights. In the opinion of the Hindus 
the Untouchables have no right to ask for any rights. What 
does this difference of attitude on the part of the Hindus to 
the political demands of the different communities indicate? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


428 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

428 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It indicates three things (1) They want to get all power to 
themselves, (2) They are not prepared to base their political 
institutions on the principle of justice, (3) Where they have to 
surrender power they will surrender it to the forces of truculence 
and the mailed first but never to the dictates of justice. 

This attitude of the Hindus forms the tragic scene of Indian 
politics. Unfortunately this is not the only tragic scene with 
Indian Politics. There is another equally tragic in character. 
It concerns the friends of the Hindus in foreign countries. The 
Hindus have created many friends for themselves all over the 
world by their clever propaganda, particularly in America, “the 
land of liberty”. The tragedy is that these friends of the Hindus 
are supporting a side without examining whether it is the side 
which they in point of justice ought to support. No American 
friends of the Hindus have, so far as I know, asked what do 
the Hindus stand for ? Are they fighting for freedom or are they 
fighting for power ? If the Hindus are fighting for power, are the 
American friends justified in helping the Hindus ? If the Hindus 
are engaged in a war for freedom, must they not be asked to 
declare their war aims ? This is the least bit these American 
friends could do. Since the American friends have thought it 
fit to respond to the Hindu call for help it is necessary to tell 
these American friends of the Hindus what wrong they will 
be doing to the cause of freedom by their indiscriminate and 
blind support to the Hindu side. What I want to say follows 
the line of argument which the Hindus themselves have taken. 
Since the war started the Hindus, both inside and outside the 
Congress, demanded that the British should declare their war 
aims. Day in and day out the British were told, “If you want 
our help, tell us what you are fighting for ? If you are fighting 
for freedom, tell us if you will give us freedom in the name of 
which you are waging this war” There was a stage when the 
Hindus were prepared to be satisfied with a promise from the 
British that India will have the benefit of freedom for which 
the British are waging. They have gone a stage further. They 
are no longer content with a promise. Or to put it in the 
language of a congressman, “They refuse to accept a postdated 
cheque on a crashing Bank”. They wanted freedom to be given 
right now, before the Hindus would consent to give their 
voluntary support to the War effort. That is the significance of 
Mr. Gandhi’s new slogan of “Quit India”. Mr. Churchill on whom the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


429 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS AND THEIR FRIENDS 429 

responsibility of answering these questions fell replied, that 
his war aim was victory over the enemy. The Hindus were 
not satisfied. They questioned him further “What are you 
going to do after you get that victory ? What social order 
you propose to establish after the war ?” There was a storm 
when Mr. Churchil replied that he hoped to restore traditional 
Britain. These were legitimate questions I agree. But do not 
the friends of Hindus think that if it is legitimate to ask the 
very same questions to Mr. Churchill it is also legitimate to 
ask the very same questions to Mr. Gandhi and the Hindus ? 
The British had declared war against Hitler. Mr. Gandhi 
has declared war against the British. The British have an 
Empire. So have the Hindus. For is not Hindusm a form of 
imperialism and are not the Untouchables a subject race, 
owing there allegiance and their servitude to their Hindu 
Master ? If Churchill must be asked to declare his war aims 
how could anybody avoid asking Mr. Gandhi and the Hindus 
to declare their war aims ? Both say their war is a war for 
freedom. If that is so both have a duty to declare what their 
war aims. are. What does Mr. Gandhi propose to do after 
he gets his victory over the British ? Does he propose to use 
the freedom he hopes to get to make the Untouchables free 
or will he allow the freedom he gets to be used to endow 
the Hindus with more power than they now possess, to hold 
the Untouchables as their bondsmen ? Will Mr. Gandhi and 
Hindus establish a New Order or will they be content with 
rehabilitation of the traditional Hindu India, with its castes 
and its untouchability, with its denial of Liberty, Equality 
and Fraternity ? I should think that these questions should be 
asked by those American friends to Mr. Gandhi and the Hindus 
who are helping them in this so-called war for Freedom. These 
questions are legitimate and pertinent. It is only answers to 
such questions which will enable these American friends to 
know whether Mr. Gandhi’s war is a war for freedom or a 
war for power. These questions are not merely pertinent and 
legitimate, they are also necessary. The reason is obvious to 
those who know the Hindus. The Hindus have an innate and 
inveterate conservatism and they have a religion which is 
incompatible with liberty, equality and fraternity i. e. with 
democracy. Inequality, no doubt, exists everywhere in the 
world. It is largely to conditions and circumstances. But it 
never has had the support of religion. With the Hindus it is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


430 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

430 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

different. There is not only inequality in Hindu Society but 
inequality is the official doctrine of the Hindu religion. The 
Hindu has no will to euqality. His inclination and his attitude 
are opposed to the democratic doctrine of one man one value. 
Every Hindu is a social Tory and political Radical. Mr Gandhi 
is no exception to this rule. He presents himself to the world as 
a liberal but his liberalism is only a very thin veneer which sits 
very lightly on him as dust does on one’s boots. You scratch him 
and you will find that underneath his liberalism he is a blue 
blooded Tory. He stands for the cursed caste. He is a fanatic 
Hindu upholding the Hindu religion. See how the Hindus read 
the famous American Declaration of Independence of 1776. The 
Hindu is mad with joy when he reads the Declaration to say— 

‘That whenever any Form of Government becomes 
destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter 
or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its 
foundation on such principles and organising its powers in 
such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their 
Safety and Happiness.’ 

But he stops there. He never bothers about the earlier part 
of that Declaration which says 

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with 
certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty 
and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights. 
Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just 
powers from the consent of the governed.” 

The implementation of this Declaration has no doubt been 
a tragic episode in the history of the United States. There have 
been two views about this document Some hold that it is a 
great spiritual document. Others have held that it immortalizes 
many untruths. In any case this charter of human Liberty 
was not applied to the Negroes. What is however important to 
note is the faith underlying the Declaration. There is no doubt 
about it and certainly no doubt about the faith of Jefferson, 
the author of this Declaration. He never forgot that while 
enunciating a long principle, his country decided to take a 
short step. He wrote, “I am sorry for my countrymen.” It may 
be no recompense to the Negroes. But it is by no means small 
comfort to know that the conscience of the country is not 
altogether dead and the flame of righteous indignation may 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


431 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS AND THEIR FRIENDS 431 

one day burst forth. The Negroes may laugh at this. But the 
fact is that even this much comfort the Untouchables cannot 
hope to have from the Hindus. People to-day are proud of 
the fact that the Hindus are a solid mass. But strange as 
it may appear, to the Untouchables of India, this is more a 
matter of dread than comfort— as the “Solid South” is to the 
Negroes in the United States. Where could anyone find in 
India among the Hindus any person with a sense of shame 
and a sense of remorse such as was felt by Jefferson ? I 
should have thought the Hindus would be too ashamed of 
this stigma of Untouchability on them to appear before the 
world with a demand for their freedom. That they do clamour 
for freedom— the pity is that they get support— is evidence 
that their conscience is dead, that they feel no righteous 
indignation, and to them Untouchability is neither a moral 
sin nor a civil wrong. It is just a sport as cricket or hockey is. 
The friends of Mr. Gandhi will no doubt point to him and his 
work. But what has Mr. Gandhi done to reform Hindu Society 
that his work and life be cited by democrats as a witness 
of hope and assurance ? His friends have been informed of 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh and they continue to ask, “Is not 
Mr. Gandhi working to uplift the Harijans ?” Is he ? What is 
the object of this Harijan Sevak Sangh ? Is it to prepare the 
Untouchables to win their freedom from their Hindu masters, 
to make them their social and political equals ? Mr. Gandhi 
had never had any such object before him and he never wants 
to do this, and I say that he cannot do this. This is the task 
of a democrat and a revolutionary. Mr. Gandhi is neither. 
He is a Tory by birth as well as by faith. The work of the 
Harijan Sevak Sangh is not to raise the Untouchables. His 
main object, as every self-respecting Untouchable knows, is 
to make India safe for Hindus and, Hinduism. He is certainly 
not fighting the battle of the Untouchables. On the contrary 
by distributing through the Harijan Sevak Sangh petty gifts 
to petty Untouchables he is buying, benumbing and drawing 
the claws of the opposition of the Untouchables which he 
knows is the only force which will disrupt the caste system 
and will establish real democracy in India. Mr. Gandhi wants 
Hinduism and the Hindu caste system to remain intact. Mr. 
Gandhi also wants the Untouchables to remain as Hindus. 
But as what ? not as partners but as poor relations of the 
Hindus. Mr. Gandhi is kind to the Untouchables. But for what ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


432 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

432 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Only because he wants to kill, by kindness, them and their 
movement for separation and independence from Hindus. The 
Harijan Sevak Sangh is one of the many techniques which has 
enabled Mr. Gandhi to be a successful humbug. 

Turn to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. He draws his inspiration 
from the Jeffersonian Declaration; but has he ever expressed 
any shame or any remorse about the condition of the 60 
millions of Untouchables ? Has he anywhere referred to them 
in the torrent of literature which comes out from his pen ? 
Go to the youth of India, if you want. The youths who fill 
the Universities and who follow the Pandit’s lead are ever 
ready to fight the political battle of India against the British. 
But what do these children of the leisured class Hindus have 
done to redress the wrongs their forefathers have done to the 
Untouchables ? You can get thousands of Hindu youths to join 
political propaganda but you canot get one single youth to 
take up the cause of breaking the caste system or of removing 
Untouchability. Democracy and democratic life, justice and 
conscience which are sustained by a belief in democratic 
principle are foreign to the Hindu mind. To leave democracy 
and freedom in such Tory hands would be the greatest mistake 
democrats could commit. It is therefore very necessary for 
the American friends of the Hindus to ask Mr. Gandhi and 
the Hindus to declare their War aims, so that they may be 
sure that the fight of the Hindus against British is really and 
truly a fight for freedom. The Congress and the Hindus will 
no doubt refer their inquiring foreign friends to the Congress 
Resolutions regarding minority rights. But I would like to warn 
the American friends of the Hindus not to be content with the 
“glittering generalities” contained in congress declaration of 
Minority Rights. To declare the rights of the minority is one 
thing and to have them implemented is another. And why 
should the friends of the Hindus if they are really friends 
of freedom, not insist on implementation straight away ? 
Arc not the Hindus saying that they would not be satisfied 
with mere declaration of freedom from the British ? Are they 
not asking for immediate implementation ? If they want the 
Brittish to implement their War aims, why should the Hindus 
be not prepared to implement their war aims ? American 
friends of the Hindus, I am sure, will not be misled by the 
Hindu propaganda that this war of the Hindus against the 
British is a War for freedom. Before helping the Hindus they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


433 


MR. GANDHI AND THE EMANCIPATION OF THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

SOME QUESTIONS TO THE HINDUS AND THEIR FRIENDS 433 

must get themselves satisfied that the Hindus who are urging 
that their war against the British is a war for freedom will not 
turn out to be the enemies of the freedom of millions of Indians 
like the Untouchables. That is the plea I am making on behalf 
of the 60 millions of the Untouchables of India. And above all 
let not the American friends think that checks and balances in a 
Constitution— the demand for checks and balances suited to Indian 
conditions— are not necessary because the struggle is carried on 
by a people and is carried on in the name of freedom. Friends 
of democracy and freedom cannot afford to forget the words of 
John Adams when he said— 

“We may appeal to every page of history we have hitherto 
turned over, for proof irrefragable that the people when they 
have been unchecked, have been as unjust, tyrannical, brutal, 
barbarous , and cruel as any king or Senate possessed of 
uncontrollable power : the majority has eternally and without 
one exception usurped over the rights of the minority.” 

If all Majorities must be subjected, to checks and balances 
how much more must it be so in the case of the Hindus ? 

• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd 


MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 434 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


435 


INDEX 


American Declaration of 
Independence : 430 
Annihilation of Castes : 423 
Anti-semitism : 378, 397 

Bible : 422 

Campbell, Bannerman : 418 

Carson, Sir Edward : 427 
Caste system : 423-24 
Churchill, Sir Winston : 428-29 
Class system : 423-24 

Commission for Scheduled Castes : 404-05 
Communal Scheme : 408, 411, 414, 425 
Congress, Indian National : 401-02, 407 

Dicey, Prof. : 415 

Equality : 428 

Fraternity : 428 
Freedom, India’s : 401-02 

Gandhi M. K. : 407, 428-31 

Harijan Sevak Sangh : 431-32 

Hindus : 398, 401-02, 406-07, 410, 415-33 

Hinduism : 401, 430 

Hindu Press : 420 

Hindu Social System : 410 

Imperialism : 397, 401-02 
Indian Constitution : 425 
Institute of International Affairs : 402 
Institute of Public Relation : 397, 402 

Jefferson, Thomas : 430, 432 

Jews: 397,398,401 

Joint Electorates : 412-14 

Liberty : 428 

Muslim : 401, 415, 426 
Muslim League : 427 

‘Nation’ the : 401 
Nationalism : 410 


National Scheme : 408, 411, 414 
Nazis : 398 

Negroes : 398, 401, 430, 431 
Nehru, Jawaharlal : 432 

Quit India : 428 

Parliamentary Government : 409 

Political Majority : 415-16 
Political Minority : 415-16 

Recialism : 397 
Romans : 401 

Scheduled Castes Conference, 
at Nagpur : 403, 

Demands of : 404 
Sikhs: 426 

Separate Electorates : 404, 412-14 
Separate Settlements : 419 
Serfdom : 401 

Radicals : 430 

Rajgopalachari, Mr. C, : 427 
Redmond, Mr. : 427 

Slaves : 398, 401 
Slavery : 401 
Spartans : 401 
State Committee : 420-21 
‘Statesman’, the : 401 
Swaraj : 405 

Tory: 430 

Untouchables (Scheduled Castes) : 
405, 408, 

410-27 

Political demands of : 403-08 
As separate entity : 403 
Separate Settlements of : 405-06 
Reservations for: 418-19 
Untouchability : 401, 418-20 

Villeinage : 401 
Villeins : 401 

Ward, Mr. : 401 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd 


MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 436 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


437 


Note 

on 

the Annexure 

The present volume of ‘What Congress and Gandhi 
have done to the Untouchables,’ is the reprint of the 
first edition published in 1945. Dr. Ambedkar brought 
out a second edition, in 1946. Certain changes by way 
of substantial additions and improvements are noticed. 
Chapter 9 , which contains these changes is therefore 
annexed to the Volume. No changes are noticed in the 
remaining text. 

The Editorial Committee is grateful to Shri G. P. 
Mandavkar of Nagpur for bringing to our notice the 
contents of the second edition. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd 


MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 438 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


439 


CHAPTER EX 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 
Let not Tyranny Have Freedom to Enslave 

I 

It is a matter of common experience that barring a few 
exceptions, almost all foreigners, who show interest in Indian 
political affairs, take the side of the Congress. This quite naturally 
puzzles and annoys the other political parties in the country, such 
as the Muslim League, claiming to represent the Musalmans, 
the Justice Party — now in a state of suspended animation but 
still — claiming to speak in the name of the non-Brahmins and the 
All-India Scheduled Castes Federation, claiming to represent the 
Untouchables, all of whom have been appealing to the foreigner 
for support but to whom the foreigner is not even prepared to 
give a sympathetic hearing. Why does the foreigner support the 
Congress and not the other political parties in India ? Two reasons 
are usually assigned by the foreigner for his behaviour. One 
reason assigned by him for supporting the Congress is that it is 
the only representative political organization of the Indians and 
can speak in the name of India and even for the Untouchables. 
Is such a belief founded on facts ? 

It must be admitted that there have been circumstances which 
are responsible for creating such a belief. The first and foremost 
circumstance for the spread of this view is the propaganda by 
the Indian Press in favour of the Congress. The Press in India 
is an accomplice of the Congress, believes in the dogma that the 
Congress is never wrong and acts on the principle of not giving 
any publicity to any news, which is inconsistent with the Congress 
prestige or the Congress ideology. To the foreigner the Press is 
the principal medium of information about the Indian political 
affairs. The cry of the Indian Press being what it is, there is 
therefore no wonder if the people in England and America know 
one thing and only one thing, namely, that the Congress is the 
only representative body in India including even the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


440 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

440 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The effect of this propaganda is considerably heightened 
because of the absence of counter-propaganda on behalf of the 
Untouchables to advertise their case against the Congress claim. 
There are various explanations for this failure on the part of 
the Untouchables. 

The Untouchables have no Press. The Congress Press is 
closed to them and is determined not to give them the slightest 
publicity. They cannot have their own Press and for obvious 
reasons. No paper can survive without advertisement revenue. 
Advertisement revenue can come only from business and in 
India all business, both high and small, is attached to the 
Congress and will not favour any Non-Congress organization. 
The staff of the Associated Press in India, which is the main 
news distributing agency in India, is entirely drawn from the 
Madras Brahmins — indeed the whole of the Press in India is in 
their hands and they, for well-known reasons, are entirely pro- 
Congress and will not allow any news hostile to the Congress 
to get publicity. These arc reasons beyond the control of the 
Untouchables. 

To a large extent the failure of the Untouchables to do 
propaganda, it must be admitted, is also due to the absence of 
will to do propaganda. This absence of will arises from a patriotic 
motive not to do anything, which will damage the cause of the 
country in the eyes of the world outside. There are two different 
aspects to the politics of India, which may be distinguished as 
foreign politics and constitutional politics. India’s foreign politics 
relate to India’s freedom from British Imperialism, while the 
constitutional politics of India centre round the nature of a 
constitution for a free India. For a discriminating student the 
two issues are really separate. But the Untouchables fear that 
though the two aspects of India’s politics are separable, the 
foreigner, who counts in this matter and whose misunderstanding 
has to be guarded against, is not only incapable of separating 
them but is very likely to mistake a quarrel over constitutional 
politics for a disagreement over the ultimate purposes of India’s 
foreign politics. This is why the Untouchables have preferred 
to remain silent and allowed the Congress propaganda to go 
unchallenged. 

The Congressmen will not admit the patriotic motives of the 
Untouchables in keeping silent over Congress propaganda which 
is directed against them. The fact, however, remains that the 
silence and the desire to avoid open challenge on the part of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


441 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 441 

Untouchables have been materially responsible for the general 
belief that the Congress represents all, even the Untouchables. 

While, as explained above, there are circumstances which 
are responsible for creating the belief that Congress represents 
all including the Untouchables, such a belief is not warranted 
by the facts as disclosed by the elections that took place in 
1937. How the claim of the Congress to represent all has 
been disproved by those elections, has already been described 
in an earlier part of this book, both generally and also with 
particular regard to the claim of the Congress to represent the 
Untouchables. If the foreigner will make a note of it he will 
see how wide the propaganda is from the facts. 

At a time when the representative character of the 
Congress was not put to test in an election it was excusable 
for a foreigner to be carried away by propaganda. But the 
matter has now been put to test in the elections that took 
place in 1937. With the results of the elections available to 
check the position, it may be hoped that the foreigners will 
revise their view that the Congress represents all, including 
the Untouchables, and that they will realize that the other 
parties are equally representative of elements in the social life 
of India which are outside the Congress and have therefore 
the right to be heard. 


II 

There is another reason why the foreigner lends his 
support to the Congress. It lies in the difference between the 
demonstrative activities of the Congress and the other political 
parties in the country. While he compares the activities of the 
different political parties, he sees Congressmen engaged in a 
conflict with the British Government, launching campaigns of 
civil disobedience, breaking laws made by a foreign Government, 
organizing movements for non-payment of taxes, courting 
prison, preaching non-co-operation with Government, refusing 
offices and exhibiting themselves in other ways as men out 
to sacrifice themselves for the freedom of the country. On the 
other hand, he sees the other political parties uninterested, 
passive and taking no part in such a struggle. From this, 
he concludes that the Congress is a body struggling for the 
freedom of India, while the other parties are indifferent, if not 
obstructive and as a lover of freedom feels bound to support. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


442 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

442 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Congress as a body carrying on a ‘Fight for Freedom’ in 
preference to other parties. 

This is quite natural. But a question arises which calls 
for attention. Is this partiality to the Congress the result of 
an infatuation for the ‘Fight for Freedom’ movement ? Or, is 
it the result of a conviction that this ‘Fight for Freedom’ is 
going to make the people of India free ? If it is the former, all 
I can do is to regret that what I have said in Chapter VII in 
explanation as to why the Untouchables have not joined with 
the Congress in this ‘Fight for Freedom’ has not produced the 
desired effect on the foreigner. But I cannot quarrel with him 
on that account. For it is quite understandable that many 
a foreigner on reading that chapter may say that while the 
reasons adduced by me as to why the Untouchables refuse to 
join the ‘Fight for Freedom’ are valid and good, I have shown 
no ground why he should not support a body which is carrying 
on a fight for freedom. 

If the basis of his partiality to the Congress is of the latter 
sort then the matter stands on a different footing. It then 
becomes necessary to examine the rationale of his attitude and 
to save him from his error. 

Ordinarily, no one trusts the word of a person who is not 
prepared to place all his cards on the table and commit himself 
to something clear and definite, so as to prove his bona fides, 
to inspire confidence and secure the co-operation of those who 
have doubts about his motives. The same rule must apply to 
the Congress. But as I have shown in Chapter VII the Congress 
has not produced its blue print of the sort of democracy it aims 
to establish in India, showing what place the servile classes 
and particularly the Untouchables will have in it. Indeed, it 
has refused to produce such a blue print, notwithstanding the 
insistent demand of the Untouchables and the other minority 
communities. In the absence of such a pronouncement it appears 
to be a strange sort of credulity on the part of the foreigner 
to give support to the Congress on the ground that it stood 
for democracy. 

There is certainly no ground for thinking that the Congress 
is planning to establish democracy in India. The mere fact 
that the Congress is engaged in a ‘Fight for Freedom’ does 
not warrant such a conclusion. Before any such conclusion 
is drawn it is the duty of the foreigner to pursue the matter 
further and ask another question, namely, ‘For whose 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 443 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 443 

freedom is the Congress fighting ?’ The question whether the 
Congress is fighting for freedom has very little importance as 
compared to the question, ‘for whose freedom is the Congress 
fighting ?’ This is a pertinent and necessary inquiry and it 
would be wrong for any lover of freedom to support the Congress 
without further pursuing the matter and finding out what the 
truth is. But the foreigner who takes the side of the Congress 
does not care even to raise such a question. One should have 
thought that he would very naturally raise such a question 
and if he did raise it and pursue it, I am confident, he will 
find abundant proof that the Congress far from planning for 
democracy is planning to resuscitate the ancient form of Hindu 
polity of a hereditary governing class ruling a hereditary 
servile class. 

The attitude of the foreigner to the cause of the servile 
classes and particularly to the cause of the Untouchables is a 
vital matter and no party can leave it out of consideration, as a 
case of idiosyncrasy. For any one representing the Untouchables 
it is necessary to take note of it and do his best to convince 
the foreigner that in supporting the Congress he is supporting 
a wrong party. 


Ill 

Apart from the question of likes and dislikes, the real 
explanation for this strange attitude of the foreigner towards 
the Congress seems to be in certain notions about freedom, 
self-government and democracy propounded by western writers 
on Political Science and which have become the stock-in-trade 
of the average foreigner. 

As to freedom, the foreigner does not stop to make a dis- 
tinction between the freedom of a country and the freedom 
of the people in the country. He takes it for granted that the 
freedom of a country is the same as the freedom of the people 
in the country and once the freedom of the country is secured 
the freedom of the people is also thereby assured. 

As regards self-government he believes that all that is 
wanted in a people is a sense of constitutional morality, which 
Grote 1 defined as habits of “paramount reverence for the form of 


1. History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 347. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


444 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

444 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the constitution, enforcing obedience to the authorities acting 
under and within those forms, yet combined with the habit of 
open speech, of action subject only to definite legal control, and 
unrestrained censure of those very authorities as to all their 
public acts — combined, too, with a perfect confidence in the 
bosom of every citizen, admits the bitterness of party contest, 
that the forms of constitution will be not less sacred in the eyes 
of his opponents than in his own.” If in a populace these habits 
are present, then according to the western writers on Politics, 
self-government can be a reality and nothing further need be 
considered. As to democracy he believes that what is necessary 
for achieving it is the establishment of universal adult suffrage. 
Other aids have been suggested such as recall, plebiscite and 
frequent elections and in some countries they have been brought 
into operation. But in a majority of countries nothing more than 
adult suffrage and frequent elections is deemed to be necessary 
for ensuring Government by the people, of the people and for 
the people. 

I have no hesitation in saying that all these notions are 
fallacious and grossly misleading. 

Not to make a distinction between the freedom of the 
country and the freedom of the people in the country is to allow 
oneself to be misled, if not deceived. For, words such as society, 
nation and country are just amorphous if not ambiguous terms. 
There is no gainsaying that ‘nation’ though one word means 
many classes. Philosophically, it may be possible to consider a 
nation as a unit but sociologically it cannot but be regarded as 
consisting of many classes and the freedom of the nation, if it 
is to be a reality, must vouchsafe the freedom of the different 
classes comprised in it, particularly of those who are treated as 
the servile classes. 

Habits of constitutional morality may be essential for the 
maintenance of a constitutional form of Government. But the 
maintenance of a constitutional form of Government is not the 
same thing as a self-government by the people. Similarly, it may 
be granted that adult suffrage can produce government of the 
people in the logical sense of the phrase, i.e., in contrast to the 
government of a king. But it cannot by itself be said to bring 
about a democratic government, in the sense of the government 
by the people and for the people. 

Anyone who knows the tragic fate of Parliamentary 
Democracy in Western Europe will not require more and 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK SJ+YS 3- 1 0-20 1 3/VS- 14-1 1-2013 445 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 445 

better evidence to prove the fallacy underlying such notions 
of democracy 1 . If I may quote myself from what I have said 
in another place, the causes which have led to the failure 
of democracy in Western Europe may be summarized in the 
following words : 

“The Government of human society has undergone 
some very significant changes. There was a time when the 
government of human society had taken the form of autocracy 
by Despotic Sovereigns. This was replaced after a long 
and bloody struggle by a system of government known as 
Parliamentary Democracy. It was felt that this was the last 
word in the framework of government. It was believed to bring 
about the millennium in which every human being will have 
the right to liberty, property and pursuit of happiness. And 
there were good grounds for such high hopes. In parliamentary 
democracy there is the Legislature to express the voice of the 
people ; there is the executive which is subordinate to the 
Legislature and bound to obey the Legislature. Over and above 
the Legislature and the Executive there is the Judiciary to 
control both and keep them both within prescribed bounds. 
Parliamentary democracy has all the marks of a popular 
Government, a government of the people, by the people and 
for the people. It is therefore a matter of some surprise that 
there has been a revolt against parliamentary democracy 
although not even a century has elapsed since its universal 
acceptance and inauguration. There is revolt against it in 
Italy, in Germany, in Russia and in Spain, and there are very 
few countries in which there has not been discontent against 
parliamentary democracy. Why should there be this discontent 
and dissatisfaction against parliamentary democracy ? It is a 
question worth considering. There is no country in which the 
urgency of considering this question is greater than it is in 
India, India is negotiating to have parliamentary democracy. 
There is a great need of some one with sufficient courage to 
tell Indians: “Beware of parliamentary democracy, it is not 
the best product as it appears to be. 

Why has parliamentary democracy failed ? In the country 
of the dictators it has failed because it is a machine whose 
movements are very slow. It delays swift action. In a 
parliamentary democracy the Executive may be held up by 
the Legislature which may refuse to pass the laws which the 
Executive wants and if it is not held up by the Legislature it 


1. Labour and Parliamentary Democracy — A lecture delivered on 17th 
September 1943 to the All-India Trade Union Workers’ Study Camp held in Delhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


446 


446 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

may be held up by the judiciary which may declare the 
laws as illegal. Parliamentary democracy gives no free hand 
to dictatorship and that is why it became a discredited 
institution in countries like Italy, Spain and Germany which 
readily welcomed dictatorships. If dictators alone were against 
parliamentary democracy it would not have mattered at all. 
Their testimony against parliamentary democracy would be 
welcomed for the reason that it can be an effective check 
upon dictatorship. But unfortunately there is a great deal of 
discontent against parliamentary democracy even in countries 
where people are opposed, to dictatorship. That is the most 
regrettable fact about Parliamentary democracy. This is all 
the more regrettable because parliamentary democracy has 
not been at a standstill. It has progressed in three directions. 
It began with equality of political rights in the form of equal 
suffrage. There are very few countries haying parliamentary 
democracy which have not adult suffrage. It has progressed by 
expanding the notion of equality of political rights to equality 
of social and: economic opportunity. It has recognised that 
the State cannot be held at bay by corporations which are 
anti-social in their purpose. With all this, there is immense 
discontent against parliamentary democracy even in countries 
pledged to democracy. The reasons for discontent in such 
countries must obviously be different from those assigned by 
the dictator countries. There is no time to go into details. But 
it can be, said in general terms that the discontent against 
parliamentary democracy is due to the realization that it has 
failed to assure to the masses the right to liberty, property 
or the pursuit of happiness. If this is true, it is important 
to know the causes which bave brought about this failure. 
The causes for this failure may be found either in. wrong 
ideology or wrong organization or in both. I think the causes 
are to be found in both. 

Of the erroneous ideologies which have been responsible 
for the failure of parliamentary democracy I have no doubt 
that the idea of freedom of contract is one of them. The 
idea became sanctified and was upheld in the name of 
liberty. Parliamentary democracy took no notice of economic 
inequalities and did not care to examine the result of freedom 
of contract on the parties to the contract, in spite of the 
fact that they were unequal in their bargaining power. It 
did not mind if the freedom of contract gave the strong 
the opportunity to defraud the weak. The result is that 
parliamentary democracy in standing out as protagonist of 
liberty has continuously added to the economic wrongs of the 
poor, the downtrodden and the disinherited class. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


447 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 447 

The second wrong ideology which has vitiated 
parliamentary democracy is the failure to realize that political 
democracy cannot succeed where there is no social and 
economic democracy. Some may question this proposition. To 
those who are disposed to question it, I will ask a counter- 
question. Why did parliamentary democracy collapse so easily 
in Italy, Germany and Russia ? Why did it not collapse so 
easily in England and the U.S.A. ? To my mind there is 
only one answer. It is that there was a greater degree of 
economic and social democracy in the latter countries than 
existed in the former. Social and economic democracy are the 
tissues and the fibre of a political democracy. The tougher 
the tissue and the fibre, the greater the strength of the 
body. Democracy is another name for equality. Parliamentary 
democracy developed a passion for liberty. It never made even 
a nodding acquaintance with equality. It failed to realize 
the significance of equality and did not even endeavour to 
strike a balance between liberty and equality with the result 
that liberty swallowed equality and has made democracy a 
name and a farce. 

I have referred to the wrong ideologies which in 
my judgment have been responsible for the failure of 
parliamentary democracy. But I am equally certain that 
more than bad ideology it is bad organization which has been 
responsible for the failure of democracy. All political societies 
get divided into two classes — the Rulers and the Ruled. This 
is an evil. If the evil stopped here it would not matter much. 

But the unfortunate part of it is that the division becomes 
so stereotyped and stratified that Rulers are always drawn 
from the ruling class and the class that is ruled never 
becomes the ruling class. This happens because generally 
people do not care to see that they govern themselves. 
They are content to establish a government and leave it to 
govern them. This explains why parliamentary democracy 
has never been a government of the people or by the people 
and why it has been in reality a government of a hereditary 
subject class by a hereditary ruling class. It is this vicious 
organization of political life which has made parliamentary 
democracy such a dismal failure. It is because of this that 
parliamentary democracy has not fulfilled the hope it held 
out to the common man of ensuring to him liberty, property 
and pursuit of happiness.” 

If this analysis of the causes which have led to the failure 
of democracy is correct, it must serve as a warning to the 
protagonists of democracy that there are certain fundamental 
considerations which go to the root of democracy and which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


448 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

448 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

they cannot ignore without peril to democracy. For the sake of 
clarity these considerations may be set down in serial order. 

First is the recognition of the hard fact of history that in 
every country there exist two classes, — the governing class and 
the servile class between whom there is a continuous struggle 
for power. Second is that by reason of its power and prestige 
the governing class finds it easy to maintain its supremacy 
over the servile class. Third is that adult suffrage and frequent 
elections are no bar against governing class reaching places 
of power and authority. Fourth is that on account of their 
inferiority complex the members of the servile classes regard 
the members of the governing class as their natural leaders 
and the servile classes themselves volunteer to elect members 
of the governing classes as their rulers. Fifth is that the 
existence of a governing class is inconsistent with democracy 
and self-government and that given the fact that where the 
governing class retains its power to govern, it is wrong to 
believe that democracy and self-government have become 
realities of life. Sixth is that self-government and democracy 
become real not when a constitution based on adult suffrage 
comes into existence but when the governing class loses its 
power to capture the power to govern. Seventh is that while 
in some countries the servile classes may succeed in ousting 
the governing class from the seat of authority with nothing 
more than adult suffrage, in other countries the governing 
class may be so deeply entrenched that the servile classes 
will need other safeguards besides adult suffrage to achieve 
the same end. 

That there is great value in having these considerations 
drawn up and hung up, so to say on the wall, before every 
lover of democracy, so that he may see them and note them, 
goes without saying. For they will help, as nothing else 
can, to make him realize that in devising a constitution for 
democracy he must bear in mind : that the principal aim of 
such a constitution must be to dislodge the governing class 
from its position and to prevent it from remaining as a 
governing class for ever ; that the machinery for setting up 
a democratic government cannot be a matter of dogma ; that 
ousting the governing class from power being the main object 
the machinery for setting up a democratic government cannot 
be uniform and that variations in the machinery of Democracy 
must not merely be tolerated but accepted for the reason that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


449 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 449 

the processes by which the governing classes obtain their 
mastery over the servile classes vary from country to country, 

This is what democracy means and involves. But 
unfortunately Western writers on Politics from whom the 
foreigner draws his notions have failed to take such a realistic 
view of democracy. Instead, they have taken a very formal 
and a very superficial view of it by making constitutional 
morality, adult suffrage and frequent elections as the be-all 
and end-all of democracy. 

Those who propound the view that democracy need involve 
no more than these three devices are probably unaware of 
the fact that they are doing nothing more than and nothing 
different from expressing the point of view of the governing 
classes. The governing classes know by experience that such 
mechanisms have not proved fatal to their power and their 
position. Indeed, they have helped to give to their power 
and prestige the virtue of legality and made themselves less 
vulnerable to attack by the servile classes. 

Those who wish that democracy and self-government 
should come into their own, and should not remain as mere 
forms, cannot do better than start with the recognition of 
the crucial fact that the existence of a permanently settled 
governing class is the greatest danger to democracy. It is 
the only safe and realistic approach for a democrat to adopt. 
It is a fatal blunder to omit to take account of its existence 
in coming to a conclusion as to whether in a free country 
freedom will be the privilege of the governing class only or 
it will be the possession of all. In my view, therefore, what 
the foreigner who chooses to side with the Congress should 
ask is not whether the Congress is fighting for freedom. He 
should ask : For whose freedom is the Congress fighting ? 
Is it fighting for the freedom of the governing class in India 
or is it fighting for the freedom of the people of India ? If 
he finds that the Congress is fighting for the freedom of 
the governing class, he should ask Congressmen ; Is the 
governing class in India fit to govern ? This is the least he 
can do before siding with the Congress. 

What are the answers which Congressmen have to give 
to these questions ? I do not know. But I will give what I 
think are the only true answers to these questions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


450 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

450 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IV 

I cannot say if the foreigner will be impressed by what 
has been said in the foregoing section of this chapter. If he 
is he will no doubt ask for proof in support of the statement 
that the Congress in fighting for the freedom of the country 
is really fighting not to establish democracy but is planning to 
resuscitate the ancient Hindu polity of a hereditary governing 
class ruling a hereditary servile class. I am not certain that 
the foreigner will be satisfied with the evidence. But I am 
prepared to place it before him for what it is worth. 

Who constitute the governing class in India ? For Indians 
such a question is unnecessary. But for the foreigner it is a 
necessary preliminary and it must therefore be dealt with. The 
governing class in India consists principally of the Brahmins. 
Strangely enough some present-day Brahmins repudiate the 
allegation that they belong to the governing class though at 
one time they described themselves as Bhudevas (Gods on 
earth). What can this volte face be due to ? The intellectual 
class in every community is charged by its moral code with 
one sacred duty, namely, to safeguard the interest of the 
community and not to sacrifice it to the interest of their own 
class. No intellectual class has so grossly violated this trust 
as have the Brahmins in India. When one finds the Brahmins 
repudiating their position as the governing class in India one 
begins to think whether it is due to a guilty conscience, born 
out of the realization that they have committed a criminal 
breach of this trust and therefore dare not stand before the 
bar of the world. Or is it due to their sense of modesty ? It 
is not necessary to speculate as to what the truth is. For, it 
is hardly open to question that in India the Brahmins are 
a governing class. If necessary there are two tests which 
one could apply for the purpose of ascertaining the truth. 
First is the sentiment of the people and the second is the 
Brahmin’s share in administration. Taking the attitude 
of the people towards the Brahmin, nobody can deny that 
the person of the Brahmin is regarded as sacred by every 
Hindu, high or low. He is the most “Worshipful Master” to 
whom everyone high and low must bow. In pre-British days 
he had immunities and privileges which were denied to the 
servile class. For instance he could not be hanged even if 
he committed murder. That was because he was a sacred 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


451 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 451 

person. There was a time when no person of the servile class could 
take his food without drinking the water in which the toes of the 
Brahmins were washed. Sir P. C. Ray once described how in his 
childhood, rows of children belonging to the servile classes used 
to stand for hours together in the morning on the roadside in 
Calcutta with cups of water in their hands waiting for a Brahmin 
to pass, ready to wash his feet and take the sacred liquid to 
their parents who would not take their food without having a 
sip of it first. He was entitled to first fruits. In Malabar, where 
the Sambandham form of marriage prevails, the servile classes, 
such as the Nairsy regard it an honour to have their females kept 
as mistresses by the Brahmins. Even kings invited Brahmins to 
deflower their queens on prima noctis . 1 * * * * * * VIII, 

1. The Traveller Ludovico Di Varthema who came to India in the middle of the 

16th century and visited Malabar says : 

“It ia proper and at the same time a pleasant thing to know who these Brahmins 
are. You must know that they are the chief persona of the faith, as priests are among 
us. And when the king takes a wife he selects the most worthy and the most honoured 
of these Brahmins and makes him sleep the first night with his wife, in order that 
he may deflower her. Do not imagine that the Brahmin goes willingly to perform this 
operation. The king is obliged to pay him four hundred to five hundred ducats. The 
king only and-no other person in Calicut adopts this practice.” — Voyages of Varthma 
(Hakluyat Society), Vol I, p 141. 

Other Travellers tell that the practice was widespread. Hamilton in his Account 
of the East Indies says : 

“When the Samorin marries, he most not cohabit with his bride till the Nambourie 
(Nambudri) or chief priest, has enjoyed her, and if he pleases he may have three nights 
of her company, because the first fruits of her nuptials most be a holy oblation to the 
God she worships and some of the nobles are so complacent as to allow the clergy the 
same tribute ; bat the common people cannot have that compliment paid to them, but 
are forced to supply the priests places themselves.” — Vol. I, p. 308. 

Buchanan in his Narrative refers to the practice in the following terms : 

“The ladies of the Tamuri family are generally impregnated by Nambudries ; although 
if they choose they may employ the higher ranks of Naire ; bus the sacred character 
of the Nambudries always procures them a preference.” — Pinkerton’s Voyages, Vol. 

VIII, p. 734. 

Mr. C. A. Innes, I.C.S., Editor of the Gazetteer of Malabar and Anjengo issued 
under the authority of the Government of Madras, says : 

“Another institution found amongst all the classes following the marukak-kattayam 
system, as well as amongst many of those who observe makkattayam, is that known 
as “Tali-tying wedding “which has been described as the most peculiar, distinctive 
and unique” among Malayali marriage customs. Its essence is the tying of a tali (a 
small piece of gold or other metal, like a locket on a string) on a girl’s neck before 
she attains the ago of puberty. This is done by a man of the same or of a higher 
caste (the usages of different classes differ), and it is only after it has been done that 
the girl is at liberty to contract, a sambandham. It seems to be generally considered 
that the ceremony was intended to confer on the tali tier or manavalan (bridegroom) 
a right to cohabit with the girl; and by some the origin of the ceremony is found in 
the claim of the Bhu-devas or “Earth-Gods,” (that is the Brahmins), and on a lower 
plane of Kshatriyas or ruling classes, to the first-fruits of lower caste womanhood, a 
right akin to the mediaeval droit de seigneurie” — Vol. I, p. 101. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


452 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

452 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Under the British Government and by reason of its 
equalitarian jurisprudence these rights, immunities and 
privileges of the Brahmins have ceased to exist. Nonetheless 
the advantages they gave still remain and the Brahmin is still 
pre-eminent and sacred in the eyes of the servile classes and 
is still addressed by them as “Swami” which means ‘Lord.’ 

The second test gives an equally positive result. To take 
only the Madras Presidency by way of illustration. Consider 
Table 18 (see page 213). It shows the distribution of gazetted 
posts between the Brahmins and the other communities in the 
year 1943. Similar data from the other provinces could also 
be adduced to support this conclusion. But it is unnecessary 
to labour the point. Whether the Brahmins accept or deny 
the status the facts that they control the State and that their 
supremacy is accepted by the servile classes, are enough to 
prove that they form the governing class. 

It is of course impossible for the Brahmins to maintain 
their supremacy as a governing class without an ally to 
help them on account of their being numerically very small. 
Consequently, as history shows, the Brahmins have always 
had other classes as their allies to whom they were ready 
to accord the status of a governing class provided they were 
prepared to work with them in subordinate co-operation. In 
ancient and mediaeval times they made such an alliance 
with the Kshatriyas or the warrior class and the two not 
merely ruled the masses, but ground them down to atoms, 
pulverized them so to say — the Brahmin with his pen and 
the Kshatriya with his sword. At present, Brahmins have 
made an alliance with the Vaishya class called Banias. The 
shifting of this alliance from the Kshatriya to the Bania 
is in the changed circumstances quite inevitable. In these 
days of commerce money is more important than sword. 
That is one reason for this change in party alignment. The 
second reason is the need for money to run the political 
machine. Money can come only from and is in fact coming 
from the Bania. If the Bania is financing the Congress it 
is because he has realized — and Mr. Gandhi has taught 
him — that money invested in politics gives large dividends. 
Those who have any doubt in the matter might do well to 
read what Mr. Gandhi told Mr. Louis Fischer on June 6, 
1942. In his book A Week with Mr. Gandhi, Mr. Fischer 


Table 18 (i) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


453 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 453 


ft? 


£ 

^3 


8 

0 

e 

1 




^3 




^F 

o 

oq 

05 

q 

oq 

tf 

00 


q 

o 


oq 

UO 

tF 

tF 

o 

i—i 

to 

Oq 

TF 

00 

CD 

CD 

•^F 

tF 

00 

i— l 

i—l 

r— 1 

oo" 


<N 


<^> p 

OS 

^ tsT 


§p 


^3 


O p 

a 

3 ' 


CO 

t> 

CO 

TF 


CO 

CD 

52 

q 

CO 

CD 


CO 


o 

1 6 


-O 

I 


o 

© s s £ 

~ «■ * 


03 

CO 


CO 

^F 

to 


S’ 


O * 
& 

3 1 


CO 


o 

oq 


2 


■I 




^ O O 

^ N 03 

w 00 l-H 


O 

lO 


to 

(N 


O' 

Oq 

CD 


O 

iO 


^ S3 
o 
‘-5 

a 2 
S 3 


(N 

(N 


O 

lO 


& 
3 ■ 


1 5 

■ta ^ 
2 0 
33 Kj 

& e 
ftn ^ 


O' 

oq 


CO 


o 

i> 


LO 

TF 

oq 


c3 


a 

Co 


CQ 


O 


3 

c3 

a 

g 

a 

a 

r3 

S3 


r-5 

O 


S Q 



S3 

*4 S 
0) S 

^ s 

O O 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 454 

DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

454 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

records very revealing answers to some of his most interesting 
and pertinent questions. Mr. Fischer writes 1 : 

“I said I had several questions to ask him (Mr. Gandhi) 
about the Congress Party. Very highly placed Britishers, I 
recalled, had told me that Congress was in the hands of big 
business and that Mr. Gandhi was supported by the Bombay 
Millowners who gave him as much money as he wanted. ‘What 
truth is there in these assertions,’ I asked, ‘Unfortunately, they 
are true,’ he declared simply. ‘Congress hasn’t enough money 
to conduct its work. We thought in the beginning to collect 
four annas (about eight cents) from each member per year 
and operate on that. But it hasn’t worked.’ ‘What proportion 
of the Congress budget,’ I asked, ‘is covered by rich Indians ?’ 
‘Practically all of it,’ he stated ‘In this ashram, for instance, 
we could live much more poorly than we do and spend less 
money. But we do not and the money comes from our rich 
friends.’ ” 

Being dependent on his money, it is impossible for the 
Brahmin to exclude the Bania from the position of a governing 
class. In fact, the Brahmin has established not merely a working 
but a cordial alliance with the Bania. The result is that the 
governing class in India to-day is a Brahmin-Bania instead of 
a Brahmin-Kshatriya combine as it used to be. 

Enough has been said to show who constitute the governing 
class in India. The next inquiry must be directed to find out 
how the governing class fared in the elections to the Provincial 
Legislatures that took place in 1937. 

The elections that took place in 1937 were based on a 
franchise which though it was neither universal nor adult was 
wide enough to include classes other than the governing class, 
certainly wider than any existing prior to 1937. The elections 
based on such a franchise may well be taken as a test to find 
out how the governing class fared as against the servile classes 
in this electoral contest. 

Unfortunately, no Indian publicist has as yet undertaken 
to compile an Indian counterpart of Dodd’s Parliamentary 
Manual. Consequently, it is difficult to have precise particulars 
regarding the caste, occupation, education and social status 
of members of the legislature elected on the Congress ticket. 
The matter is so important that I thought of collecting the 


1. A Week With Gandhi (1943), p. 41. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 455 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 455 

necessary information on these points relating to members of 
the Provincial Legislatures elected in 1937. I did not succeed 
in getting precise information about every member. There 
are many whom I have had to leave as unclassified. But the 
information I have been able to gather is I believe sufficient 
to warrant our drawing certain definite conclusions. 

As an answer to the question as to how the governing 
class fared in the electoral contest of 1937, attention may be 
drawn to Table 19 (see page 216) which shows the proportion 
of Brahmins and Banias (landlords and moneylenders) 
representing the governing class and non-Brahmins and 
the Scheduled Castes representing the servile classes, that 
were elected to the Provincial Legislative Assemblies on the 
Congress ticket. 

Those, who do not know how small is the proportion of 
the Brahmins to the total population of Hindus, may not be 
able to realize the degree of over-representation which the 
Brahmins have secured in the election. But there is no doubt 
that on comparison with their numbers the Brahmins have 
secured overwhelming representation. 

Those, who wish to know what degree of representation the 
propertied classes, such as Banias, businessmen and landlords 
obtained, may see the figures given in Table 20 (see page 217). 
It shows how many Banias, businessmen and landlords were 
elected on the Congress ticket. Here again the representation 
secured by the Banias, landlords and businessmen is quite 
out of proportion to their numbers. 

Such is the position of the governing class in the legislatures 
constituted under the elections that took place in 1937. Some 
may say that on the whole the governing classes were in a 
minority in the legislature. As against this, it must be pointed 
out that the supremacy of the governing class can be measured 
not by its position in the legislature but by its ability to get 
possession of executive authority. An inquiry into the class 
composition of the Ministers is therefore very pertinent. 
Information on this point will be found in Tables 21 and 22 
(see pages 218 and 219). A glance at the tables 1 is enough 
to show that the Brahmins — the premier governing class — 
succeeded in capturing an overwhelming majority of seats in 


1. The facts summarized in those Tables are taken from the issue for July 15, 
1939, of Information, an official publication issued by the Government of India. 


Classification of Congress Members of Provincial Assemblies by Castes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


456 


456 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Classification of the Congress Members of the Provincial Legislatures in terms of Occupation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


457 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 457 


Total 

33 

54 

co 

05 

70 

159 

36 

Not 

Stated 

05 


14 

HO 

36 

1 

Nil 

CO 

16 

i—l 

00 

CO 

i—l 

Money 

Lenders 

I 

I 

1 

I 

1—1 

rH 

Private 

Officials 

1 

<N 

CO 

1 

<N 


Business- 

men 

i—l 

lO 

CD 

10 

18 


Land- 

lords 


16 

56 

25 

45 

17 

Medical 

Practiti- 

oners 


<N 


(N 

<N 

i—l 

Lawyers 

16 

05 

14 

20 

52 

CO 


&H 


hJD 

£ 

05 

CQ 


03 

A 

s 


O 


cC 




o 


Composition of the Cabinets in the Congress Provinces 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


458 


458 


* 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


£ 

£ 

§ 


CJ 


e 


^ CC 

*3 « 

O 
o w 
CO 


g £ 

< e 

5k 

CQ 


-«S 

S 

nq 




O ^ 

I J 

_ *o 
8 £ 

g 0 


A 

cd 

Sh 

CQ 


43 

cd 


CQ 


43 

cd 


CQ 


43 

cd 


CQ 


43 

Cd 


CQ 


g 

a 

43 

cd 

5m 

m 


cd 

S 


cd 

rO 

a 

o 

PQ 


cd 


O 




* This table represent the position as it stood in May 1939 and as reported in the Issue of July 15, 1939, of the Indian Information. 
Question mark indicates inability to classify whether Brahmin or non-Brahmin. 


Classification of Parliamentary Secretaries in Congress Provinces 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


459 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 
A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 



459 


Compiled from Indian Information Issue of July 15, 1939. Question mark indicates inability to classify whether Brahmin or non- Brahmin. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


460 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

460 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Cabinet. In all the Hindu Provinces, the Prime Ministers 
were Brahmins. In all Hindu provinces, if the non-Hindu 
ministers were excluded, the majority of ministers were 
Brahmins and even parliamentary secretaries were Brahmins. 

What has been said so far makes two things as clear as 
daylight. First is that there is in India a well defined governing 
class, distinct and separate from the servile class. Second is 
that the governing class is so powerful that though small in 
number in the elections of 1937 it quite easily captured political 
power and established its supremacy over the servile classes. 
There remains only one more point for me to establish to be 
able to put my thesis across. It is to show how far Congress 
was responsible for the victory of the governing class in the 
elections of 1937. I know I must prove beyond reasonable doubt 
that the Congress is responsible for placing the governing class 
in the position of supremacy over the servile class. For it might 
be said that the Congress had nothing to do with this, that 
even if the Congress was responsible for it the result was an 
accident and that there was no intention on the part of the 
Congress to help the governing classes to win this position of 
supremacy. 


V 

The first line of these suggested defences can be easily 
disposed of. It is probable that those who raise this defence 
do not know the political colour of the province to which the 
figures given in Tables 19, 20, 21 and 22 relate. If they knew 
it they would give up this line of defence. For they relate to 
what are called the Congress Provinces. In these provinces 
the majority party was the Congress Party and the Cabinets 
were Congress Cabinets. Obviously, if in these Congress 
provinces the governing classes succeeded in establishing 
their rule over the servile classes it is difficult to see how 
the Congress could be absolved from responsibility for such 
a result. The Congress is a well disciplined party. It had a 
plan for fighting the elections. In every province there was 
established a Parliamentary Board, the functions of which 
were (1) to choose candidates for elections, (2) to decide upon 
the formation of Cabinets, and (3) to control the actions of 
ministers. Over and above these Provincial Parliamentary 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


461 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 461 

Boards there was a Central Parliamentary Board to superintend 
and control the work of the Provincial Parliamentary Boards. 
It was an election which was planned and controlled by the 
Congress. It is therefore futile to argue that if the governing 
classes captured power in the elections of 1937 in the Congress 
Provinces the Congress is not responsible for the result. 

The second line of defence is as fragile as the first. Those 
who wish to argue that the dominance of the governing class in 
the Congress provinces is accidental and not intentional should 
know that they are advancing an argument which will not 
stand. I would invite the attention of those who are inclined to 
treat it as an accident to consider the following circumstances. 

First let them consider the mentality of the leading members 
of the Congress High Command who have guided the destiny 
of the Congress in the past and who are at present running 
the affairs of the Congress. It would be well to begin with 
Mr. Tilak. He is dead. But while he was alive he was the 
most leading man in the Congress and exercised the greatest 
sway over it. Mr. Tilak was a Brahmin and belonged to the 
governing class. Though he had acquired the reputation of 
being the father of the Swaraj movement his antipathy to the 
servile classes was quite well known. For want of space I will 
cite only one instance of his mentality towards the servile 
classes. In 1918, when the non-Brahmins and the Backward 
classes had started an agitation for separate representation in 
the legislature, Mr. Tilak in a public meeting held in Sholapur 
said that he did not understand why the oil pressers, tobacco 
shopkeepers, washermen, etc. — that was his description of the 
Non-Brahmins and the Backward classes — should want to go 
into the legislature. In his opinion, their business was to obey 
the laws and not to aspire for power to make laws. 

Next after Tilak I may take Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel. 
Here again, I will cite only one instance to indicate his 
mentality. In 1942, Lord Linlithgow invited 52 important 
Indians representing different sections of the people to 
discuss the steps that might be taken to make the Central 
Government more popular and thereby enlist the sympathy 
and co-operation of all Indians in war effort. Among those 
that were invited were members belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes. Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel could not bear the idea that the 
Viceroy should have invited such a crowd of mean men. Soon 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


462 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

462 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

after the event, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel made a speech in 
Ahmedabad and said 1 : — 

“The Viceroy sent for the leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
he sent for the leaders of the Muslim League and he sent 
for Ghanchis (oil pressers), Mochis (cobblers) and the rest.” 

Although Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel in his malicious and 
stinging words referred only to Ghanchis and Mochis his speech 
indicates the general contempt in which he holds the servile 
classes of his country. 

It may be well to know the reactions of Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru is a Brahmin, but he has the 
reputation of being non-communal in his outlook and secular 
in his beliefs. Facts do not seem to justify the reputation he 
carries. A person cannot be called secular if he, when his father 
dies, performs the religious ceremonies prescribed by orthodox 
Hinduism at the hands of Brahmin priests on the banks of the 
river Ganges as Pandit Jawaharlal did when his father died 
in 1931. As to his being non-communal it is stated by no less 
a person than Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya that Pandit Nehru 
is very conscious of the fact that he is a Brahmin. 2 This must 
come as a most astonishing fact to those who believe the Pandit 
to have the reputation of being the most nationally minded 
Hindu leader in India. But Dr. Sitaramayya must be knowing 
what he is talking about. More disturbing is the fact that in 
the United Provinces from which he hails and over which he 
exercises complete authority the ministers in the cabinet of 
the province were all Brahmins. Mrs. Vijaya Laxmi Pandit, 
the well-known sister of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, also seems 
to be conscious of herself being Brahmin by caste. It is said 
that at the All-India Women’s Conference held in Delhi in 
December 1940, the question of not declaring one’s caste in 
the Census Return was discussed. Mrs. Pandit disapproved 3 
of the idea and said that she did not see any reason why she 
should not be proud of her Brahmin blood and declare herself 
as a Brahmin at the Census. 

Who are these men ? What is their status ? Mr. Tilak 

1 Quoted by Mr. J. E. Sanjana in Sense and Nonsense in Politics — Serial 
No. XII in the Rast Rahabar (a Bombay Gujarati Weekly) of 14th January 1945. 

2 See his Invitation p. XVI to Jawaharlal Nehru by Y. G. Krishnamurti. 

3 Quoted by Sanjann in Sense and Nonsense in Politics — Serial No. XII in the 
Rast Rahabar, dated 14th January 1945, 


z:\ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK SJ+YS 3- 1 0-20 1 3/VS- 14-1 1-2013 463 

WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 463 

has the reputation of being the father of the Swaraj movement. 
Mr. Patel and Pandit Nehru come next in command in the 
Congress hierarchy after Mr. Gandhi. 

Some might think that these are the individual and private 
opinions of the members of the Congress High Command. 
But that would be an error. Several cases could be pointed 
out in which such opinions have been acted upon in election 
campaigns run by the Congress. 

Ever since 1919 when Mr. Gandhi captured the Congress, 
Congressmen have looked upon the boycott of legislatures 
as one of the sanctions for making the British Government 
concede the demand for Swaraj. Under this policy, every time 
there was an election in which the Congress decided not to take 
part, the Congress would not only refuse to put candidates on 
the Congress ticket but would carry on propaganda against 
any Hindu proposing to stand for election as an independent 
candidate. One need not quarrel over the merits of such a 
policy. But what were the means adopted by the Congress 
to prevent Hindus standing on an independent ticket ? The 
means adopted were to make the legislatures objects of 
contempt. Accordingly, the Congress in various Provinces 
started processions carrying placards with these significant 
and telling words: “Who will go in the legislatures? Only 
barbers, cobblers, potters and sweepers.” In the processions 
one man would utter the question as part of the slogan 
and the whole Congress crowd would shout as answer the 
second part of the slogan. When the Congressmen found that 
this was not enough to deter persons from standing for the 
elections, they decided to adopt sterner measures. Believing 
that respectable people would not be prepared to stand for 
election if they felt certain that they would have to sit with 
barbers, potters and sweepers, etc., in the legislatures, the 
Congress actually went to the extent of putting up candidates 
from these despised communities on the Congress ticket and 
got them elected. A few illustrations of this outrageous conduct 
of the Congress may be mentioned. In the 1920 election, the 
Congress elected a cobbler 1 to the legislature of the Central 
Provinces. In the 1930 election, they elected in the Central 


Fagnwa Rohidas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


464 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

464 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Provinces two cobblers, 1 one milkman 2 and one barber, 3 and 
in the Punjab one sweeper. 4 In 1934, the Congress elected 
to the Central Legislature a potter. 5 It might be said that 
this is old history. Let me correct such an impression by 
referring to what happened in 1943, in the Municipal elections 
in Andheri — a suburb of Bombay. The Congress put up a 
barber to bring the Municipality in contempt. 

What a mentality for a, Governing class ! What a brazen- 
facedness for a governing class to use the servile class for 
such an ignominious purpose and yet claim to be fighting 
for their freedom ! What a tragedy for the servile class to 
take pride in its own disgrace and join in it voluntarily! 
The Sinn Fein Party in Ireland also boycotted the British 
Parliament. But did they make such hideous use of their own 
countrymen for effecting their purposes ? The campaign of 
boycott of legislature which took place in 1930 is of particular 
interest. The elections to the Provincial legislatures in 
1930 in which these instances occurred coincided with Mr. 
Gandhi’s Salt Satyagraha campaign of 1930; I hope that the 
future (the official historian, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, has 
failed to do so) historian of Congress while recording how 
Mr. Gandhi decided to serve notice on the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwin, presenting him with a list of demands to be conceded 
before a certain date and on failure by the Viceroy in this 
behalf, how Mr. Gandhi selected Salt Act as a target for 
attack, how he selected Dandi as a scene of battle, how he 
decided to put himself at the head of the campaign, how he 
marched out from his Ashram in Ahmedabad with all pomp 
and ceremony, how the women of Ahmedabad came out 
with Arthi and applied tilak ’(saffron mark) to his forehead 
wishing him victory, how Mr. Gandhi assured them that 
Gujarat alone would win Swaraj for India, how Mr. Gandhi 
proclaimed his determination by saying that he would not 
return to Ahmedabad until he had won Swaraj, will not fail 
to record that while on the one hand Congressmen were 
engaged in fighting for Swaraj, which they said they wanted 
to win in the name of and for the masses, on the other 


1 Guru Gosain Agamdas and Babraj Jaiwar. 

2 Chunnu. 

3 Arjun Lai. 

4 Bansi Lai Caudhari. 

6 Bhagat Chandimal Gola. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


465 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 465 

hand and in the very year they were committing the worst 
outrages upon the very masses by exhibiting them publicly 
as objects of contempt to be shunned and avoided. 

VI 

This mentality of the Congress High Command towards 
the servile classes is enough to negative the theory that 
the supremacy of the governing classes in the Congress 
Provinces was an accident. There are other facts which also 
go to negative the theory of accident and which are set out 
in Table 23 (see page 226). They relate to the educational 
qualifications of the several classes of candidates selected by 
the Congress for fighting the elections. What does the table 
show ? It is crystal clear that in the case of the Brahmins 
the relative proportion of graduates to non-graduates is far 
higher than what it is in the case of non-Brahmins and 
the Scheduled Castes. Was this an accident or was this a 
matter of policy ? This sort of selection is marked by such 
a state of uniformity that it could hardly be doubted that 
the Congress High Command in selecting a candidate had 
a definite policy, namely, in the case of Brahmins, to give 
preference to a candidate who had the highest educational 
qualifications and in the case of the non-Brahmins and the 
Scheduled Castes, to give preference to a candidate who 
had the lowest educational qualifications. The difference 
in terms of graduates and non-graduates does not really 
reveal the real difference between the status and position of 
the Brahmin candidates and non-Brahmin candidates. The 
Brahmin candidates were not merely graduates but they were 
seasoned politicians of high repute, while the non-Brahmin 
graduates were raw graduates with nothing but the career 
of second class politicians behind them. 

Why did the Congress select the best educated Brahmins 
as its candidates for election ? Why did the Congress select 
the least educated non-Brahmins and Scheduled Castes 
as its candidates for election ? To this question I can see 
only one answer. It was to prevent the non-Brahmins — the 
representatives of the servile classes — from forming a ministry. 
It cannot be that better educated non-Brahmins were not 
available. What the Congress seems to have done is deliberately 


Classification of Brahmin and Non-Brahmin Congress Partymen by Literacy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


466 


466 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


CO 

0 


02 | I> | CO 2 I 


CO rH 
i-l CO 


i - * CO l> lO 


iHC0C0t^(M(m|c0^h^h| | <n 


1 H <N rH ^ | LO Tf 


oq co 


CO I 


CO T-H 
1-1 CO 


CO t> 


02 ^ 
CO uo 


00 O CO 

CO 02 (N 


o 

<N 


LO 






CO 



CO 



CO 



CO 




CO 





0 



0 



0 



0 

CO 



0 





CO 



CO 



CO 



CO 

cd 



ro 


0 


0 

cd 


Ch 

cd 


53 

cd 


53 

cd 


S3 

cd 


a 


8 

u 


a 

u 


a 

u 


a 

a 

o 


a 

u 


X 


x 

X 


X 

r 0 


x 

X 


X 

Td 

T3 



X 

g 

a 

cd 

PQ 

g 

a 

cd 

PQ 

3 

Td 

g 

a 

cd 

PQ 

3 

Td 

g 

a 

cd 

PQ 

3 

Td 

g 

a 

cd 

f-i 

PQ 

3 

cd 

•s 

g 

a 

cd 

!H 

PQ 

3 

43 

43 

a 

o 


43 

a 

o 


43 

a 

o 


3 

a 

o 


44 

43 


cd 

o 

cd 

Sh 


cd 

43 

cd 

u 

43 

cd 

43 

0 

cd 

cd 

o 

43 

m 

2; 

n 

2 


Cm 

2 

m 

CQ 

2 

m 


2 

CO 

m 

m 

2 




a 

cd 

CO 

CO 

< 


cd 

bo 

S3 

0 

PQ 


Cd 

s 


0 

o 


Ph 


cd 


S 3 


0 

o 


CO 

cd 

H 

X 

cd 


§ 


cd 

CO 

CO 

o 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


467 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 467 

to prefer an uneducated non-Brahmin to an educated non- 
Brahmin. And why ? Because from the point of view of the 
governing class, the uneducated non-Brahmin has two definite 
advantages over an educated non-Brahmin. In the first place, 
he is likely to be more grateful to the Congress High Command 
for having got him elected than an educated non-Brahmin is 
likely to be. In the second place, the uneducated non-Brahmin 
is less likely to join hands with the educated non-Brahmins 
in the Congress Party and overturn the ministry of the 
governing classes and form a non-Brahmin ministry. In the 
third place, the greater the number of raw non-Brahmins in 
the Congress the lesser is the possibility of the non-Brahmins 
in the Congress forming a competent and alternative Ministry 
to the detriment of the governing class. 

Given these circumstances, can there be any doubt that 
the Congress “Fight for Freedom” is for the freedom of nobody 
except that of the governing class ? Is there any doubt that 
the Congress is the governing class and the governing class 
is the Congress ? Is there any doubt that when Swaraj came 
in 1937 in the form of Provincial autonomy, the Congress 
deliberately and shamelessly put the governing class in places 
of power and authority ? 


VII 

The facts set out above prove beyond cavil that the 
“Fight for Freedom” launched by the Congress has ended in 
perverting the aim and object of Indian freedom and that the 
Congress itself is a party to such a perversion. The result is 
an enormity, the character of which it would not be possible 
for the foreigner to realize unless he has an adequate idea 
of the social outlook and social philosophy of the Governing 
Classes in India. 

Starting with the Brahmins who form a strong and powerful 
element in the governing class in India it is no exaggeration 
to say that they have been the most inveterate enemies of 
the servile classes, the Shudras (the old name for the non- 
Brahmins) and the Untouchables who together constitute about 
80 or 90 per cent, of the total Hindu population of India. If 
the common man belonging to the servile classes in India is 
to-day so fallen, so degraded, so devoid of self-respect, hope or 
ambition, and so lifeless, it is entirely due to the Brahmins and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


468 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

468 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their philosophy. The cardinal principles of this philosophy 
of the Brahmins were six — to use a correct expression, 
techniques of suppression — (1) graded inequality between the 
different classes; (2) complete disarmament of the Shudras 
and the Untouchables; (3) complete ban on the education 
of the Shudras and the Untouchables; (4) total exclusion 
of the Shudras and the Untouchables from places of power 
and authority; (5) complete prohibition against the Shudras 
and the Untouchables acquiring property, and (6) complete 
subjugation and suppression of women. Inequality is the 
official doctrine of Brahmanism and the suppression of the 
lower classes aspiring to equality has been looked upon by 
them and carried out by them, without remorse as their 
bounden duty. There are countries where education did not 
spread beyond a few. But India is the only country where 
the intellectual class, namely, the Brahmins not only made 
education their monopoly but declared acquisition of education 
by the lower classes, a crime punishable by cutting off of the 
tongue or by the pouring of molten lead in the ear of the 
offender. The result is that for centuries the Brahmins have 
denied the servile classes the right to education. Even to-day 
the Brahmins exhibit the same hostility to their education. 
Mr. Baines, the Census Commissioner for 1891 in discussing 
the causes why education was not spreading among the 
masses said : — 

“The second influence antagonistic to a more general 
spread of literacy is the long continued existence of a 
hereditary class whose object it has been to maintain their 
own monopoly of all book-learning as the chief buttress of 
their social supremacy. Sacerdotalism knows that it can 
reign over none but an ignorant populace. The opposition 
of the Brahmin to the rise of the writer castes has been 
already mentioned, and the repugnance of both, in the 
present day, to the diffusion of learning amongst the masses 
can only be appreciated after long experience. It is true that 
the recognition by the British Government of the virtue 
and necessity of primary education has met with some 
response on the part of the literate castes, but it is chiefly 
in the direction of academic utterances, which cannot, in 
the circumstances, be well avoided. It is welcome too, in its 
capacity of affording the means of livelihood to many of these 
castes, as they have to be engaged as teachers, and are bound 
accordingly to work up to the State standard of efficient 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


469 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 469 

tuition. The real interest of the castes in question is centred 

on secondary education, of which they almost exclusively 

are in a position to reap the advantage.” 

The Congress politicians complain that the British are 
ruling India by a wholesale disarmament of the people of 
India. But they forget that disarmament of the Shudras and 
the Untouchables was the rule of law promulgated by the 
Brahmins. Indeed, so strongly did the Brahmins believe in 
the disarmament of the Shudras and the Untouchables that 
when they revised the law to enable the Brahmins to arm 
themselves for the protection of their own privileges, they 
maintained the ban on the Shudras and the Untouchables as 
it was without lessening its rigour. If the large majority of 
people of India appear to-day to be thoroughly emasculated, 
spiritless, with no manliness, it is the result of the Brahmanic 
policy of wholesale disarmament to which they have been 
subjected for the untold ages. There is no social evil and 
no social wrong to which the Brahmin has not given his 
support. Man’s inhumanity to man, such as the feeling of 
caste, untouchability, unapproach-ability and unseeability is 
a religion to him. It would, however, be a mistake to suppose 
that only the wrongs of man are a religion to him. The 
Brahmin has given his support to some of the worst wrongs 
that women have suffered from in any part of the world. In 
India widows were burnt alive as suttees and the Brahmin 
gave his fullest support to the practice. Widows were not 
allowed to remarry. The Brahmins upheld the doctrine. Girls 
were required to be married before 8 and the husbands were 
permitted to claim the right to consummate the marriage 
at any time thereafter whether she had reached puberty or 
not. The Brahmin defended the system. The record of the 
Brahmins as law givers for the Shudras, for the Untouchables 
and for women is the blackest as compared with the record 
of the intellectual classes in other parts of the world, For no 
intellectual class has prostituted its intelligence for the sole 
purpose of inventing a philosophy to keep his uneducated 
countrymen in a perpetual state of servility, ignorance and 
poverty as the Brahmins have done in India. Every Brahmin 
to-day believes in this philosophy of Brahmanism propounded 
by his forefathers. He is an alien element in the Hindu Society. 
The Brahmin ‘vis-a-vis the Shudras and the Untouchables 
is as foreign as the German is to the French, as the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


470 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

470 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Jew is to the Gentile or as the White is to the Negro. There 
is a real gulf between him and the lower classes of Shudras 
and Untouchables. He is not only alien to them but he is 
also hostile to them. In relationship with them, there is in 
him no room for conscience and no call for justice. 

The Bania is the worst parasitic class known to history. 
In him the vice of money-making is unredeemed by culture or 
conscience. He is like an undertaker who prospers when there 
is an epidemic. The only difference between the undertaker 
and the Bania is that the undertaker does not create an 
epidemic while the Bania does. He does not use his money 
for productive purposes. He uses it to create poverty and 
more poverty by lending money for unproductive purposes. 
He lives on interest and as he is told by his religion that 
money-lending is the occupation prescribed to him by the 
divine Manu, he looks upon money-lending as both right 
and righteous. With the help and assistance of the Brahmin 
judge who is ready to decree his suits, the Bania is able to 
carry on his trade with the greatest ease. Interest, interest 
on interest, he adds on and on, and thereby draws millions 
of families perpetually into his net. Pay him as much as he 
may, the debtor is always in debt. With no conscience to 
check him there is no fraud, and there is no chicanery which 
he will not commit. His grip over the nation is complete. 
The whole of poor, starving, illiterate India is irredeemably 
mortgaged to the Bania. 

In every country there is a governing class. No country is 
free from it. But is there anywhere in the world a governing 
class with such selfish, diseased and dangerous and perverse 
mentality, with such a hideous and infamous philosophy of 
life which advocates the trampling down of the servile classes 
to sustain the power and glory of the governing class ? I 
know of none. It is true that the governing classes in other 
countries do not readily admit into their society those who do 
not belong to their class. But they do not refuse admission 
to those who have risen to their level. Nor do they prevent 
any person from rising to their level. In India the governing 
class is a close corporation unwilling to admit anyone who 
does not belong to it by birth and ready to use every means 
to prevent the servile classes from rising to their level. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


471 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 471 

VIII 

There was a governing class in France before the French 
Revolution. There was a governing class in Japan before the 
seventies of the nineteenth century when Japan decided to 
modernize its constitution. In both countries the governing 
classes realizing that it was an hour of national crisis decided 
to shed their ancient rights and privileges in order to make the 
transition from oligarchy to democracy smooth and easy. 

In France, when the Revolution broke out and demanded 
equality the governing class in France voluntarily came forward 
to give up its powers and its privileges and to merge itself 
in the mass of the nation. This is clear from what happened 
when the States-General was called. The Commons got 600 
representatives, while the clergy and the Nobles got 300 each. 
The question arose how were the 1,200 members to sit, debate 
and vote. The Commons insisted upon the union of all the 
estates in one Chamber and ‘vote by head.’ It was impossible 
to expect the clergy and the Nobles to accept this position. 
For it meant the surrender of their most ancient and valuable 
privileges. Yet a good part of them agreed to the demand of the 
Commons and gave France a constitution based upon liberty, 
equality and fraternity. 

The attitude of the governing classes in Japan during the 
period between 1855 to 1870 — a period in which the Japanese 
people were transformed from a feudal society into a modern 
nation — was even more self-sacrificing than the attitude of the 
governing classes in France. As students of Japanese history 
know, there were four classes in Japanese Society: (1) The 
Damiyos, (2) The Samurai, (3) The Hemin or the Common 
folk and (4) The Eta or the outcasts, standing one above the 
other in an order of graded inequality. At the bottom were the 
Eta numbering a good many thousands. Above the Eta were 
the Hemin numbering about 25/30 millions. Over them were 
the Samurai who numbered about 2 millions and who had 
the power of life and death over the Hemin. At the apex were 
the Damiyos or the Feudal Barons who exercised sway over 
the rest of the three classes and who numbered only 300. The 
Damiyos and the Samurai realized that it was impossible to 
transform this feudal society with its class composition and 
class rights into a modern nation with equality of citizenship. 
Accordingly the Damiyos charged with the spirit of nationalism 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


472 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

472 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and anxious not to stand in the way of national unity, came 
forward to surrender their privileges and to merge themselves 
in the common mass of people. In a memorial submitted to 
the Emperor on the 5th March 1869 they said 1 : — 

“The Place where we live is the Emperor’s land. The 
food that we eat is grown by the Emperor’s men. How 
then can we claim any property as our own ? We now 
reverently offer up our possessions and also our followers 
(Samurai as well as ‘common folk’) with the prayer that 
the Emperor will take good measures, for rewarding those 
to whom reward is due, and for lining such as do not 
deserve reward. Let imperial orders be issued for altering 
and remodelling the territories of the various clans. Let 
the civil and penal codes, the military laws down to the 
rules for uniform and for the construction of engines of 
war, all proceed from the Emperor. Let all affairs of the 
Empire, both great and small, be referred to him.” 

How does the governing class in India compare in this 
behalf with the governing class in Japan? Just the opposite. 
Unfortunately, the history of the struggle of the servile 
classes in India against the governing class has not yet 
been written. But those who know anything about it will 
know that the governing class in India has no intention of 
making any sacrifice not even on the altar of Indian Freedom 
for which it is thirsting. Instead, the governing class is 
using every means to retain them. For this it is using two 
weapons. First is the weapon of nationalism. Whenever the 
servile classes ask for reservations in the legislatures, in 
the Executive and in Public Services, the governing class 
raises the cry of ‘nationalism in danger.’ What are these 
reservations for ? To put it briefly they are intended to 
provide floorings below which the governing class will not 
be able to push down the servile classes in their struggle 
for existence. There, is nothing sinister and nothing wrong 
in this demand for reservations. How does the governing 
class react to them ? It loses no occasion to deprecate them 
and to ridicule them. People are led to believe that if they 
are to achieve national freedom, they must maintain unity, 
that all questions regarding reservations in the Legislatures, 
Executives and the Public Services are inimical to national 
unity and that, therefore, for anyone interested in national 
freedom it is a sin to support those who ask for such 

1 Quoted in Romance of Japan by Japan by James A. B. Scherer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


473 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 473 

reservations. That is the attitude of the governing class in India. 
It stands in glaring contrast with that of the governing class in 
Japan. It is a misuse of nationalism. But the governing class 
does not feel any compunction for such misuse. 

The second means employed by the governing class is the 
writing of the lampoons and parodies calculated to pour ridicule 
on the demand for reservations. Such lampoons are by no means 
few and far between. Even the most respectable members of the 
governing class do not mind indulging in such compositions. Even 
Dr. R. P. Paranjpe, now India’s High Commissioner for Australia, 
who stands for an advanced type of liberalism, could not withstand 
the temptation of trying his hand in writing such a parody . 1 
Among the parodies composed by members of the governing class 
his was the most colourful and had, when it appeared, excited 
the greatest resentment among the servile classes. 

The argument used by the governing classes to oppose 
the demand of the servile classes for reservations is based on 
the doctrine of efficiency. To give a patriotic look to the stand 
taken by the governing classes it is represented that what 


1 The parody written by Dr. R. P. Paranjpe appeared in a magazine called 
Gujarathi Punch for May 1926 under the heading “A Peep into the Future.” As 
a specimen of this class of writing by members of the governing class it is worth 
perusal. It is a satire based on certain incidents which are imagined to have 
occurred under the principle of communal reservations. As the magazine is not 
easily available, I reproduce’ it below with a view to rescue it from oblivion: — 

A Peep into the Future’ 

The following extracts are taken from reports of Commissions, records of police 
courts oases, judicial trials. Council Proceedings, Administration Reports, etc., 
issued between the year 1930-50 and are published for the exclusive benefit of 
the readers of the Gujarati Punch. 

I 

Report of the Royal Commission on the Government of India, 1930 : 

We have given our closest consideration to the representations made on 
behalf of several communities in India. Taking the figures of the last Census 
as our basis we can only give an approximate satisfaction to all the claims 
made before us, for it is not possible to give an absolutely accurate solution 
to the problem of constructing a machinery of Government unless every single 
person in the country is made a member thereof, as the numbers of the several 
communities do not possess a common measure. We lay down the number 2375 
as the fundamental number in the constitution and this number is divided 
into parts attached to the several communities as shown in the schedule 
attached to our report. The claims of each community will henceforward be 
represented by its proper number, and all appointments, memberships of various 
bodies, and in fact everything in the country will be awarded according to the 
proportion given in the schedule wherever possible. The Viceroy’s Executive 
Council will consist of 475 members selected as far as may be according to one- 
fifth the numbers belonging to each community and three members will hold 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


474 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

474 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Indians must aim at is to maintain in India an efficient body 
politic and that this can be done only by insisting that every 
place of power and authority should be filled by none but 
the best man available. It is this argument which seems to 
impress the foreigner and which makes him a critic if not 
an adversary of the demand for reservation. It is therefore 


office for one year so that each community will have attained its exact share of 
membership in five years. There will be 125 Judges in each High Court, each judge 
holding office for one year, though according to this arrangement, each section will have 
obtained its exact share only after the lapse of 19 years. The number of other kinds 
of appointments will be determined on the same basis for the accurate adjustment 
of all claims. 

To allow for the proper functioning of all bodies with these numbers as many- 
existing Government buildings as may be necessary may be pulled dowu and rebuilt 
so as to be of the proper size. 

II 

{Notification of the Government of India, 1932) 

In accordance with the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1931. His 
Majesty the King Emperor has been pleased to appoint the following 475 gentlemen 
as members of the Executive Council of the Governor-General: 

267. Matadin Ramdin (caste Barber) member in charge of the Surgical Branch of 
the Medical Department. 

372. Allabux Peerbux (Mahomedan Camel driver) in charge of the camel transport 
division of the Army Department. 

433. Ramaswamy (caste, Andhra Sweeper) in charge of the road cleaning branch 
of the P.W.D. 

437. Jagannath Bhattsoharya (Kulin Brahmin Priest) in charge of the domestic 
section of the Registration Department. 

* * * * 

IV 

( Letter to all Local Governments, 1934) 

In response to a resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly, with which the 
Government of India are in full agreement, I am directed to say that henceforward 
every appointment under Government should go by rotation to each community 
irrespective of the merits of the applicants. 

V 

{Notification in the Bombay Government Gazette, 1934) 

The Government of Bombay will proceed to make the following appointments in 
December. The applicants for the several appointments should belong to the castes 
mentioned against each according to the rotation fixed by Government Order No. , 
dated November 30th, 1934. 

1. Chief Engineer for Irrigation (Sind) : Kunbi from North Kanara. 

2. Professor of Sanskrit, Elphinstone College, Bombay : Baluchi Pathan from Sind. 

3. Commandant of His Excellency’s Bodyguard : Marwari from North Gujarat. 

4. Consulting Architect to Government: Wadari (wandering gypsy) from the Deccan. 

5. Director of Islamic Culture : Karhada Brahmin. 

6. Professor of Anatomy : (Grant Medical College) Mahomedan Butcher. 

7. Superintendent of Ycravda Jail : Ghantichor. 

8. Two organizers of prohibition : Dharala (Kairs District Bhil) (Panch Mahals). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


475 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 475 

necessary to examine the validity of the argument and the 
sincerity of those who use it. 

Nobody will have any quarrel with the abstract principle 
that nothing should be done whereby the best shall be 
superseded by one who is only better and the better by one 
who is merely good and the good by one who is bad. But the 
argument completely fails to carry conviction when in practice 
one finds that having regard to the historical circumstances 
of India every time the ‘best man’ is chosen he turns out to 
be a man from the governing class. This may be alright from 
the point of view of the governing class. But can it be right 
from the point of view of the servile class ? Could the ‘best’ 
German be the ‘best’ for the French ? Could the ‘best’ Turk 
be ‘best’ for the Greeks ? Could the ‘best’ Pole be regarded 

VI 

( Report of a Case from the High Court, 1935) 

A.B. (caste Teli) was charged with the cold-blooded murder of his father while 
he was asleep. The judge summing up Against the accused, the jury brought in 
a verdict of guilty. Before passing sentence the judge asked the pleader for the 
acoused if he had to say anything. The pleader, Mr. Bomanji, said he agreed 
with the verdict but that according to Law the aocnaed could not be sentenced 
at all, much less sentenced to death, as during the current year seven Telia 
had already been convicted and sentenced two of them with death, that several 
other communities had not yet reached their quota of convictions as given in the 
Government of India Act, while the Telis had already reached theire. His Lordship 
accepted the contention of the defence pleader and acquitted the acoused. 

VII 

{Extract from the ‘ Indian Daily Mail,’ 1936) 

Annaji Ramchandra (Chitpavan Brahmin) was found wandering in the streets 
of Poona with a long knife attacking whomsoever he met. When brought up’ 
before the Magistrate he was shown by the police to have been recently let off 
from the Mental Hospital. The Superintendent of the Hospital in his evidence 
said that Annaji had been in the hospital as a dangerous insane for three years, 
but as there was the quota for the Chitpavanas and as the inmates belonging to 
other communities had not finished their year-quotas he could not keep him any 
longer and show any special favouritism to the Chitpavans and he had therefore 
let him off according to Government Order No. ... in the Medical Department. 
The Magistrate ordered Annaji to be discharged. 

VIII 

{Extract from the Report of the Administration of Jails in the Bombay 
Presidency, 1937) 

In Spite of every precaution the numbers in the jails did not correspond to 
the quotas fixed for each community. The Superintendent had already asked for 
instructions from Government with a view to remedying the discrepancy. 

Resolution of Government : Government view with serious displeasure this 
grave dereliction of duty on the part of the I. G. of prisons. Immediate steps 
should be taken to arrest and put in jail as many members of the various com- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


476 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

476 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘best’ for the Jews ? There can hardly be any doubt as to the 
correct answer to these questions. 

In answering this question two things cannot be overlooked. 
One is that a great man is not necessarily a good man. The 
other is that man is not a mere machine without any feelings. 
This is even true of the ‘best’ man. He too is charged with the 
feelings of class sympathies and class antipathies. Having regard 
to these considerations the ‘best’ man from the governing class 
may well turn out to be the worst from the point of view of the 
servile classes. 

Mere efficiency can never be accepted as a test. If it was 
accepted as the only test the result would be that the affairs 
of the French might well be run by the Germans, of Turks by 
the Russians and of Chinese by the Japanese. Those who hold 
out the theory of naked efficiency and nothing but efficiency 
as the test of good Government should ask the French, the 
Turks and the Chinese as to what they have to say about it 
and how they like the result which follows from its application. 


munities as are required to bring their quotas up to the proper level. If enough 
persons required cannot be caught, a sufficient number of inmates should be let 
off to bring down all to the same level. 

IX 

( Proceedings of the Legislative Council, 1940) 

Mr. Chennappa asked : Has the attention of Government been called to the 
fact that class list of the recent M.A. Examination in Pali do not show the proper 
quota for mang-garudis ? 

The Hon. Mr. Damu Shroff (Minister of Education) : The University Registrar 
reports that no candidate from among Mang-garudis offered himself for examination. 

Mr. Chennappa: Will Government be pleased to stop this examination until such 
a candidate offers himself and if the University disobeys the order of Government 
to take away the University grant and amend the University Act ? 

The Hon. Member: Government will be pleased to consider the suggestion 
favourably. (Cheers). 

X 

{Extract from ‘The Times of India,’ 1942) 

The Coroner Mr was suddenly called last evening to inquire into the death 

of Ramji Sonu at the J.J. Hospital as the result of n surgical operation. Dr. Tanu 
Pandav (caste Barber) deposed that he had conducted the operation. He wished to 
open an abscess in the abdomen but his knife pierced the heart and the patient 
expired. Asked whether he had ever carried out any operation of this nature 
before, he said that he was appointed as the principal surgeon to the hospital 
only one day before as it was then the turn of his community and that he had 
never held a surgical instrument in his hand before except a razor for shaving. 
The jury returned a verdict of death by misadventure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


477 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 477 

Even a simpleton can imagine what answer they are likely 
to return. I am sure that a theory which produces such a 
result will be regarded as an absurd one on all hands without 
exceptions. How then can such a theory be applied to India 
where the difference between the governing class and the 
servile class is the same both in degree and in kind as the 
difference between French and Germans, Turks and Russians 
or Chinese and Japanese ? The fact is that the governing 
class in India blinded by self-interest is unmindful of the 
absurdity of the argument of naked efficiency and being 
conscious that it has the power to convert its opinion into 
law does not bother what the servile classes have to say on 
the point. 

The governing class does not bother to inquire into the 
ways and means by which it has acquired its supremacy. 
It does not feel the necessity of doing so, partly because it 
believes that it acquired its supremacy by dint of merit and 
partly because it believes that no matter how it acquired its 
power it is enough that it is in a position to dictate its policy 
on the servile classes. Assuming that the governing class 
did not find it necessary to examine the ways and means by 
which it obtained its supremacy what would it find ? Strange 
as it may seem the governing class has obtained its power 
by the same system of reservations which it is now opposing 
on the ground of communalism. Many may find it difficult 
to accept the truth of this statement. Those who have any 
doubt need do no more than read the Manu Smriti, the Bible 
of the Hindus. What will they find in it ? They will find and 
will no doubt be shocked to know that the Brahmins, the 
chief and the leading element in the governing class, acquired 
their political power not by force of intellect — for intellect is 
nobody’s monopoly — but by sheer communalism. According 
to the Laws of Manu Smriti the post of the Purohit, King’s 
Chaplain and Lord Chancellor, the posts of the Chief Justice 
and Judges of the High Court and the post of Ministers to the 
Crown were all reserved for the Brahmins. Even for the post 
of the Commander-in-Chief the Brahmin was recommended as 
a fit and a proper person though it was not in terms reserved 
for him. . All the strategic posts having been reserved for the 
Brahmins it goes without saying that all ministerial posts 
came to be reserved for the Brahmins. This is not all. The 
Brahmin was not content with reserving places of profit and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


478 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

478 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

power for his class. He knew that mere reservation will not do. 
He must prevent rivals shooting up from other non-Brahmin 
communities equally qualified to hold the posts and agitate and 
blow up the system of reservations. In addition to reserving 
all executive posts in the State for Brahmins a law was made 
whereby education was made the monopoly and privilege of 
Brahmins. As has already been pointed out the law made it a 
crime for the Shudra, i.e., the lower orders of Hindu Society 
to acquire learning, the infringement of which was followed 
by not only heavy but cruel and inhuman punishment such 
as cutting the tongue of the criminal and filling his ear with 
hot molten lead. It is true that these reservations do not exist 
under the British rule. But it must be admitted that though the 
reservations made by Manu have gone, the advantages derived 
from their continuance over several centuries have remained. 
In asking for reservations the servile classes are not asking 
for anything new or anything extraordinary. The demand for 
reservation is a demand for protection against the aggressive 
communalism of the governing class, which wants to dominate 
the servile class in all fields of life and without imposing on 
the governing class any such ignominious conditions as was 
done by the Brahmins for their own aggrandisement and for 
the perpetuation of their own domination on the Shudra, 
namely, to make it a crime for the governing class to learn or 
to acquire property. 

This argument of naked efficiency has also to be considered 
from the point of view of public welfare. It was said by 
Campbell Bannerman in the course of a debate in the House 
of Commons on Ireland, that self-government is better than 
good government. The statement had become so popular in 
India that it had become more than a mere slogan. It had 
become a maxim. As it stands the statement is quite absurd. 
Campbell Bannerman was not contrasting self-government 
with good government. He was contrasting self-government 
with efficient government or rather with “resolute government” 
to use the phrase of his opponent Lord Salisbury. There is 
no denying that self-government must be good government, 
otherwise it is not worth having. The question is, how is good 
government to be had. Some people seem to be under the 
impression that as self-government is a sovereign government 
it is bound to result in good government. This is one of the 
greatest delusions from which most people in dependent 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


479 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 479 

countries are suffering. Those who are living in such a delusion 
had better read what Prof. Dicey has to say on this point. 
Discussing the question what persons and bodies with full 
sovereign powers can do Dicey has the following observations 
to make : — 

“The actual exercise of authority by any sovereign 
whatever and notably by Parliament, is bounded or 
controlled by two limitations. Of these the one is an external, 
the other is an internal limitation. 

“The external limit to the real power of a sovereign 
consists in the possibility or certainty that his subjects or 
a large number of them, will disobey or resist his laws. 

“This limitation exists even under the most despotic 
monarchies. A Roman Emperor, or a French King during 
the middle of the eighteenth century, was (as is the Russian 
Czar at the present day) in strictness a ‘sovereign’ in 
the legal sense of that term. He had absolute legislative 
authority. Any law made by him was binding, and there 
was no power in the empire or kingdom which could annul 
such law . . . But it would be an error to suppose that the 
most absolute ruler who ever existed could in reality make 
or change every law at his pleasure . . . 

“The authority, that is to say, even of a despot, depends 
upon the readiness of his subjects or of some portion of his 
subjects to obey his behests; and this readiness to obey 
must always be in reality limited. This is shown by the 
most notorious facts of history. None of the early Caesars 
could at their pleasure have subverted the worship of 
fundamental institutions of the Roman world . . . The Sultan 
could not abolish Mahomedanism. Louis the Fourteenth at 
the height of his power could revoke the Edict of Nantes, 
but he would have found it impossible to establish the 
supremacy of Protestantism, and for the same reason 
which prevented James the Second from establishing the 
supremacy of Roman Catholicism . . . What is true of 
the power of a despot or of the authority of a constituent 
assembly is specially true of the sovereignty of Parliament ; 
it is limited on every side by the possibility of popular 
resistance. Parliament might legally tax the Colonies ; 
Parliament might without any breach of law change the 
succession to the throne or abolish the monarchy ; but 
everyone knows that in the present state of the world the 
British Parliament will do none of these things. In each case 
widespread resistance would result from legislation which. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


480 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

480 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

though legally valid, is in fact beyond the stretch of Parliamentary 
power. 

k k k 

“There is an internal limit to the exercise of sovereign power 
itself. Even a despot exercises his powers in accordance with his 
character, which is itself moulded by the circumstances under 
which he lives, including under that head the moral feelings 
of the time and the society to which he belongs. The Sultan 
could not if he would, change the religion of the Mahommedan 
world, but if he could do so it is in the very highest degree 
improbable that the head of Mahommedanism should wish 
to overthrow the religion of Mahomet; the internal check on 
the exercise of the Sultan’s power is at least as strong as the 
external limitation. People sometimes ask the idle question 
why the Pope does not introduce this or that reform ? The 
true answer is that a revolutionist is not the kind of man 
who becomes a Pope and that the man who becomes a Pope 
has no wish to be a revolutionist ...” 

I have already pointed out that it is not enough for the servile 
classes to be content with the mere fact that their country has 
become an independent and a sovereign state. It is necessary 
for them to go further and to find out who are likely to be the 
instruments of the State, in other words who is going to be the 
governing class. Dicey’s observations and the profound truth 
which underlies them no one can question — add a further point 
namely that for good government, ability and efficiency of the 
governing class are not enough. What is necessary is to have in 
the governing class the will to do good or to use Dicey’s language, 
freedom from internal limitations arising out of selfish class 
interests. Efficiency combined with selfish class interests instead 
of producing good government is far more likely to become a 
mere engine of suppression of the servile classes. 

In selecting the instrumentalities of the State considerations 
of class bias in the instrumentalities cannot be overlooked. It is 
in fact fundamental to good government. It is unfortunate that 
the importance of this fact is not generally recognized even by 
those who regard themselves as the champions of democracy. 
Karl Marx was the first to recognize it and take account of it in 
the administration of the Paris Commune. It is unnecessary to 
say that it is to-day the basis of Government in Soviet Russia. 
The demand for reservations put forth by the servile classes 
in India is essentially based upon the same considerations 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


481 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 481 

pointed out by Dicey, advocated by Marx and adopted by 
Russia. Only those who belong to the servile class can be 
trusted to protect the interest of that class. This consideration 
is so important that the principle of efficiency cannot be 
allowed to altogether override it. If the governing class in 
India stands on the principle of efficiency and efficiency 
alone it is because it is actuated by the selfish motive of 
monopolizing the instrumentalities of Government. 

IX 

The foregoing discussion has extended over such length 
that the foreigner is likely to miss the points which it is 
intended to bring out. It may therefore be well to assemble 
them together with a view to underline them. 

The main problems, which those desirous of establishing 
democracy in India must face, are: — (1) the position of the 
governing class of India, (2) the aims and objects of the 
governing class towards the servile classes, (3) the raison 
d’etre of the demands of the servile classes for constitutional 
safeguards and (4) the relation of the governing class to the 
Congress. 

Regarding the first point the argument is that the position 
of the governing class in India is quite different from the 
position of the governing classes in other countries of the 
world. It is not easy to understand this difference, nor is it 
easy to state it in expressive terms. Perhaps the illustration 
of a bar and a hyphen may help to give a clear idea of what 
the difference is. Nobody can mistake the difference between 
a hyphen and a bar. A bar divides but does not link. A 
hyphen does both. It divides but it also links. In India the 
governing classes and the servile classes are divided by a 
bar. In other countries there exists between them only a 
hyphen. The resultant difference is a very crucial one. In 
other countries, there is a continuous replenishment of the 
governing class by the incorporation of others who do not 
belong to it but who have reached the same elevation as 
the governing class. In India, the governing class is a close 
corporation in which nobody, not born in it, is admitted. 
In other countries where the governing class is not a close 
preserve, where there is social endosmosis between it and 
the rest, there is a mental assimilation and accommodation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


482 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

482 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which makes the governing class less antagonistic in its 
composition and less antagonistic to the servile classes in 
its social philosophy. In other words, the governing class in 
countries outside India is not anti-social. It is only non-social. 
In India where the governing class is a close corporation, 
tradition, social philosophy and social outlook which are 
antagonistic to the servile classes remain unbroken in their 
depth and their tenor and the distinction between masters and 
slaves, between the privileged and the unprivileged continues 
for ever hard in substance and fast in colour. In other words 
the governing class in India is not merely non-social. It is 
positively anti-social. 

As to the demand for reservations by the servile classes 
the reason behind it is to put a limit on the power of the 
governing classes to have control over the instrumentalities 
of government. The governing classes are bent on giving the 
reservations a bad name in order to be able to hang those who 
are insisting upon them. The real fact is that the reservations 
are only another name for what the Americans call checks and 
balances which every constitution must have, if democracy is 
not to be overwhelmed by the enemies of democracy. That the 
reservations demanded by the servile classes are different in 
form front the American sort of checks and balances does not 
alter their character. The forms of checks and balances must 
be determined by two considerations. The first is the necessity 
of establishing a correlation between the political constitution 
and social institutions of the country if democracy is to be 
real. As the social institutions of countries differ in their form 
the checks and balances in its political constitutions must also 
differ. For instance, where a country is ridden by the caste 
system the checks and balances will have to be of a different 
sort from what they need be in a country pervaded by a spirit 
of social democracy. The second is the necessity of providing 
a firm flooring to the servile classes against the possibility of 
their being pressed down by the governing classes by reason 
of their superior power. In some countries adult suffrage 
may be quite enough for the servile classes to hold their own 
against the governing classes. In India unlike other countries 
the governing class is so omnipotent and omnipresent that 
other remedies besides adult suffrage will be necessary to give 
adequate power to the servile classes to protect themselves 
against exploitation by the governing classes. Looked at in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


483 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 483 

light of these observations, the reservations demanded by 
the servile classes, though different in form from the checks 
and balances embodied in the American Constitution, are 
fundamentally checks and balances, and must be considered 
as such by the foreigner before he forms an adverse opinion 
against them. 

The facts bearing on the last point namely the relation 
of the Congress to the governing classes have also been 
fully set out. From these facts the foreigner should be able 
to see how intimate is the connection between the two. The 
same facts will explain why the governing class in India has 
placed itself in the vanguard of the Congress movement and 
why it strives to bring everybody within the Congress fold. 
To put it briefly the governing class is aware that a political 
campaign based on class ideology and class conflicts will toll 
its death knell. It knows that the most effective way of side- 
tracking the servile classes and fooling them is to play upon 
the sentiment of nationalism and national unity. It clings to 
the Congress because it realizes that the Congress platform 
is the only platform that can most effectively safeguard the 
interest of the governing class. For if there is any platform 
from which all talk of conflict between rich and poor, Brahmin 
and non-Brahmin, landlord and tenant, creditor and debtor, 
which does not suit the governing class, can be effectually 
banned, it is the Congress platform which is not only bound 
to preach nationalism and national unity, — this is what the 
governing class wants, as it is on this that its safety entirely 
depends — but which prohibits any other ideology inconsistent 
with nationalism being preached from its platform. 

If the foreigner bears in mind these points he will realize 
why the servile classes of India are not attracted by the 
Congress brand of Swaraj. What good can the Congress brand 
of Swaraj bring to them ? They know that under the Congress 
brand of Swaraj the prospect for them is really very bleak. 
The Congress brand of Swaraj will either be materialization of 
what is called Gandhism or it will be what the governing class 
would want to make of it. If it is the former it will mean the 
spread of charkha, village industries, the observance of caste, 
Bramhcharya (continence), reverence for the cow and things 
of that sort. If it is left to governing classes to make what it 
likes of Swaraj the principal item in it will be the suppression 
of the servile classes by withdrawing the facilities given by the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


484 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

484 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

British Government in the matter of education and entry in 
public services. 

Some people hope that under Swaraj there will be a 
reform of tenancy laws, factory legislation, compulsory primary 
education, prohibition and construction of roads and canals, 
improvement of currency, regulation of weights and measures, 
dispensaries and introduction of other measures for the servile 
classes. I am not quite sure that these hopes are well-founded. 
Most people forget that what leads the Congress to-day to 
mouth such a programme is the desire to show that the 
Congress is better than the British bureaucracy. But once the 
bureaucracy is liquidated, will there be the same incentive to 
better the lot of the masses ? That is the question. Firstly, I 
entertain very grave doubts as to how far this will materialize. 
Secondly, there is nothing very great in it. In the world of 
to-day, no governing class can omit to undertake reforms, 
which are necessary to maintain society in a civilized state. 
Apart from this, is social amelioration the be-all and end-all of 
Swaraj ? Knowing the servile classes as I do that is certainly 
not the fault of the servile classes. They certainly do not 
intend to follow the teaching that ‘the meek shall eat and be 
satisfied.’ The want and poverty which has been their lot for 
centuries is nothing to them as compared to the insult and 
indignity which they have to bear as a result of the vicious 
social order. Not bread but honour, is what they want, That 
can happen only when the governing classes disappear and 
cease to have control over their destiny. The question for the 
servile classes is not whether this reform or that reform will 
be undertaken. The question is: Will the governing classes in 
India having captured the machinery of the State, undertake 
a programme for the reform of the social order whereby the 
governing class will be liquidated, as distinguished from a 
programme of social amelioration ? The answer to this depends 
upon whether the future constitution of India will be with 
safeguards or without safeguards for the protection of the 
servile classes. If it will have safeguards it will be possible 
for the servile classes to liquidate the governing classes in 
course of time. If the constitution is without safeguards the 
governing class will continue to maintain its dominance over 
the servile classes. This being the issue, the foreigner should 
note that the much-advertised representative character of 
the Congress is absolutely irrelevant. The Congress may be a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


485 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 485 

representative body and the Congress may be the body which 
is engaged in what is called the Fight for Freedom ; but these 
things have nothing to do with the decision of the issue. A true 
lover of democracy before he befriends the Congress will demand 
that it should produce its blue print of the constitution and 
be satisfied that its constitution does contain unequivocal and 
positive provisions for the safety, security for the life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness for the servile classes. 

X 

The foreigners who take interest in Indian politics fall into 
two classes. The first class includes those who are travellers and 
tourists who come ‘to do’ India for a short while and who are 
not equipped with a knowledge of the intricacies of the Indian 
Political problems, the theoretical apparatus to pronounce a 
correct opinion on the attitude of the different parties to these 
problems. Those who fall into the second class are the leaders 
of democratic public opinion such as Louis Fischer in America, 
Kingsley Martin, Brailsford and Laski whose knowledge and 
equipment none can question. I would have had no regrets if 
the foregoing discussion had been called for by the needs of 
correcting the unthinking bias of the tourists and traveller class 
of foreigners in favour of the Congress. But unfortunately the 
same sort of bias is also to be found in those foreigners who 
fall into the second class. 

That there should be foreigners of the tourist sort who cannot 
understand the intricacies of Indian politics and who therefore 
support the Congress on no other ground except that which 
Mr. Pickwick gave to Sam Weller — to shout with the biggest 
crowd — is quite understandable. But what annoys most is the 
attitude of the leaders of the British Labour Party, heads of 
radical and leftist groups in Europe and America, represented 
by men like Laski, Kingsley Martin, Brailsford and editors of 
journals like the Nation in America, and the New Statesman 
in England championing the cause of the oppressed and the 
suppressed people in other parts of the world. How can these 
men support the Congress it is difficult to understand. Do 
they not know that the Congress means the governing class 
and that the governing class in India is a Brahmin-Bania 
combine ? That masses are drawn in the Congress only to be 
camp followers with no say in the making of Congress policy ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


486 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

486 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Do they not realize that for the reasons for which the Sultan 
could not abolish Islam or the Pope could not repudiate 
Catholicism, the governing class in India will not decree the 
destruction of Brahmanism and that so long as the governing 
class remains what it is, Brahmanism, which preaches the 
supremacy of Brahmins and the allied castes and which 
recognises the suppression and degradation of the Shudras 
and the Untouchables as the sacred duty of the State, will 
continue to be the philosophy of the State even if India became 
free ? Do they not know that this governing class in India is 
not a part of the Indian people, is not only completely isolated 
from them, but believes in isolating itself, lest it should be 
contaminated by them, has implanted in its mind by reason 
of the Brahmanic philosophy, motives and interests which 
are hostile to those who are outside its fold and therefore 
does not sympathise with the living forces operating in the 
servile masses whom it has trodden down, is not charged 
with their wants, their pains, their cravings, their desires, 
is inimical to their aspirations, does not favour any advance 
in their education, promotion to high office and disfavours 
every movement calculated to raise their dignity and their 
self-respect? Do they not know that in the Swaraj of India 
is involved the fate of 60 millions of Untouchables ? 

It would be impossible to say that the leaders of the 
British Labour Party, that Kingsley Martin, Brailsford and 
Laski whose writings on liberty and democracy are a source 
of inspiration to all suppressed people, do not know these 
facts. Yet if they refer to India, it is always to support the 
Congress. It is very, very seldom that they are found to 
discuss the problem of the Untouchables which ought to make 
the strongest appeal to all radicals and democrats. Their 
exclusive attention to Congress activities and their utter 
neglect of other elements in the national life of India show 
how misguided they have been. One could well understand 
their support to the Congress if the Congress was fighting 
for political democracy. But is it ? As every one knows, 
the Congress is only fighting for national liberty and is 
not interested in political democracy. The party in India 
who is fighting for political democracy is the party of the 
Untouchables who fear that this Congress fight for liberty, if 
it succeeds, will mean liberty to the strong and the powerful 
to suppress the weak and the down-trodden unless they are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


487 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 487 

protected by constitutional safeguards. It is they who ought to 
receive the help of these radical leaders. But the Untouchables 
have been waiting in vain for all these years even for a gesture 
of goodwill and support from them. These radicals and leftists 
in Europe and America have not even cared to know the forces 
behind the Congress. 

Ignorant or unmindful one does not know, but the fact 
remains that these leftists and radical leaders have been 
giving blind and unquestioning support to the Congress which 
admittedly is run by capitalists, landlords, money-lenders and 
reactionaries, only because the Congress calls its activities by 
the grandiloquent name of “Fight for Freedom.” All battles for 
freedom are not on equal moral plane for the simple reason that 
the motives and purposes behind these battles of freedom are not 
always the same. To take only a few illustrations from English 
History. The Barons’ Rebellion against John which resulted in 
the Magna Charta could be called a battle for freedom. But 
could any democrat in modern times give it the same support 
which he would give — say to the Levellers’ Rebellion or to the 
Peasants’ Revolt in English History, merely because it could 
logically be described as a battle for freedom ? To do so will 
be to respond to a false cry of freedom. Such crude conduct 
would have been forgivable, had it proceeded from groups not 
intelligent enough to make a distinction between freedom to 
live and freedom to oppress. But it is quite inexcusable in 
radical and leftist groups led by Messrs. Laski, Kingsley Martin, 
Brailsford, Louis Fischer and other well-known champions of 
democracy. 

When pressed to explain why they don’t support Indian 
Parties which stand for true democracy, they are reported to 
meet the charge by a counter question. Arc there any such 
parties in India ? Insist that there are such parties and they 
turn round and say: If such parties exist, how is it the Press 
docs not report their activities ? When told that the Press 
is a Congress Press, they retort: How is it that the foreign 
correspondents of the English Papers do not report them ? I 
have shown why nothing better can be expected from these 
foreign correspondents. The Foreign Press Agency in India is 
not better than the Indian Press. Indeed it cannot be better. 
There are in India what are called foreign correspondents. 
In a large majority of cases they are Indians. Only a very 
few are foreigners. The selection of Indians as foreign 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


488 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : 

488 WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

correspondents is so made that they are almost always from 
the Congress camp. The foreign correspondents who are 
foreigners fall into two groups. If they are Americans they 
are just Anti-British and for that reason pro-Congress. Any 
political party in India which is not madly anti-British does 
not interest them. Those who are not in the Congress will 
testify how hard it was for them to persuade the American 
War Correspondents who trooped into this country in 1941-42, 
even to entertain the possibility of the Congress not being the 
only party, much less to induce them to interest themselves 
in other political parties. It took a long time before they 
recovered their sanity and when they did, they either abused 
the Congress as an organization led by impossible men or just 
lost interest in Indian politics. They never got interested in 
other political parties in India and never cared to understand 
their point of view. The situation is no better in the case 
of foreign correspondents who are Britishers. They too are 
interested only in that kind of politics which is first and 
foremost anti-British. They are uninterested in those political 
parties in India whose foremost concern is to make a free 
India safe for democracy. The result is that the foreign press 
provides the same kind of news about Indian politics as does 
the Indian Press. 

These reasons cannot be beyond the ken of these radicals. 
Correspondents or no correspondents, is it not the duty of 
radicals to keep in touch with their kindred in other parts 
of the world to encourage them, to help them and to see that 
true democracy lives everywhere ? It is a most unfortunate 
thing that the Radicals of England and America should have 
forgotten the class to whom they owe a duty to help and have 
become the publicity agents of Indian Tories who are just 
misusing the slogan of liberty to befool and befog the world. 

The sooner they get out of this fog created by the Congress 
and realize that democracy and self-government in India cannot 
be real unless freedom has become the assured possession of 
all, the better for them and the better for the people of India. 
But if they persist in giving their blind support to the Congress 
on the basis of an empty slogan without examining its relation 
to facts and intentions, I for one will have no hesitation in 
saying that far from being the friends of India they are a 
positive menace to the freedom of the Indian masses. It is a 
pity that they do not seem to distinguish the case of a tyrant 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 


489 


WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES : 

A PLEA TO THE FOREIGNER 489 

who is held down and who pleads for liberty because he wants 
to regain his right to oppress and the case of an oppressed class 
seeking to be free from the oppression of the tyrant. In their 
hurry to bring freedom to India they have no time to realize that 
by siding with the Congress what they are doing is not to make 
India safe for democracy but to free the tyrant to practise his 
tyrannies. Is it necessary to tell them that to support Congress 
is to let tyranny have freedom to enslave ? It is to save their own 
reputation as the champions of the Oppressed and suppressed 
classes that they should reconsider their attitude towards the 
Congress. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-09\vol9-06.indd 


MK SJ+YS 3-10-2013/YS-14-11-2013 490 


BLANK 


