
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 



BLANK 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
VOL. 4 


Compiled 

by 

VASANT MOON 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 4 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : October 1987 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : Rs. 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


m 

Adk 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumari Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when these 
were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on the 
base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumari Selja) 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


FOREWORD 


Dr. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution, is 
well-known not only as a constitutionalist and a parliamentarian 
but also as a scholar and active reformer all over the world. As a 
champion of the down-trodden he waged relentless struggle against 
the oppressive features of Hindu society. Throughout his life, he 
strove for establishment of a new social order based on the principles 
of liberty, equality, justice and universal brotherhood. 

The Indian society owes a tremendous debt to his radical and 
humanitarian approach for solution of the problems of the Backward 
Classes. 

The Government of Maharashtra is committed to the welfare of 
the backward classes for whose uplift Dr. Ambedkar dedicated his 
whole life. Thoughts and teachings of great men like Dr. Ambedkar 
will always serve as a beacon light for the new generation. Our 
Government, therefore, feels proud and happy to bring out these three 
consecutive volumes of his unpublished writings as part of our total 
project of publication of the writings of Dr. Ambedkar. 



(S. B. CHAVAN) 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


BLANK 


PREFACE 


I consider it a great honour to have been asked to write a preface 
to these volumes which consist of hitherto unpublished writings of 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. 

Dr. Ambedkar occupies a position of high eminence among the 
learned scholars of Indian society and philosophy. His erudition and 
learning as reflected through his writings may serve as a beacon 
light for rational approach towards our social and religious problems. 

The Government of Maharashtra has undertaken the work of 
bringing out complete writings of Dr. Ambedkar in a series of volumes. 
The reconstituted Committee appointed for this work, has now come 
up with three consecutive volumes of the unpublished writings, 
which were very eagerly awaited by the students of India’s social 
and political evolution. 

The present volumes, which deal with philosophical as well as social 
problems of Indian society, may prove interesting to the scholars 
as well as to the new and young generation which is eager to find 
solutions to the national problems on a rational basis. 

The Editorial Board is to be congratulated for the zeal, dedication 
and care which they brought to bear on the expeditious publication 
of these volumes. 



(Prof. RAM MEGHE) 
Minister for Education, 
Maharashtra State 


BLANK 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee, Maharashtra State 

EDITORS 


1 . 

Hon’ble Prof. RAM MEGHE 
Minister for Education 

President. 

2. 

Hon’ble Kum. CHANDRIKA KENIYA 
Minister of State for Education 

Vice-President. 

3. 

Shri R. S. GAVAI 

Member of the Legislative Council 

Vice-President. 

4. 

Shri B. C. RAMBLE 

Member. 

5. 

Dr. P. T. BORALE 

Member. 

6. 

Dr. V. B. KOLTE . 

Member. 

7. 

Shri GHANASHYAM TALVATKAR 

Member. 

8. 

Shri SHANKARRAO KHARAT 

Member. 

9. 

Smt. SHANTABAI DANI 

Member. 

10. 

Shri PRAKASH Y. AMBEDKAR 

Member. 

11. 

Shri R. R. BHOLE 

Member. 

12. 

Shri S. S. REGE 

Member. 

13. 

Dr. BHALCHANDRA PHADKE 

Member. 

14. 

Shri BABURAO BAGUL 

Member. 

15. 

Shri DAYA PA WAR 

Member. 

16. 

Prof. ARUN RAMBLE 

Member. 

17. 

Prof. RAMAKANT YADAV 

Member. 

18. 

Shri WAMAN NIMBALKAR 

Member. 

19. 

Secretary, Education Department 

Member. 

20. 

Director of Education, M. S., Pune 

Member.. 

Secretary. 

21. 

Shri VASANT MOON 

Officer on 
Special Duty. 


BLANK 


INTRODUCTION 


The members of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee are pleased to present this volume of Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar’s unpublished writings to readers on behalf of the Government 
of Maharashtra. This volume is significant and unique in several respects. 
Firstly, the contents of this volume were hitherto unknown. These are 
the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar which were in the custody of 
the Administrator General and the custodian of Dr. Ambedkar’s property. 
The students of Dr. Ambedkar’s writings and his devoted followers were 
anxious to read these writings. Some of the followers of Dr. Ambedkar 
had even gone to the court to secure permission for the printing of these 
writings although the manuscripts were not in their possession. Thus, 
these writings had assumed such significance that it was even feared 
that they had been destroyed or lost. 

There is a second reason why this volume is significant. Dr. Ambedkar 
is known for his versatile genius, but his interpretation of the philosophy 
of and his historical analysis of the Hindu religion as expressed in these 
pages may throw new light on his thought. 

The third important point is that Dr. Ambedkar’s analysis of Hindu 
Philosophy is intended not as an intellectual exercise but as a definite 
approach to the strengthening of the Hindu society on the basis of the 
human values of equality, liberty and fraternity. The analysis ultimately 
points towards uplifting the down-trodden and absorbing the masses in 
the national mainstream. 

It would not be out of place to note down a few words about the 
transfer of these papers to the Committee for publication. During his 
life time, Dr. Ambedkar published many books, but also planned many 
others. He had also expressed his intention to write his autobiography, 
the life of Mahatma Phule and the History of the Indian Army, but left 
no record of any research on these subjects. 

After his death, in 1956, all the papers including his unpublished 
writings were taken into custody by the custodian of the High Court of 
Delhi. Later, these papers were transferred to the Administrator General 
of the Government of Maharashtra. Since then, the boxes containing the 
unpublished manuscripts of Dr. Ambedkar and several other papers were 
in the custody of the Administrator General. 

It was learned that Shri J. B. Bansod, an Advocate from Nagpur, had 
filed a suit against the Government in the High Court Bench at Nagpur, 


Xll 


INTRODUCTION 


which was later transferred to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. 
The petitioner had made a simple request seeking permission from 
the court to either allow him to publish the unpublished writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar or to direct the Government to publish the same as 
they had assumed national significance. This litigation was pending 
before the Bombay High Court for several years. 

After the formation of this Committee and after the appointment 
of Shri V. W. Moon as Officer on Special Duty in 1978, it was felt 
necessary to secure the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar and to 
publish them as material of historical importance. Shri Moon personally 
contacted the legal heris of Dr. Ambedkar and the Administrator 
General. Shri Bansod, Advocate, was also requested to cooperate. It 
must be noted with our appreciation that Smt. Savita B. Ambedkar, 
Shri Prakash Y. Ambedkar and his family members and Shri Bansod, 
Advocate, all showed keen interest, consented to the Government 
project for publication and agreed to transfer all the boxes containing 
the Ambedkar papers to the Government. At last, the Administrator 
General agreed to transfer all the papers contained in five iron trunks 
to this Committee. Accordingly, Shri Vasant Moon took possession 
of the boxes on behalf of the Government of Maharashtra on 18-9- 
1981. All the five trunks are since stored safely in one of the Officers’ 
Chambers in the Education Department of Mantralaya. 

Shri M. B. Chitnis, who, as a close associate of Dr. Ambedkar, 
was intimately familiar with the latter’s handwriting. He was 
at that time Chairman of the Editorial Board. On receipt of the 
papers, he spent a fortnight identifying which of the papers were 
Dr. Ambedkar’s manuscripts. This basic process of identification 
having been accomplished, there remained the stupendous task of 
reading, interpreting and collating the vast range of MS material in 
the collection, to decide in what form and in what order it should be 
presented to the public. 

In 1981, Shri. Moon, OSD, set to work on this project. This work 
of matching and sorting was a delicate and difficult one as well as 
immensely time-consuming. Many of the works what Dr. Ambedkar 
had evidently intended to complete, were scattered here and there in 
an incomplete state in the manuscript form. It was therefore necessary 
to retrieve and collate the fragments in order to place them in proper 
order. Only after very many hours of reading, selecting and reflecting 
not only on the contents of these papers but also what was already 
known of Dr. Ambedkar’s work and thought, did Shri. Moon arrive 
at the present selection and arrangement of those MS. 


INTRODUCTION 


Xlll 


This task was not merely strenuous at the intellectual level but also 
at the physical one due to the condition of the papers themselves. These 
had been stored in the closed boxes for more than 30 years. They were 
fumigated with insecticides, with the result that a most poisonous foul 
odour emitted from these papers. Shri Moon and his staff had to suffer 
infection of the skin and eyes and required medical treatment. 

After two years of strenuous work, Shri Moon had submitted a detailed 
report to the Editorial Board on 17-9-1983 containing recommendations 
as to the proper arrangement and presentation of the papers as they 
were to appear in a published form. The present volume is substantially 
in accordance with these recommendations. 

In the execution of this laborious work, invaluable assistance was 
rendered by the Stenographers Shri Anil Kavale and Shri L. R. Meher, 
and Shri S. A. Mungekar as a clerk. 

After the proposed arrangements had been approved by the Dr. 
Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Editorial Committee 
in its meeting dated 23-9-1986, Shri Moon and his staff took on the tasks 
associated with publication, i.e. proof reading and indexing. 

In the papers that the Editorial Board scrutinised, we have come 
across 51 titles of unpublished writings (including 26 of ‘Riddles in 
Hinduism’). In addition to these, we have received 14 unpublished essays 
of Dr. Ambedkar from Shri S. S. Rege, the Ex-Librarian of the Siddharth 
College, Bombay. The essays received from Shri Rege are shown by 
asterisk in the list mentioned below. Not all these essays are complete. 
All the essays have been divided into three volumes as under : 

VOLUME 3 : 

1. Philosophy of Hinduism 

2. The Hindu Social Order : Its Essential Principles 

3. The Hindu Social Order : Its Unique Features 

4. Symbols of Hinduism 

5. Ancient India on Exhumation 

6. The Ancient Regime — The State of the Aryan Society 

7. A Sunken Priesthood 

8. Reformers and Their Fate 

*9. The Decline and Fall of Buddhism 

10. The Literature of Brahminism 

*11. The Triumph of Brahmanism 

12. The Morals of the House — Manusmriti or the Gospel of Counter- 
Revolution 

13. The Philosophic Defence of Counter-Revolution: Krishna and His 
Gita 

14. Analytical notes of Virat Parva and Uddyog Parva 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


15. Brahmins Vs Kshatriyas 

16. Shudras and the Counter-Revolution 

17. The Woman and the Counter-Revolution 

18. Buddha or Karl Marx 

19. Schemes of books 
VOLUME 4: 

Riddles in Hinduism (27 Chapters including 1 from Shri S. S. Rege) 
[While composing this Volume, the total number of Riddles (24), including 
Appendices (8), has come to 32.] 

VOLUME 5: 

1. Untouchables or Children of India’s Ghetto 

*2. The House the Hindus have Built 

*3. The Rock on which it is Built 

*4. Why Lawlessness is Lawful ? 

*5. Touchables Vs Untouchables 

*6. Hinduism and the Legacy of Brahminism 

*7. Parallel Cases 

8. Civilization or Felony 

9. The Origin of Untouchability 

10. The Curse of Caste 

*11. From Millions to Fractions 

12. The Revolt of Untouchables 

13. Held at Bay 

14. Away from the Hindus 

15. A Warning to the Untouchables 

16. Caste and Conversion 

*17. Christianizing the Untouchables 
*18. The Condition of the Convert 
*19. Under the Providence of Mr. Gandhi 
*20. Gandhi and His Fast 

In this Introduction we propose to deal with all the questions raised 
about these manuscripts in order to clear the air about the publication 
of all Dr. Ambedkar’s extant writings. 

It is generally believed by the followers of Dr. Ambedkar that 
Dr. Ambedkar had completed the books entitled : (1) Riddles of 
Hinduism, (2) The Buddha and Karl Marx and (3) Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution. The manuscripts of “Riddles of Hinduism” 
have been found in separate chapters bundled together in one file. 
These chapters contain corrections, erasures, alterations, etc. by the 
hands of Dr. Ambedkar himself. Fortunately, the introduction by Dr. 
Ambedkar is also available for this book. We, however, regret that the 


INTRODUCTION 


xv 


final manuscript of this volume has not been found. The Committee has 
accepted the title “Riddles in Hinduism”, given by Dr. Ambedkar in his 
Introduction to the Book. 

“The Buddha and Karl Marx” was also said to have been completed 
by Dr. Ambedkar, but we have not come across such a book among the 
manuscripts. There is, however, a typed copy of a book entitled “Gautam 
the Buddha and Karl Marx” (A Critique and Comparative Study of their 
Systems of Philosophy) by LEUKE — Vijaya Publishing House, Colombo) 
(year of publication not mentioned). One short essay of 34 pages by 
Dr. Ambedkar entitled “Buddha or Karl Marx” was however found and 
being included in the third volume. A third book, viz., “Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution”, was also believed to have been completed by Dr. 
Ambedkar. A printed scheme for this treatise has been found in the 
papers received by the Committee. It appears that Dr. Ambedkar had 
started working on various chapters simultaneously. Scattered pages 
have been found in the boxes and are gathered together. 

We are tempted here to present the process of writing of Dr. Ambedkar 
which will give an idea of the colossal efforts he used to make in the 
writing of a book. He had had his own discipline. He used to make a 
blue-print of the book before starting the text. The Editorial Board found 
many such blue-prints designed by him, viz., “India and Communism”, 
“Riddles in Hinduism”, “Can I be a Hindu?”, “Revolution and Counter- 
Revolution”, “What Brahmins have done to the Untouchables”, “Essays 
on Bhagvat Gita”, “Buddha and Karl Marx”, etc. But some of these were 
not even begun and those which were begun were left incomplete. 

It will be interesting to present an illustration. Dr. Ambedkar had 
prepared a blue-print for a book entitled “India and Communism”. The 
contents are as follows : 

Part — I The Pre-requisites of Communism 

Chapter 1 — The Birth-place of Communism 

Chapter 2 — Communism & Democracy 

Chapter 3 — Communism & Social Order 

Part — II India and the Pre-requisites of Communism 

Chapter 4 — The Hindu Social Order 

Chapter 5 — The Basis of the Hindu Social Order 

Chapter 6 — Impediments to Communism arising from the Social Order. 
Part — III What then shall we do ? 

Chapter 1 — Marx and the European Social Order 
Chapter 2 — Manu and the Hindu Social Order 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


Dr. Ambedkar could complete only Chapters 4 and 5 of the scheme viz., 
“The Hindu Social Order” and “The Basis of the Hindu Social Order”. It 
appears that when it struck to him that he should deal with two more 
topics in Part III he added those two topics in his own handwriting on 
the typed page. In the same well-bound file of typed material, there 
appears a page entitled “Can I be a Hindu?” which bears his signature 
in pencil and a table of contents on the next page as follows : 

Introduction 

Symbols of Hinduism 

Part-I — Caste 

Part-II — Cults — Worship of Deities 

Part-Ill — Superman 

The third page bears sub-titles of the chapters as follows: 

1. Symbols represent the soul of a thing 

2. Symbols of Christianity 

3. Symbols of Islam 

4. Symbols of Jainism 

5. Symbols of Buddhism 

6. Symbols of Hinduism 

7. What are the Symbols of Hinduism ? 

Three 

1. Caste. 

2. Cults — 

(1) Rama 

(2) Krishna 

(3) Shiva 

(4) Vishnu 

3. Service of Superman 

The plan as designed above remains incomplete except for the chapter 
on, “Symbols of Hinduism”. 

The Editorial Committee has found a chapter on “Riddles of Rama and 
Krishna” which might have been intended for the volume “Riddles in 
Hinduism”. The 24 riddles as proposed in his original plan were changed 
often in blue-prints. The seriatim of the contents and chapters and the 
arrangement of the file do not synchronize. The chapter on Rama and 
Krishna did not find a place in the listing of the contents of the book. 
However, we are including it in the volume on Riddles. 

At the end we are confident that our time and our pains will not 
go unrewarded when Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar’s hitherto unpublished 
works will be brought in a proper form before the general public as well 
as interested scholars. 


INTRODUCTION 


xvi 1 


We place on record our deep sense of gratitude to Smt. Savita B. 
Ambedkar, Shri Prakash Y. Ambedkar and his family members for 
granting permission to the Government for publication of all the writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar. Shri Y. I. Desai, the Administrator General and Custodian 
of Dr. Ambedkar’s Estate deserves our appreciation for transfer of the 
manuscripts to the Government. Shri J. B. Bansod, an Advocate from 
Nagpur also deserves thanks for co-operating with the Committee. We 
record our deep appreciation of the Late Shri M. B. Chitnis for sparing 
his valuable time, labour and guidance in his failing health. 

We express our sincere gratitude to Shri Shankarrao Chavan, the 
Hon’ble Chief Minister, Prof. Ram Meghe, the Education Minister, and 
Miss Chandrika Keniya, the Minister of State for Education, Maharashtra 
State, for their decision to publish all the manuscripts. We thank Shri R. 
S. Gavai, the Vice-President of the Committee and MLC for his initiative, 
guidance and invaluable efforts in solving the Committee’s problems. We 
are also thankful to Shri Madhusudan Kolhatkar, Secretary, Education 
Department, Maharashtra State, for his valuable advice. We thank Shri 
R. S. Jambhule, Director; Shri S. A. Deokar, Joint Director; Shri J. B. 
Kulkarni, Asistant Secretary; “ Shri M. M. Awate, Deputy Director and 
Shri E. M. Meshram, Superintendent, all of the Education Department, 
for taking keen interest in the process of publication. 

A special mention needs to be made of Dr. P. T. Borale, Shri S. S. 
Rege, Dr. B. D. Phadke and Shri Daya Pawar, Members of the Committee, 
who met together several times and made invaluable suggestions in 
the editing of this volume. We express our deep appreciation for their 
contribution. 

Shri S. S. Rege, a Member of this Committee, was kind enough to 
spare the manuscripts of 14 essays of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar which 
had been in his possession for many years. These essays have enriched 
the material included in these three volumes. The Members of the 
Committee are most indebted to Shri Rege for his kindness. 

Shri G. D. Dhond, the Director; Shri P. S. More and Shri Purkar,the 
Managers; Shri R. J. Mahatekar, the Dy. Manager; Shri J. S. Nagvekar, 
Operator Film Setter, and the staff of the Department of Printing and 
Stationery deserve full appreciation and thanks for their expeditious 
printing with utmost care and sincerity. 


EDITORS 


Bombay 

2nd October 1987 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source 
Material Publication Committee 


Maharashtra State 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


1 













M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc, LL.D., D.Litt., Barrister-at-Law. 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


2 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


3 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


1. 

Introduction 


PART I — Religious 

5 

2. 

Riddle No. 

1 

The Difficulty of Knowing why one is a 
Hindu. 

13 

3. 

Riddle No. 

2 

The Origin of the Vedas — The Brahminic 
Explanation or an exercise in the art of 
circumlocution. 

16 

4. 

Riddle No. 

3 

The Testimony of other Shastras on the 
origin of the Vedas. 

19 

5. 

Riddle No. 

4 

Why suddenly the Brahmins declare the Ve- 
das to be infallible and not to be questioned? 

25 

6. 

Riddle No. 

5 

Why did the Brahmins go further and 
declare that the Vedas are neither made by 
man nor by God ? 

28 

7. 

Riddle No. 

6 

The Contents of the Vedas: Have they any 
moral or spiritual value? 

37 

8. 

Riddle No. 

7 

The turn of the tide Or How did the Brah- 
mins declare the Vedas to be lower than the 
lowest of their Shastras? 

53 

9. 

Riddle No. 

8 

How the Upanishads declared War on the 
Vedas ? 

62 

10. 

Riddle No. 

9 

How the Upanishads came to be made sub- 
ordinate to the Vedas? 

67 

11. 

Riddle No. 

10 

Why did the Brahmins make the Hindu 
Gods fight against one another? 

71 

12. 

Riddle No. 

11 

Why did the Brahmins make the Hindu 
Gods suffer to rise and fall? 

80 

13. 

Riddle No. 

12 

Why did the Brahmins dethrone the Gods 
and enthrone the Goddesses? 

99 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


4 


4 TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


14. 

Riddle No. 

13 

The Riddle of the Ahimsa 

108 

15. 

Riddle No. 

14 

From Ahimsa back to Himsa 

113 

16. 

Riddle No. 

15 

How did the Brahmins Wed an Ahimsak God to a 
Bloodthirsty Goddess? 

117 

17. 

Appendix 

I 

The Riddle of the Vedas 

128 

18. 

Appendix 

II 

The Riddle of the Vedanta 

151 

19. 

Appendix 

III 

The Riddle of the Trimurti 

161 

20. 

Appendix 

IV 

Smarth Dharma and Tantrik Dharma 

176 

21. 

Appendix 

V 

The Infallibility of the Vedas 

183 




PART II— Social 


22. 

Riddle No. 

16 

The Four Varnas — Are the Brahmins sure of 
their origin? 

189 

23. 

Riddle No. 

17 

The Four Ashramas — The Why and How 
about them. 

205 

24. 

Riddle No. 

18 

Manu’s madness or the Brahmanic explana- 
tion of the origin of the mixed castes. 

215 

25. 

Riddle No. 

19 

The change from Paternity to Maternity. 
What did the Brahmins wish to gain by it? 

226 

26. 

Riddle No. 

20 

Kali Varjya or the Brahmanic art of sus- 
pending the operation of Sin without calling 
it Sin. 

233 

27. 

Appendix 

I 

The Riddle of the Varnashram Dharma 

236 

28. 

Appendix 

II 

Compulsory Matrimony 

262 




PART III— Political 


29. 

Riddle No. 

21 

The Theory of Manvantara 

275 

30. 

Riddle No 

22 

Brahma is not Dharma. What good is Brahma? 

281 

31. 

Riddle No 

23 

Kali yuga — Why have the Brahmins made it un- 
ending? 

288 

32. 

Riddle No 

24 

The Riddle of the Kali yuga 

307 

33. 

Appendix 

I 

The Riddle of Rama and Krishna 

323 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


5 


INTRODUCTION 


This book is an exposition of the beliefs propounded by what might be 
called Brahmanic theology. It is intended for the common mass of Hindus 
who need to be awakened to know in what quagmire the Brahmins have 
placed them and to lead them on to the road of rational thinking. 

The Brahmins have propagated the view that the Hindu civilization is 
Sanatan, that is, unchanging. This view has been reinforced by a good 
many of the European Scholars who have said that the Hindu civilization 
is static. In this book I have attempted to show that this view is not 
in accord with facts and that Hindu Society has changed from time to 
time and that often times the change is of the most radical kind. In 
this connection, compare the Riddles from Himsa to Ahimsa and from 
Ahimsa back to Himsa. I want to make the mass of people to realize 
that Hindu religion is not Sanatan. 

The second purpose of this book is to draw attention of the Hindu 
masses to the devices of the Brahmins and to make them think for 
themselves how they have been deceived and misguided by the Brahmins. 

It will be noticed how the Brahmins have changed and chopped. 
There was a time when they worshipped the Vedic Gods. Then came a 
time when they abandoned their Vedic Gods and started worshipping 
non-Vedic Gods. One may well ask them — where is Indra, where is 
Varuna, where is Brahma, where is Mitra — the Gods mentioned in 
the Vedas? They have all disappeared. And why, because the worship 
of Indra, Varuna and Brahma ceased to be profitable. Not only did 
the Brahmins abandon their Vedic Gods but there are cases where 
they have become the worshippers of Muslim Pirs. In this connection 
one glaring case may be referred to. In Kalyan near Bombay there is 
a famous Darga of Pir called Bawa Malangsha on the top of a hill. 
It is a very famous Darga. Every year a Urs (pilgrimage) is held and 
offerings are made. The person who officiates at the Darga as a priest 


This is a seven-page manuscript, with corrections in Dr. Ambedkar’s 
handwriting. Last few paras are additions in the handwriting by Dr. 
Ambedkar to the typed script. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is a Brahmin, sitting near it, wearing the clothes of Muslims and receiving 
monies offered at the Darga. This he did for the sake of money. Religion 
or no religion what the Brahmin wants is Dakshina. Indeed the Brahmins 
have made religion a matter of trade and commerce. Compare with this 
faithlessness of the Brahmins the fidelity of the Jews to their Gods even 
when their conqueror Nebuchadnezzar forced the Jews to abandon their 
religion and adopt his (religion) 1 . 

Nebuchadnezzar, the king, made an image of gold, whose height was 
three score cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits; he set it up in 
the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. 

Nebuchadnezzar, the king, ordered the princes, the governors, the 
captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and 
all the rulers of the provinces to come to the dedication of the image 
which Nebuchadnezzar, the king had set up. 

Then the princes, the governors, the captains, the judges, the treasurers, 
the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were 
gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar 
the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar 
had set up. 

Then an herald cried aloud, 

“To you, it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, That at 
what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sack -but, psaltery, 
dulcimer and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden 
image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up: 

And who so falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be 
cast into the midst of burning fiery furnace.” 

Therefore at that time, when all the people heared the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sack-but, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, 
all the people, the nations, and the languages fell down and worshipped 
the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up. 

Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused 
the Jews. 

They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, 

“O King, live for ever. 

Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the 
sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sack-but, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds 
of musick shall fall down and worship the golden image; 


What follows is from Damet Ch. 3 (Old Testament). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


7 


INTRODUCTION 7 

And who so falleth not down and worshippeth that he should be cast 
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; 

There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province 
of Babylon; Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, O king, have 
not regarded thee; they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image 
which thou hast set up.” 

Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought these men before king. 

Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, 

“Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, do not ye serve my 
gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up? 

Now if ye’be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, 
flute, harp, sack-but, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, 
ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; well! but if ye 
worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning 
fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?” 

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king, 

“O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. 

If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the 
burning fiery furnace and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. 

But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy 
Gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” 

Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage 
was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; therefore he 
spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven 
times more than it was wont to be heated. 

And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to 
bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and to cast them into the 
burning fiery furnace. 

Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen and their hats, 
and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning 
fiery furnace. 

Therefore because the king’s commandment was urgent, and the 
furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took 
up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. 

And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down 
bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Can the Brahmins of India show such stead-fast faith and attachment 
for their Gods and to their religious faith? 

Buckle in his history of civilization says: 

“It is evident that until doubt began, progress was impossible. For 
as we have clearly seen, the advance of civilization solely depends 
on the acquisitions made by the human intellect and on the extent 
to which those acquisitions are diffused. But men who are perfectly 
satisfied with their own knowledge will never attempt to increase it. 

Men who are perfectly convinced of the accuracy of their opinions will 
never take the pains of examining the basis on which they are built. 

They look with wonder, and often with horror, on views contrary to 
those which they inherited from their fathers; and while they are in 
this state of mind, it is impossible that they should receive any new 
truth which interferes with their foregone conclusions. 

On this account it is, that although the acquisition of fresh knowledge 
is the necessary precursor of every step in social progress, such 
acquisition must itself be preceded by a love of inquiry, and therefore 
by a spirit of doubt; because without doubt there will be no inquiry 
and without inquiry there will be no knowledge. For knowledge is 
not an inert and passive principle which comes to us whether we will 
or not; but it must be sought before it can be won; it is the product 
of great labour and therefore of great sacrifice. And it is absurd to 
suppose that men will incur the labour, and make the sacrifice for 
subjects respecting which they are already perfectly content. They 
who do not feel the darkness, will never look for the light. If on any 
point we have attained to certainty, we make no further inquiry on 
that point; because inquiry would be useless, or perhaps dangerous. 

The doubt must intervene, before the investigation can begin. Here, 
than we have the act of doubting as the originator or, at all events, 
the necessary antecedent of all progress.” 

Now the Brahmins have left no room for doubt, for they have 
propounded a most mischievous dogma which the Brahmins have spread 
among the masses, is the dogma of the infallibility of the Vedas. If the 
Hindu intellect has ceased to grow and if the Hindu civilization and 
culture has become a stagnant and stinking pool, this dogma must 
be destroyed root and branch if India is to progress. The Vedas are a 
worthless set of books. There is no reason either to call them sacred or 
infallible. The Brahmins have invested it with sanctity and infallibility 
only because by a later interpolation of what is called the Purusha — 
Sukta, the Vedas have made them the lords of the Earth. Nobody has 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


9 


INTRODUCTION 9 

had the courage to ask why these worthless books which contain nothing 
but invocation to tribal Gods to destory the Enemies, loot their property 
and give it to their followers (have been made sacred and infallible) 1 . But 
the time has come when the Hindu mind must be freed from the hold* 
which the silly ideas propagated by the Brahmins, have on them. Without 
this liberation India has no future. I have undertaken this task knowing 
full well what risk* it involves. I am not afraid of the consequences. I 
shall be happy if I succeed in stirring the masses. 


B. R. AMBEDKAR 

• • 


1 Inserted by the editors — Ed. 

* The word ‘hold’ has been introduced by us. This word is illegible in the hand-written 
manuscript. So also the word ‘risk’ is missing from the original. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


10 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


11 


PART I 
Religious 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


12 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


13 


RIDDLE NO. 1 

THE DIFFICULTY OF KNOWING WHY 
ONE IS A HINDU 


India is a conjeries of communities. There are in it Parsis, Christians, 
Mohammedans and Hindus. The basis of these communities is not racial. 
It is of course religious. This is a superficial view. What is interesting to 
know is why is a Parsi a Parsi and why is a Christian a Christian, why 
is a Muslim a Muslim and why is a Hindu a Hindu? With regard to the 
Parsi, the Christian and the Muslim it is smooth sailing. Ask a Parsi 
why he calls himself a Parsi he will have no difficulty in answering the 
question. He will say he is a Parsi because he is a follower of Zoraster. 
Ask the same question to a Christian. He too will have no difficulty in 
answering the question. He is a Christian because he believes in Jesus 
Christ. Put the same question to a Muslim. He too will have no hesitation 
in answering it. He will say he is a believer in Islam and that is why 
he is a Muslim. 

Now ask the same question to a Hindu and there is no doubt that he 
will be completely bewildered and would not know what to say. 

If he says that he is a Hindu because he worships the same God as 
the Hindu Community does his answer cannot be true. All Hindus do 
not worship one God. Some Hindus are monotheists, some are polytheists 
and some are pantheists. Even those Hindus who are monotheists are 
not worshippers of the same Gods. Some worship the God Vishnu, 
some Shiva, some Rama, some Krishna. Some do not worship the male 
Gods. They worship a goddess. Even then they do not worship the same 
Goddesses. They worship different Goddesses. Some worship Kali, some 
worship Parvati, some worship Laxmi. 

Coming to the Polytheists they worship all the Gods. They will worship 
Vishnu and Shiva, also Rama and Krishna. They will worship Kali, 
Parvati and Laxmi. A Hindu will fast on the Shivaratri day because it 
is sacred to Shiva. He will fast on Ekadashi day because it is sacred to 
Vishnu. He will plant a Bel tree because it is sacred to Shiva and he 
will plant a Tulsi because it is dear to Vishnu. 

Polytheists among the Hindus do not confine their homage to 
the Hindu Gods. No Hindu hesitates to worship a Muslim Pir or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a Christian Goddess. Thousands of Hindus go to a Muslim Pir and 
make offerings. Actually there are in some places Brahmins who own 
the office of a hereditary priesthood of a Muslim Pir and wear a Muslim 
Pir’s dress. Thousands of Hindus go to make offerings to the Christian 
Goddess Mant Mauli near Bombay. 

The worship of the Christian or Muslim Gods is only on occasions. 
But there are more permanent transfer of religious allegiance. There are 
many so-called Hindus whose religion has a strong Muhammadan content. 
Notable amongst these are the followers of the strange Panchpiriya cult, 
who worship five Muhammadan saints, of uncertain name and identity, 
and sacrifice cocks to them, employing for the purpose as their priest 
a Muhammadan Dafali fakir. Throughout India many Hindus make 
pilgrimages to Muhammadan shrines, such as that of Sakhi Sarwar in 
the Punjab. 

Speaking of the Malkanas Mr. Blunt says that they are converted 
Hindus of various castes belonging to Agra and the adjoining districts, 
chiefly Muttra, Ettah and Mainpuri. They are of Rajput, Jat and Bania 
descent. They are reluctant to describe themselves as Musalmans, and 
generally give their original caste name and scarcely recognize the name 
Malkana. Their names are Hindu; they mostly worship in Hindu temples; 
they use the salutation Ram-Ram; they intermarry amongst themselves 
only. On the other hand, they sometimes frequent a mosque, practise 
circumcision and bury their dead; they will eat with Muhammadans if 
they are particular friends. 

In Gujarat there are several similar communities — such as the 
Matia Kunbis, who call in Brahmans for their chief ceremonies, but are 
followers of the Pirana saint Imam Shah and his successors, and bury 
their dead as do the Muhammadans; the Sheikhadas at their weddings 
employ both Hindu and a Muhammadan priest, and the Momans who 
practise circumcision, bury their dead and read the Gujarati Koran, but 
in other respects follow Hindu custom and ceremonial. 

If he says that “I am a Hindu because I hold to the beliefs of the 
Hindus” his answer cannot be right for here one is confronted with the 
fact that Hinduism has no definite creed. The beliefs of persons who are 
by all admitted to be Hindus often differ more widely from each other 
than do those of Christians and Muhammadans. Limiting the issue to 
cardinal beliefs the Hindus differ among themselves as to the beliefs which 
are of cardinal importance. Some say that all the Hindu scriptures must 
be accepted, but some would exclude the Tantras, while others would 
regard only the Vedas as of primary importance; some again think that 
the sole essential is belief in the doctrine of karma and metempsychosis. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


15 


RIDDLE NO. 1 15 

A complex congeries of creeds and doctrines is Hinduism. It shelters 
within its portals monotheists, polytheists and pantheists; worshippers 
of the great Gods Shiva and Vishnu or of their female counterparts, as 
well as worshippers of the divine mothers or the spirits of trees, rocks 
and streams and the tutelary village deities; persons who propitiate 
their deity by all manner of bloody sacrifices, and persons who will not 
only kill no living creature but who must not even use the word ‘cut’; 
those whose ritual consists mainly of prayers and hymns, and those 
who indulge in unspeakable orgies in the name of religion; and a host 
of more or less heterodox sectaries, many of whom deny the supremacy 
of the Brahmans, or at least have non-Brahmanical religious leaders. 

If he says that he is a Hindu because he observes the same customs 
as other Hindus do his answer cannot be true. For all Hindus do not 
observe the same customs. 

In the north near relatives are forbidden to marry; but in the south 
cousin marriage is prescribed, and even closer alliances are sometimes 
permitted. As a rule female chastity is highly valued, but some communities 
set little store by it, at any rate prior to marriage, and others make it a 
rule to dedicate one daughter to a life of religious prostitution. In some 
parts the women move about freely; in others they are kept secluded. 
In some parts they wear skirts; in others trousers. 

Again if he said that he is a Hindu because he believes in the caste 
system his answer cannot be accepted as satisfactory. It is quite true 
that no Hindu is interested in what his neighbour believes, but he is 
very much interested in knowing whether he can eat with him or take 
water from his hands. In other words it means that the caste system 
is an essential feature of Hinduism and a man who does not belong 
to a recognized Hindu Caste cannot be a Hindu. While all this is true 
it must not be forgotten that observance of caste is not enough. Many 
Musalmans and many Christians observe caste if not in the matter of 
inter-dining certainly in the matter of inter-marriage. But they cannot 
be called Hindus on that account. Both elements must be present. He 
must be a Hindu and he must also observe caste. This brings us back 
to the old question who is a Hindu? It leaves us where we are. 

Is it not a question for every Hindu to consider why in the matter of 
his own religion his position is so embarrassing and so puzzling? Why 
is he not able to answer so simple a question which every Parsi, every 
Christian, and every Muslim can answer? Is it not time that he should 
ask himself what are the causes that has brought about this Religious 
chaos ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


16 


RIDDLE NO. 2 

THE ORIGIN OF THE VEDAS- 

THE BRAHMINIC EXPLANATION OR AN EXERCISE 
IN THE ART OF CIRCUMLOCUTION 


There is hardly any Hindu who does not regard the Vedas as the most 
sacred Book of his religion. And yet ask any Hindu what is the origin 
of the Vedas and it would be difficult to find one who can give a clear 
and a definite answer to the simple question. Of course, if the question 
was addressed to a Vedic Brahmin he would say that the Vedas are 
Sanatan. But this is no answer to the question. For first of all what 
does the word Sanatan means? 

The best explanation of the word Sanatan is to be found in the 
Commentary by Kalluka Bhatt on Chapter I Shlokas 22-23 of the Manu 
Smriti. This is what Kulluka Bhatt defines the word Sanatan 1 . 

1 Muir Sanskrit Texts Vol. III. p. 6. 

We have found 72 pages dealing with the subject “Origin of the Vedas”. 
These pages were neither arranged properly nor paged either by the typist 
or by the author. We have attempted to organize and arrange all these 
loose papers systematically and divide them into the Riddle No. 2 to 6, 
in accordance with the arrangement given in the Table of contents. It is 
difficult to assume that all these pages are complete in the treatment of 
the subject of each Chapter. 

There is, however, one independent chapter containing 61 pages under 
the title Riddle of the Vedas’ placed as Appendix I. That essay deals with 
all the subjects mentioned in the Table of Contents at Sr. No. 2 to 6 in a 
consolidated manner. Several paras may be found repeated in that essay. 
The original MS of the chapters 2 to 6 included here bears corrections 
and modifications in the handwriting of the author, whereas the Chapter 
included as Appendix I is a typed second copy having no corrections at 
all. We have followed the chronology of the Table of contents and the 
pages of corrected MS are arranged accordingly. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


17 


RIDDLE NO. 2 17 

“The word Sanatana he says, means ‘eternally pre-existing’. The doctrine 
of the superhuman origin of the Vedas is maintained by Manu. The same 
Vedas which (existed) in the previous mundane era (Kalpa) were preserved 
in the memory of the omniscient Brahma, who was one with the supreme 
spirit. It was those same Vedas that, in the beginning of the present 
Kalpa, he drew forth from Agni, Vayu and Surya; and this dogma, which 
is founded upon the Veda, is not to be questioned, for the Veda says, ‘the 
Rig-Veda comes from Agni, the Yajur-Veda from Vayu, and the Sama-Veda 
from Surya.” 

To understand the explanation by Kulluka Bhatt it is necessary to 
explain what Kalpa means. 

A Kalpa is a reckoning of time adopted by the Vedic Brahmins. The 
Brahmanic reckoning of time divides time into (1) Varsha, (2) Yuga, (3) 
Mahayuga, (4) Manvantara and (5) Kalpa. 

Varsha is easy enough to understand. It corresponds to the term year. 

What exactly the period of time covered by the term Yuga covers 
there is no unanimity. 

A Mahayuga is a period covered by a group of four Yugas: (1) Krita 
Yuga, (2) Treta Yuga, (3) Dwapar Yuga and (4) Kali Yuga. The four Yugas 
follow one another in a cycle, when the period of the first Yuga is spent 
it is followed by the second and so on in the order given. When the cycle 
is complete one Mahayuga is completed and a new Mahayuga opens. 
Every Mahayuga begins with the Krita Yuga and ends with Kali Yuga. 

There is no uncertainty as to the time relation of a Mahayuga and a 
Kalpa. 71 Mahayugas make one Kalpa. There is however some uncertainty 
as to the time relation between Mahayuga and Manvantara. A Manvantara 
is equal to 71 Mahayugas “and something more”. What exact period of 
time that ‘something more’ means, the Brahmins have not been able to 
state categorically. Consequently the time relation between Manvantara 
and Kalpa is uncertain. 

But this does not matter very much for our present purposes. For the 
present it is enough to confine our attention to Kalpa. 

The idea underlying ‘Kalpa’ is closely connected with the creation 
and dissolution of the Universe. The creation of the world is called 
Srashti. The dissolution of the universe is called Pralaya. Time 
between Srashti and Pralaya is called Kalpa. The idea of the origin 
of the Vedas is thus more intimately connected with the idea of Kalpa 

According to this scheme of things, what is supposed to happen is 
that when a Kalpa begins creation begins. With the beginning of the 
creation there comes into being a new series of Vedas. What Kulluka 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bhatt wants to convey is that though in a sense every new Kalpa has a 
new series of Vedas the same old Vedas are reproduced by Brahma from 
his memory. That is why he says the Vedas are Sanatan i.e., eternally 
pre-existing. 

What Kalluka Bhatt says is that the Vedas are reproduced from 
memory. The real question is who made them and not who reproduced 
them. Even if one accepts the theory of reproduction at the beginning 
of each Kalpa the question still remains who made the Vedas when the 
first Kalpa began. The Vedas could not have come into being ex-nihilo. 
They must have a beginning though they may have no end. Why don’t 
the Brahmins say openly? Why this circumlocution? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


19 


RIDDLE NO. 3 

THE TESTIMONY OF OTHER SHASTRAS 
ON THE ORIGIN OF THE VEDAS 

i 

The search for the origin of the Vedas may well begin with the Vedas 
themselves. 

The Rig-Veda propounds a theory of the origin of the Vedas. It is set 
out in the famous Purusha Sukta. According to it, there was a mystic 
sacrifice of the Purusha a mythical being and it is out of this sacrifice 
that the three Vedas namely, Rig, Sama, Yajus came into being. 

The Sama-Veda and Yajur-Veda have nothing to say about the origin 
of the Vedas. 

The only other Veda that refers to this question is the Atharva- 
Veda. It has many explanations regarding the origin of the Vedas. One 
explanation 1 reads as follows: 

“From Time the Rig verses sprang; the Yajus sprang from Time.” 

There are also two other views propounded in the Atharva-Veda on 
this subject. The first of these is not very intelligent and may be given 
in its own language which runs as follows 2 : 

“Declare who that Skamba (supporting principle) is in whom the 
primeval rishis, the rick, saman, and yajush, the earth and the one rishi, 
are sustained. . . . 

“Declare who is that Skamba from whom they cut off the rick verses, 
from whom they scrapped off the yajush, of whom the saman verses are 
the hairs and the verses of Atharvan and Angiras the mouth.” 

Obviously this statement is a challenge to some one who had proclaimed 
that the Rig, Sama and Yajur Veda were born out of a Skamba. 

The second explanation given in the Atharva-Veda is that the Vedas 
sprang from Indr a . 3 


1 Atharva-Veda XIX 54. 3. Quoted in Muir S. I. III. p. 4. 

2 Atharva-Veda X 7.14 quoted in Muir S. I. III. p. 3. 

3 Muir S. T. III. p. 4. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ii 

This is all that the Vedas have to say about their own origin. Next 
in order of the Vedas come the Brahmanas. We must therefore inquire 
into what they have to say on this subject. The only Brahmanas which 
attempt to explain the origin of the Vedas are the Satapatha Brahmana, 
the Taitteriya Brahmana, Aitereya Brahmana and Kaushitaki Brahmana. 

The Satapatha Brahmana has a variety of explanations. One attributes 
the origin of the Vedas to Prajapati 1 . According to it: 

“Prajapati, was formerly this universe (i.e., the sole existence) one only. 

He desired, ‘may I become, may I be propagated’. He toiled in devotion, 

he performed austerity. 

“From him, when he had so toiled and performed austerity, three 
worlds were created — earth, air and sky. He infused warmth into these 
three worlds. From them, thus heated, three lights were produced, — 

Agni (fire), this which purifies i.e., Pavana, or Vayu, (the Wind), 
and Surya (the Sun). He infused heat into these three lights. From 
them so heated the three Vedas were produced, — the Rig-Veda from 
Agni (fire), the Yajur-Veda from Vayu (Wind) and the Sama-Veda 
from Surya (the Sun). He infused warmth into these three Vedas. 

From them so heated three luminous essences were produced, bhuh, 
from the Rig-Veda, bhuvah from the Yajur-Veda, and svar from the 
Sama-Veda. Hence, with the Rig-Veda, the office of the adhvaryu; 
with the Sama-Veda, the duty of the udgatri; while the function of 
the brahman arose through the luminous essence of the triple science 
(i.e., the three Vedas combined).” 

The Satapatha Brahmana gives another variant 2 of this explanation of 
the origin of the Veda from Prajapati. The explanation is that Prajapati 
created the Vedas from waters. Says the Satapatha Brahmana: 

“This male, Prajapati, desired, ‘May I multiply, may I be 
propagated’. He toiled in devotion; he practised austere-fervour. 
Having done so he first of all created sacred knowledge, the triple 
Vedic science. This became a basis for him. Wherefore men say, 
‘sacred knowledge is the basis of this universe’. Hence after studying 
the Veda a man has a standing ground; for sacred knowledge is his 
foundation. Resting on this basis he (Prajapati) practised austere- 
fervour. He created the waters from Vach (speech) as their world. 

Vach was his; she was created. As she pervaded (apnot) waters were 

1 Muir Sanskrit Texts, III. p. 5. 

2 Ibid, p. 8 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


21 


RIDDLE NO. 3 21 

called ‘apah’. As she covered (avrinot) all, water was called ‘Var’. He 
desired, ‘May I be propagated from these waters’. Along with this triple 
Vedic science he entered the waters. Thence sprang an egg. He gave 
it an impulse; and said ‘ let there be, let there be, let there be again’. 
Thence was first created sacred knowledge, the triple Vedic science. 
Wherefore men say, ‘Sacred knowledge is the first-born thing’ in this 
universe. Moreover, it was sacred knowledge which was created from 
that Male in front, wherefore it was created as his mouth. Hence they 
say of a man learned in the Veda, ‘he is like Agni; for the sacred 
knowledge is Agni’s mouth’.” 

There is a third explanation 1 given in the Satapatha Brahmana: 

“ I settle thee in the ocean as they seat.” 

“ Mind is the ocean. From the mind-ocean with speech for a shovel 
the Gods dug out the triple Vedic science. Hence this verse has been 
uttered; ‘May the brilliant deity today know where they placed that 
offering which the Gods dug out with sharp shovels. Mind is the ocean; 
speech is the sharp shovel; the triple Vedic Science is the offering. In 
reference to this the verse has been uttered. He settles it in Mind.” 

The Taitteriya — Brahmana has three explanations to offer. It speaks 
of the Vedas as being derived from Prajapati. It also says Prajapati 
created king Soma and after him the three Vedas were created 2 . This 
Brahmana has another explanation 3 quite unconnected with Prajapati. 
According to it: 

“Vach (speech) is an imperishable thing, and the first-born of 
the ceremonial, the mother of the Vedas, and the centre-point of 
immortality. Delighting in us, she came to the sacrifice. May the 
protecting goddess be ready to listen to my invocation, she whom 
the wise rishis, the composers of hymns, the Gods sought by austere- 
fervour, and by laborious devotion.” 

To crown all this the Taitteriya Brahmana offers a third explanation. 
It says that the Vedas came from the beard of Prajapati . 4 

Ill 

The Upanishads have also attempted to explain the origin of the Vedas. 

The explanation offered by the Chhandogya Upanishad is the same 5 

1 Muir I. pp. 9-10. 

2 Ibid. p. 8. 

3 Ibid. p. 10. 

4 Ibid. p. 10. 

6 Ibid p. 5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as that given by the Satapatha Brahmana — namely that the Rig-Veda 
originated from Agni, Yajus from Vayu and Sam from the Sun. 

The Brahad Aranyaka Upanishad has two explanations to offer. In 
one place, it says 1 : 

“As from a fire made of moist wood, various modifications of smoke 
proceed, so is the breathing of this great Being the Rig-Veda, the Yajur- 
Veda, the Sama-Veda, the Atharvangirases, the Itihasas, Puranas, science, 
the Upanishads, verses (slokas), aphorisms, comments of different kinds — all 
these are his breathings.” 

In another place, it says 2 : 

“Prajapati (identified with Death or the Devourer) is said to have produced 
Vach (speech), and through her, together with soul, to have created all 
things, including the Vedas.” 

“By that speech and that soul he created all things whatsoever, rick, 
yajush, and saman texts, metres, sacrifices, creatures and animals.” 

“ The three Vedas are (identifiable with) these three things (speech, mind 
and breath). Speech is the Rig-Veda, mind the Yajur-Veda and breath the 
Sama-Veda.” 


IV 

Coming to the Smritis, there are two theories as to the origin of the 
Vedas to be found in the Manu Smriti. In one place 3 , it is said that the 
Vedas were created by Brahma. 

“He (Brahma) in the beginning fashioned from the words of the Veda 
the several names, functions, and separate conditions of all (creatures). 
That Lord also created the subtle host of active and living deities, and of 
Sadhyas, and eternal sacrifice. And in order to the performance of sacrifice, 
he drew forth from Agni, from Vayu and from Surya, the triple eternal 
Veda, distinguished as Rick, Yajush and Saman.” 

In another place 4 , he seems to accept the story of Prajapati being the 
originator of the Vedas as would be evident from the following: 

“Prajapati also milked out of the three Vedas the letters, 'a’, ‘u, 
and ‘m’ together with the words ‘bhuh’, ‘bhuvah’ and ‘svar’. The same 
supreme Prajapati also milked from each of the three Vedas one of 
the three portions of the text called Savitri (or gayatri), beginning 
with the word tat .... The three great imperishable particles (bhuh, 

1 Muir Vol. I. p. 8. 

2 Ibid. p. 9. 

3 Ibid. p. 6. 

4 Ibid p. 7. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

RIDDLE NO. 3 

bhuvah, svar) preceded by om, and the gayatri of three lines, are to be 
regarded as the mouth of Brahma.” 

V 

It is also interesting to note what the Puranas have to say about the 
origin of the Vedas. The Vishnu Purana 1 says: 

“From his eastern mouth Brahma formed the gayatra, the rick verses, 
the trivrit, the soma-rathantara, and of sacrifices, the agnishtoma. From 
his southern mouth he created the yajush verses, the trishtubh metre, the 
panchadasa-stoma, the vrihat-saman and the ukthya. From his western 
mouth he formed the saman verses, the jagatimetre, the saptadasa-stoma, 
the vairupa, and the atiratra. From his northern mouth he framed the 
ekavinsa, the atharvan, the aptoryaman, with the anushtubh and biraj 
metres.” 

The Bhagvat Purana 2 says: 

“Once the Vedas sprang from the four-faced creator, as he was meditating 
‘how shall I create the aggregate worlds as before?... He formed from his 
eastern and other mouths the Vedas called rick, yajush, saman, and atharvan, 
together with praise, sacrifice, hymns and expiation.” * [There appears to be 
some quotations missing as there is no link between these two paragraphs .] 

“Entering between her eyes. From her there was then produced a 
quadruple being in the form of a Male, lustrous as Brahma, undefined, 
eternal, undecaying, devoid of bodily senses or qualities, distinguished by the 
attribute of brilliancy, pure as the rays of the moon, radiant, and embodied 
in letters. The God fashioned the Rig-Veda, with the Yajush from his eyes, 
the Sama-Veda from the tip of his tongue, and the Atharvan from his head. 
These Vedas, as soon as they are born, find a body, (kshetra). Hence they 
obtain their character of Vedas, because they find (vindanti) that abode. 
These Vedas then create the pre-existent eternal Brahma (sacred science), 
a Male of celestial form, with their own mind-born qualities.” 

It also accepts Prajapati as the origin. It says that when the Supreme 
being was intent on creating the Universe, Hiranyagarbha, or Prajapati, 
issued from his mouth the sound ‘Om’, and was desired to divide 
himself — a process which he was in great doubt how he should effect — 
the Harivamsa proceeds 3 : 

“ While he was thus reflecting, the sound ‘om’ issued from him, 
and resounded through the earth, air and sky. While the God of Gods 


23 

23 


1 Muir Vol. I. p. 11. 

2 Ibid. p. 11. 

3 Ibid. p. 14. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


was again and again repeating this, the essence of mind, the vashatkara 
proceeded from his heart. Next, the sacred and transcendent vyahritis, (bhuh, 
bhuvah, svar), formed of the great smriti, in the form of sound, were produced 
from earth, air, and sky. Then appeared the goddess, the most excellent of 
meters, with twenty-four syllables (the gayatri). Reflecting on the divine text 
(beginning with) ‘tat’, the Lord formed the Savitri. He then produced all the 
Vedas, the Rick, Saman, Atharvan, and Yajush, with their prayers and rites.” 

VI 

Here we have eleven different explanations regarding the origin of 
the Vedas — (1) as originating from the mystical sacrifice of Purusha, 
(2) as resting on Skambha, (3) as cut or scraped off from him, as being 
his hair and his mouth, (4) as springing from Indra, (5) as produced 
from Time, (6) as produced from Agni, Vayu and Surya, (7) as springing 
from Prajapati, and the Waters, (8) as being the breath of Brahma, (9) 
as being dug by the Gods out of mind-ocean, (10) as being the hair of 
Prajapati’s beard and (11) as being the offspring of Vach. 

This bewildering multiplicity of answers to a simple question is a riddle. 
The writers who have come forward to furnish these answers are all 
Brahmins. They belong to the same Vaidik school of thought. They alone 
were the guardians of the ancient religious lore. Why should they have 
given such incoherent and chaotic answers to a very simple question? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


25 


RIDDLE NO. 4 

WHY SUDDENLY THE BRAHMINS 
DECLARE THE VEDAS TO BE 
INFALLIBLE AND NOT TO BE 
QUESTIONED? 


To say that the Vedas occupy a very high position in the Religious 
literature of the Hindus is to make an understatement. To say that 
the Vedas form the sacred literature of the Hindus will also be an 
inadequate statement. For the Vedas besides being a sacred literature of 
the Hindus is a book whose authority cannot be questioned. The Vedas 
are infallible. Any argument based on the Vedas is final and conclusive. 
There is no appeal against it. This is the theory of the Vedic Brahmins 
and is accepted by the generality of the Hindus. 

I 

On what does this theory rest? The theory rests on the view that the 
Vedas are Apaurusheya. When the Vedic Brahmins say that the Vedas are 
Apaurusheya what they mean is that they were not made by man. Not 
being made by man, they are free from the failings, faults and frailties 
to which every man is subject and are therefore infallible. 

II 

It is difficult to understand how such a theory came to be propounded 
by the Vedic Brahmins. For there was a time when the Vedic Brahmins 
themselves thought quite differently on the question of the authority of 
the Vedas as being final and conclusive. These Vaidik Brahmins are no 
other than the authors of the various Dharma Sutras. 

The following are the views expressed by the Dharma Sutras on 
question of the authority of the Vedas: 

To begin with the Gautama Dharma Sutra. 

It lays down the following rule on the question of the infallibility of 
the Vedas. 

“The Veda is the source of the sacred law” 1-1. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“And the tradition and practice of those who know the Veda” 1-2. 

“If authorities of equal force are conflicting, (either may be followed at) 
pleasure” 1-4. 

The Vashishta Dharma Sutra propounds the following view: 

“The sacred law has been settled by the revealed texts i.e., Vedas and 
by the tradition of the sages” 1-4. 

“On the failure of (rules given in) these (two sources) the practice of 
Shishtas (has) authority”. 1-5. 

The views of Baudhayana are given below: 

Prasna I, Adhyaya I, Kandika I. 

(1) The sacred law is taught in each Veda. 

(2) We will explain (it) in accordance with that. 

(3) (The sacred law), taught in the tradition (Smriti) stands second. 

(4) The practice of the Sishtas (stands) third. 

(5) On failure of them an Assembly consisting at least of ten members 
(shall decide disputed points of law). 

The view taken by the Apastamba Dharma Sutra is clear from the 
following extract from that Sutra: 

“Now, therefore, we will declare the acts productive of merit which form 
part of the customs of daily life” 1-1. 

“The authority (for these duties) is the agreement (samaya) of those 
who know the law”. 1-2. 

“And (the authorities for the latter are) the Vedas alone” 1-3. 

With regard to the Shishtas both the Vashishtha Dharma Sutra and 
also the Baudhayana Dharma Sutra have taken particular care to define 
who can be regarded as Shishtas. 

The Vashishta Dharma Sutra says: 

“He whose heart is free from desire (is called) a Shishta”. 1-6. 

Baudhayana goes into much greater details about the qualification of 
the Shishtas. This is what he says: 

“5. Shishtas, forsooth, (are those) who are free from envy, free from pride, 
contented with a store of grain sufficient for ten days, free from covetousness, 
and free from hypocrisy, arrogance, greed, perplexity and anger.” 

“6. Those are called Shishtas who, in accordance with the sacred law, 
have studied the Veda together with its appendages, know how to draw 
inferences from that (and) are able to adduce proofs perceptible by the 
senses from the revealed texts.” 

Baudhayana has also something very interesting to say about the 
assembly whom he authorises to decide. The following are his views on 
the matter: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


27 


RIDDLE NO. 4 27 

“8. Now they quote also (the following verses): ‘Four men, who each know 
one of the four Vedas, a Mimansaka, one who knows the Angas, one who 
recites (the works on) the sacred law, and three Brahmanas belonging to 
(three different) orders, constitute an assembly consisting at least of ten 
members.” 

“9. There may be five, or there may be three, or there may be one 
blameless man, who decides (questions regarding) the sacred law. But a 
thousand fools (can) not do it).” 

“As an elephant made of wood, as an antelope made of leather, such an 
unlearned Brahmana; those three having nothing but the name (of their 
kind)”. 

This review of Dharma Sutras 1 shows that the (1) Veda, (2) Tradition 
(Smriti), (3) Practice of Shishta and (4) Agreement in an assembly were 
the four different authorities which were required to be referred to in 
the decision of an issue which was in controversy. It also shows that 
there was a time when the Vedas were not the sole infallible authorities. 
That was the time represented by the Dharma Sutras of Vashishta and 
Baudhayana. Apastambha does not invest the Vedas with any authority 
at all. Knowledge of Vedas is made by him as an electoral qualification 
for membership of the Assembly whose agreed decision is the law and the 
only law. The Veda was not at all regarded as a book of authority and 
when the only recognized source of authority was an agreement arrived 
at in an Assembly of the learned. It is only in the time of Gautama that 
the Vedas came to be regarded as the only authority. There was a time 
when an agreed decision of the Assembly was admitted as one source 
of authority. That is the period represented by Baudhayana. 

This conclusion is reinforced by the following quotation from the 
Satapatha Brahmana. It says: 

[Left incomplete. Quotation and further discussion not given.] 

• • 


1 According to Max Muller the period of the Dharma Sutras was sometime between 
600 and 200 B.C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


28 


RIDDLE No. 5 

WHY DID THE BRAHMINS GO 
FURTHER AND DECLARE THAT THE 
VEDAS ARE NEITHER MADE BY MAN 
NOR BY GOD? 


The Vedic Brahmins were not content with investing the Vedas 
with Infallibility. They went further and asserted that the Vedas were 
Apaurusheya. By this they meant the Vedas were not made by man. 
This doctrine no doubt leads to the doctrine of Infallibility. For not being 
made by man they are free from the failings, faults and frailties of man 
and are therefore infallible. All the same it is necessary to examine the 
theory separately for it is an independent theory. 

Is there really no human author of the Vedas? Are they really 
Apaurusheya ? The best evidence on the subject is the evidence of the 
Anukramanis — a special class of literature which forms part of the 
ancient Sanskrit literature. What are called Anukramanis are nothing but 
systematic indices to various portions of the ancient Vedic literature. Every 
Veda has an Anukramani, sometimes have more than one Anukramani. 
Seven Anukramanis for the Rig-Veda are known to be in existence, five 
by Shaunaka, one by Katyayana and one by an unknown author. For 
the Yajur-Veda there exist three Anukramanis, one for each of the three 
Shakhas, Atreyi, Charayaniyas and Madhyandina. For the Sama-Veda 
there are two Anukramanis, one is called Arsheya-Brahmana and the 
other is known by the name Parishistas. As to the Atharva-Veda one 
Anukramani is known to exist. It is known as Brihat-Sarvanukramani. 

The most perfect Anukramani according to Prof. Max Muller is 
Katyayana’s Sarvanukramani to the Rig-Veda. Its importance lies in 
the fact that it gives (1) the first words of each hymn, (2) the number 
of verses, (3) the name and the family of the Rishi who composed it, 
(4) the names of the deities and (5) the metres of every verse. What 
emerges from a reference to the Sarvanukramani is that the Rishis are 
the authors of the hymns which make up the Rig-Veda. The Rig-Veda 
therefore on the evidence of the Anukramani cannot but be regarded 
as a man-made work. The same must be the conclusion regarding the 
other Vedas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


29 


RIDDLE NO. 5 29 

That the Anukramanis are realistic is proved by many passages in 
the Rig-Veda in which the Rishis describe themselves as the composers 
of the hymns. 

Below are given a few of such passages: 

“The Kanvas make a prayer to you, hear well their invocation’. Thus, O, 
Indra, yoker of steeds, have the Gotamas made hymns for these efficaciously” 

“This hymn has efficaciously been made to you, O opulent Asvins, by 
the Manas” 

“These magnifying prayers, (this) hymn, O Asvins, the Gritsamadas 
have made for you” 

“Aspiring to heaven, the sage Kusikas have made a hymn with praises 
to thee, O Indra.” 

“Nodhas, descendant of Gotama, fashioned this new hymn for (thee), 
Indra, who are of old, and who yokest thy steeds” 

“Thus O, hero, have the Gritsamadas, desiring succour, fashioned for 
thee a hymn as men make works.” 

“The sages generated an efficacious production and a prayer for Indra.” 

“These hymns, Agni, generated for thee, celebrate thy bounty in cows 
and horses.” 

“Our father hath discovered (or invented) this great, sevenheaded hymn, 
born of sacred truth; Ayasya, friend of all men celebrating Indra, has 
generated the fourth song of praise.” 

“We, the Raghuanas, have uttered to Agni honied speech; we incessantly 
laud him with eulogies.” 

“Thus, all ye Adityas, Aditi, and ye ruling powers, has the wise son of 
Plati magnified you. The celestial race has been lauded by the immortal 
Gaya.” 

“He it is whom they call a rishi, a priest, a pious sacrificer, a chanter 
of prayers, a reciter of hymns, he it is who knows the three bodies of the 
brilliant (Agni), the man who is most prominent in bestowing gifts.” 

Apart from the evidence of the Anukramanis there is another sort 
of evidence which militates against the theory of the Vedas being 
Apaurusheya. The Rishis themselves have treated the Vedas as a human 
and as a historical product. The hymns of Rig-Veda distinguish between 
ancient and modern Rishis. Here are a few of them: 

“Agni, who is worthy to be celebrated by former as well as modern rishis, 
will bring the gods hither.” 

“The former rishis who invoked thee for succour. 

“Hear the hymn of me this modern sage, of this modern (sage).” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


30 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Indra, as thou hast been like a joy to former worshippers who praised 
thee, like waters to the thirsty, I invoke thee again and again with this 
hymn.” 

“The ancient rishis, resplendent and sage, have placed in front of them 
(Brihaspati) with gladdening tongue.” 

“Neither the ancients nor later men, nor any modern man, has attained 
to (conceived) thy prowess, O, Madhavan.” 

“As (Indra’s) former worshippers were, (may we be) blameless, 
irreproachable, and unharmed.” 

“For, now, O energetic god, men are thy worshippers as the ancients 
born of old and the men of the middle and later ages have been thy friends, 
And O, much-invoked think of the most recent of all. 

“To Him (Indra) our ancient fathers, the seven Navagava sages desiring 
food, (resorted) with their hymns.” 

“Glorified by our newest hymn, do thou bring to us wealth and food 
with progeny.” 

A closer study of the Rig-Veda will show that the Rig-Veda itself 
makes a distinction between old hymns and new hymns. Some of them 
are given below: 

“Glorified by our newest hymn, do thou bring to us wealth and food 
and progeny.” 

“Agni thou hast announced (or do thou announcest) among the gods this 
our offering, our newest hymn.” 

“Through our new hymns, do thou, vigorous in action, destroyer of cities, 
sustain us with invigorating blessings.” 

“I bring to Agni, the son of strength, a new and energetic hymn, a 
production of thought uttered by the voice (vachah).” 

“I present to the mighty protector a mental production, a new utterance 
(now) springing up” 

“May the new prayer impel thee, the heroic well-accourted, the loud- 
thundering to succour us.” 

“I seek like the ancients, to stimulate thee, the ancient, with a new hymn.” 

“May the new hymns made to praise you, may these prayers gratify you.” 

“ Sing O, Sobhari, with a new hymn to these youthful, vigorous, and 
brilliant (gods) 

“Indra, slayer of Vritra, thunderer, invoked of many, we (thy) numerous 
(worshippers) bring to thee, as thy hire, hymns which never before existed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


31 


RIDDLE NO. 5 31 

“I will address to this ancient (deity) my new praises which he desires; 
May he listen to us” 

“Desiring horses, cattle, and wealth we invoke thee to approach us.” 

Given this abundance of evidence to prove the human origin of the 
Vedas it is a riddle to find that the Brahmins should so strenuously 
propagate this extravagant view that the Vedas are not man made. 
What made the Brahmins propagate such a view? 

Notwithstanding this there were eminent philosophers who were 
prepared to accept the authority of the Vedas although they were not 
prepared to admit that the Vedas were Sanatan or Apaurush. 

The Gautama the founder of what is called the Nyaya system of 
Philosopy said: 

“The authority of the Veda, like that of the formulas, and the Ayur-Veda 
(treatise on medicine) follows from the authority of the competent persons 
from whom they proceeded. Since the competent maker of the Veda possesses 
authority, inculcates truth, it results from the force of the terms that the 
Veda was uttered by a person of this character; and by this reasoning the 
authority of the Veda is to be inferred. He illustrates this by the case of the 
formulas and the Ayur-Veda. By formulas (mantra) are meant the sentences 
which neutralize poison etc., and the section containing the Ayur-Veda forms 
part of the Veda. Now as the authority of these two classes of writings 
is admitted by general consent, the authority of everything which possess 
the characteristics of the Veda must be inferred from this example. Some, 
however, explain the aphorism thus; a Veda is that in which authority is 
found or recognized. From such Vedicity (or Possession of the character of 
a Veda) the authority of any work is to be inferred.” 

The Vaishashika system admits that the Vedas are authoritative. But 
the grounds on which it rests its conclusion are: 

(1) That the Vedas are the product of an intelligent mind and 

(2) That they have been uttered by God. Therefore they are 
authoritative. 

The Sankhya system founded by Kapila held the view that eternity 
cannot be predicated of the Vedas, since various texts in the Vedas 
themselves declare them to have been produced. It expressly denies 
that the Vedas originated from the conscious effort of any divine being. 
According to the Sankhya, the Vedas like the Sun shine by their 
own light, and evince an inherent power both of revealing their own 
perfection and of elucidating all other things, past and future, great 
and small, near and remote. The system of Philosophy known as the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vedanta seems to support two distant views. It ascribes the origin of 
the Vedas to Brahma as its source or cause of source using the term 
Brahma as neuter denoting the supreme spirit and not as masculine 
designating the personal creator. It also speaks of the eternity of the 
Vedas and makes mention of a self-dependent author. 

The Brahmins did not remain content with the argument that the 
Vedas were not made by man. They went much further and contended 
that the Vedas were not made even by God. This theory is propounded 
by Jaimini the author of the Purva Mimansa. Jaimini’s arguments 
in favour of the thesis are so strange that one has to know them in 
order to realize their strangeness. 

It is in the Purva Mimansa — a book of Brahmanic philosophy — 
that this doctrine of the Vedas being Apaurusheya is propounded. The 
following extracts from the book will reveal the nature of the argument. 

Jaimini the author of the Purva Mimamsa first deals with the 
argument of the Naiyayikas who assert that the Vedas are made by 
Parameshwara and states the case made out by the Naiyayikas. 

The argument of the Mimansakas is: 

“The Veda could not have been uttered by the incorporeal Paramesvara 
(God), who has no palate or other organs of speech, and therefore cannot 
be conceived to have pronounced the letters (of which it is composed.). 
This objection (answers the Naiyayika) is not happy, because, though 
Paramesvara is by nature incorporeal, he can yet, by way of sport 
assume a body, in order to show kindness to his devoted worshippers. 
Consequently, the arguments in favour of the doctrine that the Veda 
had no personal author are inconclusive.” 

He then proceeds to state his arguments in favour of the Doctrine 
of the Mimansakas — 

“I shall now clear up all these difficulties. What is meant by this 
paurusheyatva (‘derivation from a personal author’) which it is sought 
to prove? Is it (1) mere procession ( utpannatva ) from a person (purusha) 
like the procession of the Veda from persons such as ourselves, when 
we daily utter it? or (2) is it the arrangement — with a view to its 
manifestation — of knowledge acquired by other modes of proof, in the 
sense in which persons like ourselves compose a treatise? If the first 
meaning be intended, there will be no dispute. 

If the second sense be meant, I ask whether the Veda is proved (to 
be authoritative) in virtue (a) of its being founded on inference, or (b) 
of its being founded on supernatural information ( agama-balat )? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


33 


RIDDLE NO. 5 33 

The former alternative (a) i.e., that the Veda derives its authority 
from being founded on inference cannot be correct, since this theory 
breaks down, if it be applied to the sentence of the Malati Madhava 
or any other secular poem (which may contain inferences destitute of 
authority). If, on the other hand, you say (b) that the contents of the 
Veda are distinguished from those of other books of having authority, 
this explanation also will fail to satisfy a philosopher. For the word of 
the Veda is (defined to be) a word which proves things that are not 
provable by any other evidence. 

Now if it could be established that this Vedic word did nothing more 
than prove things that are provable by other evidence, we should be 
involved in the same sort of contradiction as if a man were to say that 
his mother was a barren woman. 

And even if we conceded that Parameswara might in sport assume a 
body, it would not be conceivable that in that case he should perceive 
things beyond the reach of the senses, from the want of any means of 
apprehending objects removed from him in place, in time, and in nature. 
Nor is it to be thought that his eyes and other sense alone would have 
the power of producing such knowledge, since men can only attain to 
conceptions corresponding with what they have perceived. 

This is what has been said by the Guru (Prabhakara) when he refutes 
this supposition of an omniscient author; ‘Wherever any object is perceived 
(by the organ of sight) in its most perfect exercise, such perception can 
only have reference to the vision of something very distant or very 
minute, since no organ can go beyond its own proper objects, as e.g., 
the ear can never become cognizant of form’. 

Hence the authority of the Veda does not arise in virtue of any 
supernatural information acquired by the Deity in a corporeal shape.” 

These are arguments urged by Jaimini to destroy the case of the 
Naiyayikas. Jaimini then proceeds to give his positive arguments to 
show why the Vedas are not the word of God but something superior 
to that. This is what he says: 

“In the preceding aphorism it was declared that the connection of 
words and their meanings is eternal. Desiring now to prove that this 
(eternity of connection) is dependent on the eternity of words (or sound), 
he begins by setting forth the first side of the question, viz., the doctrine 
of those who maintain that sound is not eternal.” 

“Some, i.e., the followers of the Nyaya philosophy, say that sound is 
a product, because we see that it is the result of effort, which it would 
not be if it were eternal.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“That it is not eternal, on account of its transitoriness, i.e., because 
after a moment it ceases to be perceived.” 

“Because, we employ in reference to it the expression ‘making’ i.e., 
we speak of ‘making’ a sound.” 

“Because it is perceived by different persons at once, and is consequently 
in immediate contact with the organs of sense of those, both far and 
near, which it could not be if it were one and eternal.” 

“Because sounds have both an original and a modified form; as e.g., 
in the case of dadhi atra, which is changed into dadhy atra, the original 
letter ‘ i ’ being altered into ‘ y ’ by the rules of permutation. Now, no 
substance which undergoes a change is eternal.” 

“Because sound is augmented by the number of those who make it. 
Consequently the opinion of the Mimansaka, who say that sound is merely 
manifested, and not created, by human effort, is wrong; since even a 
thousand manifesters do not increase the object which they manifest, 
as a jar is not made larger by a thousand lamps.” 

These objections against the Mimansaka theory that sound is 
manifested, and not created, by those who utter it, are now answered 
by Jaimini. Says Jaimini: 

“But, according to both schools, viz., that which holds sound to be 
created, and that which regards it as merely manifested, the perception of 
it is alike momentary. But of these two views, the theory of manifestation 
is shown in the next aphorism to be the correct one.” 

“The non-perception at any particular time, of sound, which, in reality, 
perpetually exists, arises from the fact that the utterer of sound has not 
come into contact with his object i.e., sound. Sound is eternal, because we 
recognize the letter for instance, to be the same sound which we have 
always heard, and because it is the simplest method of accounting for the 
phenomenon to suppose that it is the same. The still atmosphere which 
interferes with the perception of sound, is removed by the conjunctions 
and disjunctions of air issuing from a speaker’s mouth, and thus sound 
(which always exists, though unperceived) becomes perceptible. This is 
the reply to the objection of its ‘transitoriness’. 

“The word, ‘making’ sounds; merely means employing or uttering them.” 

“One sound is simultaneously heard by different persons, just as one 
Sun is seen by them at one and the same time, Sound like the Sun is a 
vast, and not a minute object, and thus may he perceptible by different 
persons, though remote from one another.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


35 


RIDDLE NO. 5 35 

“The letter ‘y’, which is substituted for ‘i in the instance referred to under 
Sutra 10, is not a modification of ‘i\ but a distinct letter. Consequently, 
sound is not modified.” 

“It is an increase of ‘noise’, not of sound, that is occasioned by a multitude 
of speakers. The word ‘noise’ refers to the ‘conjunctions’ and ‘disjunctions’ 
of the air which enter simultaneously into the hearer’s ear from different 
quarters; and it is of these that an increase takes place.” 

“Sound must be eternal, because its utterance is fitted to convey a 
meaning to other persons. If it were not eternal (or abiding), it would 
not continue till the hearer had learned its sense, and thus he would not 
learn the sense, because the cause had ceased to exist.” 

“Sound is eternal, because it is in every case correctly and uniformly 
recognised by many persons simultaneously; and it is inconceivable that 
they should all at once fall into a mistake.” 

“When the word ‘go’ (cow) has been repeated ten times, the hearers 
will say that the word ‘go’ has been ten times pronounced, not that ten 
words having the sound of ‘go’ have been uttered ; and this fact also is 
adduced as a proof of the eternity of sound. 

“Sound is eternal, because we have no ground for anticipating its 
destruction. 

“But it may be urged that sound is a modification of air, since it arises 
from its conjunctions, and because the Siksha (or Vedanga treating of 
pronunciation) says that ‘air arrives at the condition of sound’ and as it 
is thus produced from air, it cannot be eternal.” 

A reply to this difficulty is given in Sutra 22. 

“Sound is not a modification of air, because if it were, the organ of hearing 
would have no appropriate object which it could perceive. No modification 
of air (help by the Naiyayikas to be tangible) could be perceived by the 
organ of hearing, which deals only with intangible sound.” 

“And the eternity of sound is established by the argument discoverable 
in the Vedic text, ‘with an eternal voice, O Virupa’. Now, though this 
sentence had another object in view, it, nevertheless, declares the eternity 
of language, and hence sound is eternal.” 

Such is the argument by Jaimini in favour of his thesis that the 
Vedas are eternal and not made by man, not even by God. 

The bases on which his thesis rests are simple. 

Firstly God has no body and no palate and therefore he could not 
utter the Vedas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Secondly, Assuming God had a body, God could not perceive things 
which are beyond the reach of the senses while the Vedas contain things 
beyond the reach of human senses. 

Thirdly, The connection between a word and its meaning is eternal. 

Fourthly, Sound is eternal. 

Fifthly, Because sound is eternal words which are made up of sounds 
are also eternal. 

Sixthly Because words are eternal therefore the Vedas are eternal and 
because the Vedas are eternal they are not made by man nor by God. 

What can one say of these premises? Can there be anything more absurd? 
Who can accept that the Vedas contain something not comprehensible 
by human senses ? Who can accept that there is an eternal connection 
between a word and its meaning ? Who can accept that sound is not 
created nor manifested but is eternal ? 

Having regard to these absurd premises one is led to ask why did the 
Brahmins make such a desparate attempt for establishing a desparate 
conclusion? What did they want to gain thereby? Was it because the Vedas 
had been made the exponent of the Chaturvarna with the Brahmins as 
the Lord of all? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


37 


RIDDLE NO. 6 

THE CONTENTS OF THE VEDAS: 
HAVE THEY ANY MORAL OR 
SPIRITUAL VALUE? 

i 

If the Vedas are to be accepted as binding and Infallible then what 
they teach must have ethical and spiritual value. Nobody can regard 
a rag to be binding and infallible because a Philosopher like Jaimini 
came forward to lend his authority to such a proposal. Have the Vedas 
any ethical or spiritual value? Every Hindu who regards the Vedas are 
infallible is bound to consider this question. 

Modern writers have expressed views which deny any spiritual value 
to the Vedas. As an illustration one may refer to the views of Prof. Muir. 
According to Prof. Muir 1 : 

“The whole character of these compositions and the circumstances under 
which, from internal evidence, they appear to have arisen, are in harmony 
with the supposition that they were nothing more than the natural expression 
of the personal hopes and feelings of those ancient bards of whom they 
were first recited. In these songs the Aryan sages celebrated the praises of 
their ancestral gods (while at the same time they sought to conciliate their 
goodwill by a variety of oblations supposed to be acceptable to them), and 
besought of them all the blessings which men in general desired — health, 
wealth, long life, cattle, offspring, victory over their enemies, foregiveness 
of sin, and in some cases also celestial felicity.” 

It would no doubt be objected that all foreign scholars are prejudiced 
and that their views cannot therefore be accepted. Fortunately we are 
not altogether dependent upon the views of foreigners. There are leaders 
of indegeneous schools of thought which have taken the same view. The 
most notorious example is that of the Charvakas. 

The opposition of Charvaka can be seen from the following quotation 
which reproduces his line of argument against the Vaidikas 2 : 

“If you object that, if there be no such thing as happiness in a 
future world, then how should men of experienced wisdom engage 

1 Muir. Sanskrit Texts. Vol. Ill (Page not mentioned). 

2 Sarva Darshan Sangraha p. 10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the agnihotra and other sacrifices, which can only be performed with 
great expenditure of money and bodily fatigue. Your objection cannot be 
accepted as any proof to the contrary, since the agnihotra, etc., are only 
useful as means of livelihood; for the Veda is tainted by three faults of 
untruth, self-contradiction, and tautology; then again the impostors who 
call themselves Vaidic pundits are mutually destructive, as the authority 
of the Jnan-Kanda is overthrown by those who maintain the authority of 
the Karma-Kanda and those who maintain the authority of the Jnan-Kanda 
reject that of the Karma-Kanda; and lastly, the three Vedas themselves 
are only the incoherent rhapsodies of knaves and to this effect runs the 
popular saying: 

“The Agnihotra, the three Vedas, the ascetic, three staves, and smearing 
oneself with ashes,” Brihaspati says, “these are but means of livelihood for 
those who have no manliness nor sense.” 

Brahaspati is another example of the same school of thought. Brahaspati 
was far more bold and militant in his opposition to the Vedas than the 
Charvakas. As reported by Madhava Acharya, Brahaspati argued 1 : — 

“There is no heaven, no final liberation, nor any soul in another world; 
Nor do the actions of the four castes, orders etc., produce any real effect. 
The Agnihotra, the three Vedas, the ascetic’s three stages and smearing 
one’s self with ashes, .... were made by Nature as the livelihood of those 
destitute of knowledge and manliness; If a beast slain in the Jyotishtoma 
rite will itself go to heaven; why then does not the sacrificer forthwith 
offer his own father? 

If the Sraddha produces gratification to beings who are dead, then 
here, too, in the case of travellers when they start, it is needless to give 
provisions for the journey. 

If beings in heaven are gratified by our offering the Sraddha here, then 
why not give the food down below to those who are standing on the housetop ? 

While life remains let a man live happily, let him feed on ghee even 
though he runs in debt; 

When once the body becomes ashes, how can it ever return again? 

If he who departs from the body goes to another world, how is that he 
comes not back again restless for love of his kindred? 

Hence it is only a means of livelihood that Brahmans have established 
here. 

All these ceremonies are for the dead, there is no other fruit anywhere. 
The three authors of the Vedas were buffoons, knaves and demons. 


Sarva Darshan Sangraha (Page not mentioned). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


39 


RIDDLE NO. 6 39 

All the well-known formulas of the pundits Jarphari, Turphari, and all 
the obscene rites for the queen commanded in the Aswamedha; 

These were invented by buffoons, and so all the various kinds of presents 
to the priests. 

While the eating of flesh was similarly commended by night prowling 
demons.” 

If the opinions of the Charvaka and Brahaspati are not accepted there 
is plenty of other evidence. That evidence is recorded in the books of the 
various schools of philosophy such as the Nyaya, Vaishashikha, Purva 
and Uttar Mimamsa. It must be said to the credit of the authors of the 
text -books of these philosophies that before proceeding to defend the 
authority of the Vedas they have been very careful to set out the case of 
their opponents who were opposed to the authority of the Vedas. This fact 
enables us to prove two things: (1) That there was a school of thought 
which was opposed to recognize the Vedas as books of authority; (2) That 
they were a respectable group of people whose opinions the defenders of 
the authority of the Vedas were bound to consider. I reproduce below the 
case of the opponents as set out in the Nyaya and the Purva Mimamsa. 

Gotama the author of the Nyaya system of Philosophy was an upholder 
of the doctrine of the authority of the Vedas. He has summarized the 
arguments of his opponents in Sutra 57 which reads as follows 1 : 

“The Veda has no authority, since it has the defects of falsehood, self- 
contradiction, and tautology. That verbal evidence, which is distinct from 
such as relates to visible objects, i.e., the Veda, has no authority. Why? 
Because it has the defects of falsehood etc.” 

“Of these defects, that of falsehood is established by the fact that we 
sometimes observe that no fruit results from performing the sacrifice for 
a son, or the like. ‘Self-contradiction’ is a discrepancy between a former 
and a later declaration. Thus the Veda says ‘he sacrifices when the Sun 
is risen; he sacrifices when the Sun is not yet risen. He sacrifices, (I 
cannot explain the next words says Muir,) A tawny (dog?) carries away 
the oblation of him who sacrifices before the Sun has risen: and both of 
these two carry off the oblation of him who sacrifices. Now here there is 
a contradiction between the words which enjoin sacrifices and the words 
which intimate by censure that those sacrifices will occasion disastrous 
results. Again, the Veda has no authority, owing to its ‘tautology’, as where 
it is said, he repeats the first thrice, he repeats the last thrice. For as the 


Muir III. p. 113. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

lastness ultimately coincides with the firstness and as there is a triple 
repetition of the words, this sentence is tautological. Now since these 
particular sentences have no authority, the entire Veda will be proved 
by these specimens to stand in the same predicament, since all its 
other parts have the same author, or are of the same character, as 
these portions.” 

Coming to Jaimini. He summarises the views of the opponents 
of the Vedas in the first part of Sutras 28 and 32 of his Purva 
Mimamsa. Sutra 28 says 1 : 

“It is also objected that the Vedas cannot be eternal, because we 
observe that persons, who are not eternal, but subject to birth and 
death, are mentioned in them. Thus it is said in the Veda ‘Babara 
Pravahani desired’, ‘Kusurvinda Auddalaki desired’. Now, as the 
sentences of the Veda in which they are mentioned, could not have 
existed before these persons were born, it is clear that these sentences 
had a beginning, and being thus non-eternal, they are proved to be 
of human composition.” 

Sutra 32 says 2 : 

“It is asked how the Veda can constitute proof of duty when it 
contains such incoherent nonsense as the following: ‘An old ox, in 
blanket and slippers, is standing at the door and singing benedictions. 

A Brahman female, desirous of offspring, asks, ‘ Pray O King, what 
is the meaning of intercourse on the day of the new moon?’ or the 
following: ‘the cows celebrated this sacrifice’.” 

This is also the view of Yaska the author of Nirukta who says: 

(Of the four kinds of verses specified in the preceding section), (a) 
those which address a god as absent, (b) those which address him 
as present, and (c) those which address the worshippers as present 
and the god as absent, are the most numerous, while (d) those which 
refer to the speaker himself are rare. It happens also that a god is 
praised without any blessing being invoked, as in the hymn (R. V. 
i. 32). “I declare the heroic deeds of Indra,” etc. Again, blessings are 
invoked without any praise being offered, as in the words, ‘May, I 
see well with my eyes, be resplendent in my face, and hear well with 
my ears’. This frequently occurs in the Adhvaryava (Yajur), and in 
the sacrificial formula. Then again we find oaths and curses as in 
the words (R.V.vii. 104, 15), ‘May I die today, if I am a Yatudhana,’ 
etc. Further, we observe the desire to describe some particular state 
of things, as in the verse (R. V. x. 129, 2). ‘Death was not then, 
nor immortality,’ etc. Then there is lamentation, arising out of a certain 

1 Muir III. p. 77. 

2 Muir III. p. 80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


41 


RIDDLE NO. 6 41 

state of thing, as in the verse (R. V. x. 95, 14), ‘The beautiful god will 
disappear and never return,’ etc. Again we have blame and praise, as 
in the words (R. V. x. 117, 6). “The man who eats alone, sins alone, 
etc. So, too, in the hymn to dice (R. V. x. 34, 13) there is a censure 
upon dice, and a commendation of agriculture. Thus the objects for 
which the hymns were seen by the rishis were very various.” 

To quote the words of Yaska again — 

“Each particular hymn has for its deity the God to whom the Rishi, 
seeking to obtain any object of desire which he longs for, addresses 
his prayer.” 

If this is not enough to prove that there is no ethical or spiritual 
Value in the Vedas further evidence could be added. 

As to morality there is hardly any discussion about it in the Rig- 
Veda. Nor does the Rig-Veda contain elevating examples of moral 
life. Three illustrations of cases on the other side may well be given: 

First is the conversation between Yama and Yami who were 
brother and sister. 

“(Yami speaks). I invite my friend to friendship, having come over the 
vast and desert ocean may Vedhas, after reflecting, place in the earth 
the offspring (of thee) the father, endowed with excellent qualities.” 

“(Yama speaks), Thy friend desires not this friendship, for although 
of one origin, she is of a different form; the hero sons of the great 
Asura (are) the upholders of heaven, enjoying vast renown.” 

“(Yami speaks). The immortals take pleasure in (a union) like this 
which is forbidden to every mortal; let thy mind then concur with 
mine, and as the progenitor (of all) was the husband (of his daughter), 
do thou enjoy my person” 

“(Yama speaks). We have not done what was done formerly; for how 
can we who speak truth, utter now that which is untrue? Gandharva 
(the sun) was in the watery (firmament), and the water was his bride. 
She is our common parent, hence our near affinity.” 

“(Yami speaks). The divine omniform generator Twashtri, the 
progenitor, made us two husband and wife, even in the womb; none 
frustrate his undertaking; earth and heaven are conscious of this 
our (union).” 

“(Yama speaks). Who knows anything of this (his) first day (of 
existence)? Who has beheld it? Who has here revealed it? The dwelling 
of Mitra and of Varuna is vast. What sayest thou, who punishest 
men with hell?” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“(Yami speaks). The desire of Yama hath approached me Yami, to 
lie with him in the same bed; I will abandon my person as a wife 
to her husband; let us exert ourselves in union like the two wheels 
of a wagon.” 

“(Yama speaks). The spies of the Gods, which wander upon earth, 
never stop, never close their eyes. Associate quickly, destructress with 
some other than with me, and exert yourselves in union, like the two 
wheels of a wagon.” 

“(Yami speaks). To him (Yama) let every whorshipper sacrifice both 
day and night, on him let the eye of the Sun repeatedly rise; (for him 
may) the kindred pair (day and night unite) with heaven and earth. 
Yami will adhere to the non-affinity of Yama.” 

“(Yama speaks). The subsequent ages will come, when sisters will 
choose one who is not a brother (as a husband); therefore, auspicious 
one, choose another husband than me, and make thine arm a pillow 
for thy mate.” 

“(Yami speaks). Is he a brother whose sister has no lord? Is she a 
sister (whose brother) misfortune approaches? Overcome by desire, I 
strongly urge this one request; unite thy person with mine.” 

“(Yama speaks). I will not unite my person with thine; they call 
him who approaches a sister, a sinner. Enjoy pleasure with some other 
than me; thy brother, auspicious one, has no such desire.” 

“(Yami speaks). Alas, Yama, thou art feeble; we understand not 
thy mind or thy heart. Some other female exbrances thee as a girth 
a horse, or as a creeper a tree.” 

“(Yama speaks). Do thou, Yami, embrace another; and let another 
embrace thee as a creeper a tree; seek his affection, let him seek 
thine; and make a happy union.” 

“May Agni, the destroyer of the Rakshasas consenting to our prayer, 
drive hence (the evil spirit) who (in the form of) sickness assails thine 
embryo, who, as the disease durnaman, assails thy womb.” 

“May Agni concurring in our prayer, destroy the cannibal who, as 
sickness, assails thine embryo, who, as the disease durnaman, assails 
thy womb.” 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit) who destroys the 
impregnating energy, the germ as it settles, the moving embryo, who 
seeks to destroy (the babe) when born.” 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit), who separates thy 
thighs, who lies between husband and wife, who entering thy womb, 
devours (the seeds). May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit), 
who in the form of brother, husband, or paramour, approaches thee, 
and seeks to destroy thy offspring.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


43 


RIDDLE NO. 6 43 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit) who, having beguiled thee 
by sleep or darkness, approaches thee, and seeks to destroy thy offspring.” 

Take some of the Hymns or prayers that are to be found in the Rig- 
Veda. The following are a few of them — 

1. Oh ! God Vayu, how very beautiful you are. We have prepared 
the Somarasa (an intoxicating drink) with spices. Pray come and 
drink it and grant us our prayers — Rig. Ved. I. 1.2.1. 

2. Oh! God Indra. Bring ye wealth for our protection. Let the wealth 
that you bring make us happy be increasing and everlasting and 
help us to kill our enemies — I. 1.8.1. 

3. Oh! ye people whenever you are performing your yajna, fail not 
to praise the Gods Indra and Agni. Advance their position and 
sing their praises in the Gayatri Meter — I. 21.2. 

4. Oh ! ye Agni, please bring the wives of the Gods and Twashta 
who are eager to come and drink Soma — I. 22.9. 

5. We pray that the Gods’ wives come to us with all available wings 
and with all happiness — I. 22.11. 

6. I am praying the wives of Indra, Varuna and Agni to come to 
my place to drink Soma. 

7. Oh! Varuna, we are supplicating before you to remove your anger. 
Oh ! ye Asura, you are all wise, relieve us from our sins — I. 24.14. 

8. Our Somarasa has been prepared by women who have churned it 
backward and forward. Oh ! ye Indra we pray you to come and 
drink this Soma — I. 28.3. 

9. Your enemies who do not make any offering to you may disappear 
and let your followers who do prosper. Oh ! Indra give us best 
cows and best horses and make us famous in the world. — I. 29.4. 

10. Oh! Agni save us from Rakshasas, from cunning enemies, from 
those who hate us and want to kill us. — I. 36.15. 

11. Oh ! Indra, you are a hero. Come and drink the Soma we have 
prepared and be ready to give us wealth. Loot the wealth of those 
who do not make you any offering and give the same to us — I. 
81-8-9. 

12. Oh! Indra, drink this Soma which is the best, giving immortality 
and most intoxicating. — I. 84-4. 

13. Oh ! Adityas, you come to give us your blessings. You give us 
victory in war. You are wealthy. You are charitable. Just as a 
chariot is pulled through a difficult path in the same way you 
pull us through our dangers. — I. 106-22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

14. Oh ! ye Marutas your followers are singing your praises. 

Be pleased to come and sit on the grass-cushion prepared for you 
for the purpose of drinking Soma. — VII. 57-1-2. 

15. Oh ! ye Mitra-Varuna we have offered you worship in the yajna. 
Be pleased to accept it and save us from all dangers — VII. 60-12. 

These are only a few verses out of a large bundle which form the 
Rig- Veda. But there can be no doubt that this sample small as it is is 
true to bulk. 

I may state that I have deliberately omitted a good many obscene 
passages to be found in the Rig-Veda and Yajur-Veda. Those who have 
any curiosity in the matter might look up the conversation between 
Surya and Pushan in Rig-Veda Mandal X. 85.37 and between Indra and 
Indrani in Rig-Veda. Mandal X. 86.6. A further obscenity will also be 
found in the Ashvamedha Section of the Yajur-Veda. 

Leaving these obscenities aside and confining oneself to the prayer 
portion of the Rig-Veda can any one say that these are morally or 
spiritually elevating prayers? 

As to philosophy there is nothing of it in the Rig-Veda. As Prof. Wilson 
observes there is in the Rig-Veda, which is the stock Veda, scarcely any 
indication or doctrinal or philosophical speculation, no allusion to the later 
notions of the several schools, nor is there any hint of metempsychosis, 
or of the doctrine intimately allied to it, of the repeated renovation of the 
world. The Vedas may be useful as a source of information regarding the 
social life of the Aryans. As a picture of primitive life it is full of curiosity 
but there is nothing elevating. There are more vices and a few virtues. 

II 

We may now turn to the Atharva-Veda and examine its contents. 
The best I can do is to present the following extracts from the table of 
contents of the Atharva-Veda. 

Book 1. Charms to cure diseases and possession by demons of disease 
(bhaishagyani). 

v, 22. Charm against takman (fever) and related diseases. 

vi, 20. Charm against takman (fever). 

i, 25. Charm against takman (fever). 

vii, 116. Charm against takman (fever). 

v, 4. Prayer to the Kushtha-plant to destroy takman (fever). 

xix, 39. Prayer to the Kushtha-plant to destroy takman (fever) and 
other ailments. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


45 


RIDDLE NO. 6 45 

i, 12. Prayer to lightening, conceived as the cause of fever, headache, 
and cough. 

i, 22. Charm against jaundice and related diseases, 
vi, 14. Charm against the disease halasa. 
vi, 105. Charm against cough. 

i, 2. Charm against excessive discharges from the body. 

ii, 3. Charm against excessive discharges from the body, undertaken 
with spring-water. 

vi, 44. Charm against excessive discharges from the body, 
i, 3. Charm against constipation and retention of urine. 

vi, 90. Charm against internal pain (colic) due to the missiles of Rudra. 

i, 10. Charm against dropsy. 

vii, 83. Charm against dropsy. 

vi, 24. Dropsy, heart-disease, and kindred maladies cured by flowing 
water. 

vi, 80. An oblation to the sun, conceived as one of the two. 

ii, 8. Charm against kshetriya, hereditary disease. 

ii, 10. Charm against kshetriya, hereditary disease. 

iii, 7. Charm against kshetriya, hereditary disease, 
i, 23. Leprosy cured by a dark plant. 

i, 24. Leprosy cured by a dark plant. 

vi, 83. Charm for curing scrofulous sores called apakit. 

vii, 76. A. Charm for curing scrofulous sores called apakit. 

B. Charm for curing tumours called gayana. 

C. Stanza sung at the mid-day pressure of Soma. 

vii, 74. A. Charm for curing scrofulous sores called apakit. 

B. Charm to appease jealousy. 

C. Prayer to Agni, the lord of vows. 

vi, 25. Charm against scrofulous sores upon neck and shoulders, 
vi, 57. Urine (galasha) as a cure for scrofulous. 

iv, 12. Charm with the plant arundhati (laksha) for the cure of fractures. 

v, 5. Charm with the plant silaki (laksha) arundhati for the cure of 
wounds. 

vi, 109. The pepper-corn as a cure for wounds. 

i, 17. Charm to stop the flow of blood. 

ii, 31. Charm against worms. 

ii, 32. Charm against worms in cattle, 
v, 23. Charm against worms in children, 
iv, 6. Charm against poison, 
iv, 7. Charm against poison. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

vi, 100. Ants as an antidote against poison. 

v, 13. Charm against snake-poison. 

vi, 12. Charm against snake-poison. 

vii, 56. Charm against the poison of serpants, scorpions and insects, 
vi, 16. Charm against opthalmia. 

vi, 21. Charm to promote the growth of hair. 

vi, 136. Charm with the plant nitauni to promote the growth of hair, 
vi, 137. Charm to promote the growth of hair, 
iv, 4. Charm to promote virility, 
vi, 111. Charm against Mania. 

iv, 37. Charm with the plant agasringi to drive out Rakshasas, Apsaras 
and Gandharvas. 

ii, 9. Possession by demons of disease, cured by an amulet of ten kinds 
of wood. 

iv, 36. Charm against demons (pisaka) conceived as the cause of disease, 
ii, 25. Charm with the plant prisniparni against the demon of disease 
called kanva. 

vi, 32. Charm for driving away demons (Rakshas and Pisakas). 
ii, 4. Charm with an amulet derived from the gangidatree against 
diseases and demons. 

xix, 34. Charm with an amulet derived from the gangidatree against 
diseases and demons. 

xix, 35. Charm with an amulet derived from the gangidatree against 
diseases and demons. 

vi, 85. Exorcism of disease by means of an amulet from the varana-tree. 

vi, 127. The kipuddru-tree as a panacea. 

xix, 38. The healing properties of bdellium. 

vi, 91. Barley and water as universal remedies. 

viii, 7. Hymn to all magic and medicinal plants used as a universal 
remedy. 

vi, 96. Plants as a panacea. 

ii, 33. Charm to secure perfect health. 

ix, 8. Charm to procure immunity from all diseases. 

ii, 29. Charm for obtaining long life and prosperity by transmission of 
disease. II. Prayers for long life and health (ayushyani). 

iii, 11. Prayer for health and long life. 

ii, 28. Prayer for long life pronounced over a body. 

iii, 31. Prayer for health and long life. 

vii, 53. Prayer for long life. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


47 


RIDDLE NO. 6 47 

viii, 1. Prayer for exemption from the dangers of death, 
viii, 2. Prayers for exemption from the dangers of death. 

v, 30. Prayer for exemption from disease and death, 
iv, 9. Salve (angana) as a protector of life and limb. 

iv, 10. The pearl and its shell as an amulet bestowing long life and 
prosperity. 

xix, 26. Gold as an amulet for long life. 

III. Imprecations against demons, sorcerers, and enemies (abhikarikani 
and Krityapratiharanan) . 

i, 7. Against sorcerers and demons, 
i, 8. Against sorcerers and demons. 

i, 16. Charm with lead, against demons and sorcerers. 

vi, 2. The soma-oblation directed against demons (rakshas). 

ii, 14. Charm against a variety of female demons, conceived as hostile 
to men, cattle and home. 

iii, 9. Against Vishkandha and Kabava (hostile demons). 

iv, 20. Charm with a certain plant (sadampushna) which exposes 
demons and enemies. 

iv, 17. Charm with the apamarga-plant, against sorcery, demons and 
enemies. 

iv, 18. Charm with the apamarga-plant against sorcery, demons and 
enemies. 

iv, 19. Mystic power of the apamarga-plant, against demons and 
sorcerers. 

vii, 65. Charm with the apamarga-plant against curses, and the 
consequence of sinful deeds. 

x, 1. Charm to repel sorceries or spells. 

v, 14. Charm to repel sorceries or spells. 

v, 31. Charm to repel sorceries or spells. 

viii, 5. Prayer for protection addressed to a talisman made from the 
wood of a sraktya-tree. 

x, 3. Praise of the virtue of an amulet derived from the varana-tree. 
x, 6. Praise of the virtues of an amulet of khadira-wood in the shape 
of a ploughshare. 

ix, 16. Prayer to Varuna for protection against treacherous designs, 
ii, 12. Imprecation against enemies thwarting holy work. 

vii, 70. Frustration of the sacrifice of an enemy. 

ii, 7. Charm against curses and hostile plots undertaken with a certain 
plant. 

iii, 6. The asvattha-tree as a destroyer of enemies. 

vi, 75. Oblation for the suppression of enemies (naibadhyam havih). 

vi. 37. Curse against one that practises hostile charms. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

vii. 13. Charm to deprive enemies of their strength. 

IV. Charms pertaining to women (strikarmani). 

ii, 36. Charm to obtain a husband, 
vi, 60. Charm to obtain a husband, 
vi, 82. Charm for obtaining a wife. 

vi, 78. Blessing for a married couple. 

vii, 36. Love-charm spoken by a bridal couple. 

vii, 37. Charm pronounced by the bride over the bridegroom, 
vi, 81. A bracelet as an amulet to ensure conception. 

iii, 23. Charm for obtaining a son (pumsavanam). 

vi, 11. Charm for obtaining a son (pumsavanam). 

vii, 35. An incantation to make a woman sterile, 
vi, 17. Charm to prevent miscarriage. 

i. 11. Charm for easy parturition. 

i, 34. Charm with licorice, to secure the love of a woman. 

ii, 30. Charm to secure the love of a woman, 
vi, 8. Charm to secure the love of a woman, 
vi, 9. Charm to secure the love of a woman. 

vi, 102. Charm to secure the love of a woman. 

iii, 25. Charm to secure the passionate love of a woman. 

vii, 38. Charm to secure the love of a man. 

vi, 130. Charm to arouse the passionate love of a man. 
vi, 132. Charm to arouse the passionate love of a man. 

iv, 5. Charm at an assignation. 

vi, 77. Charm to cause the return of a truant woman. 

vi, 18. Charm to allay jealousy. 

i, 14. A woman’s incantation against her rival. 

iii, 18. Charm of a woman against a rival or co-wife, 
vi, 138. Charm for depriving a man of his virility. 

i, 18. Charm to remove evil bodily characteristics from a woman, 
vi, 110. Expiatory charm for a child born under an unlucky star, 
vi, 140. Expiation for the irregular appearance of the first pair of teeth. 

V. Charms pertaining to royalty (ragakarmani). 

iv, 8. Prayer at the consecration of a king. 

iii, 3. Charm for the restoration of an exiled king. 

iii, 4. Prayer at the election of a king. 

iv, 22. Charm to secure the superiority of a king. 

iii, 5. Praise of an amulet derived from the parna-tree, designed to 
strengthen royal power. 

i, 9. Prayer for earthly and heavenly success, 
vi, 38. Prayer for lustre and power. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


49 


RIDDLE NO. 6 49 

vi, 39. Prayer for glory (yasas). 
viii. 8. Battle-charm. 

i, 19. Battle-charm against arrow-wounds, 
iii, 1. Battle-charm for confusing the enemy, 
iii, 2. Battle-charm for confusing the enemy. 

vi, 97. Battle-charm of a king upon the eve of battle, 
vi, 99. Battle-charm of a king upon the eve of battle, 
xi, 9. Prayer to Arbudi and Nyarbudi for help in battle, 
xi, 10. Prayer to Trishmdhi for help in battle, 
v, 20. Hymn to the battle-drum. 

v, 21. Hymn to the battle-drum, the terror of the enemy. 

VI. Charms to secure harmony, influence in the Assembly, and the like 
(sammanasyani) . 

iii, 30. Charm to secure harmony. 

vi, 73. Charm to allay discord. 

vi, 74. Charm to allay discord. 

vii, 52. Charm against strife and blood shed, 
vi, 64. Charm to allay discord. 

vi, 42. Charm to appease anger. 

vi, 43. Charm to appease anger. 

vii, 12. Charm to procure influence in the assembly. 

ii, 27. Charm against opponents in debate undertaken with the pata- 
plant. 

vi, 94. Charm to bring about submission to one’s will. 

VII. Charms to secure prosperity in house, field, cattle, business, gambling 
and kindred matters. 

iii, 12. Prayer at the building of a house. 

vi, 142. Blessing during the sowing of grain, 
vi, 79. Charm for procuring increase of grain. 

vi, 50. Exorcism of vermin infesting grain in the field. 

vii, 11. Charm to protect grain from lightning. 

ii, 26. Charm for the prosperity of cattle. 

iii, 14. Charm for the prosperity of the cattle. 

vi, 59. Prayer to the plant arundhati for protection to cattle, 
vi, 70. Charm to secure the attachment of a cow to her calf, 
iii, 28. Formula in expiation of the birth of twin-calves, 
vi, 92. Charm to endow a horse with swiftness. 

iii, 13. Charm for conducting a river into a new channel, 
vi, 106, Charm to ward off danger from fire. 

iv, 3. Shephered’s charm against wild beasts and robbers. 

iii, 15. A merchant’s prayer. 

iv, 38. A. Prayer for success in gambling. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

B. Prayer to secure the return of calves that have strayed to a distance, 
vii, 50. Prayer for success at dice. 

vi, 56. Exorcism of serpents from the premises. 

x, 4. Charm against serpents invoking the horse of Pedu that slays 
serpents. 

xi, 2. Prayer to Bhava and Sarva for protection from dangers, 
iv, 28. Prayer to Bhava and Sarva for protection from dangers. 

vii, 9. Charm for finding lost property. 

vi, 128. Propitiation of the weather-prophet. 

xi, 6. Prayer for deliverance from calamity, addressed to the entire 
pantheon. 

VIII. Charms in expiation of sin and defilement, 
vi, 45. Prayer against mental delinquency, 
vi, 26. Charm to avert evil. 

vi, 114. Expiatory formula for imperfections in the sacrifice, 
vi, 115. Expiatory formulas for sins. 

vi, 112. Expiation for the precedence of a younger brother over an elder. 

vi, 113. Expiation for certain heinous crimes. 

vi, 120. Prayer for heaven after remission of sins. 

vi, 27. Charm against pigeons regarded as ominous birds. 

vi, 29. Charm against pigeons regarded as ominous birds. 

vi, 29. Charm against ominous pigeons and owls. 

vii, 64. Expiation when one is defiled by a black bird of omen. 

vi, 46. Exorcism of evil dreams. 

vii, 115. Charm for the removal of evil characteristics, and the 
acquisition of auspicious. 

Ill 

It will thus be seen that the Atharva-Veda is nothing but a collection 
of sorcery, black-magic and medicine. Three-fourths of it is full of sorcery 
and black magic. It must not however be assumed that it is only the 
Atharva-Veda which contains black-magic and sorcery. The Rig-Veda is 
not altogether free from it. There are in it Mantras relating to black 
magic and sorcery. I give below three Suktas which deal with this matter: 

SUKTA XVII (CXLV) 

The deity or rather the aim of the hymn is the getting rid of a rival 
wife; the Rishi is Indrani, the metre of the last verse is Pankati, of the 
rest Anushtubh. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


51 


RIDDLE NO. 6 51 

1. I dig up this most potent medicinal creeper, by which (a wife) 
destroys a rival wife, by which she secures to herself her husband. 

2. O (plant) with up-turned, leaves, auspicious, sent by the Gods, 
powerful, remove my rival and make my husband mine alone. 

3. Excellent (plant) may I too be excellent amongst the excellent, 
and may she who is my rival be vile amongst the vile. 

4. I will not even utter her name, no (woman) takes pleasure in 
that person; may we remove the other rival wife to a distance. 

5. I am triumphing, thou art triumphant; we two being powerful 
will triumph over my rival. 

6. I make thee the triumphant (herb) my pillow, I support thee with 
that more triumphant (pillow); let thy mind hasten to me as a 
cow to her calf, let it speed on its way like water. 

SUKTA IV (CLV) 

The deity of verses 1 and 4 is the averting of misfortune (Alakshmighna), 
of verses 2 and 3 Brahmanaspati, and of verse 5 the Viswadevas; the 
Rishi is Sirimbitha, the son of Bharadwaja, the metre is Anushtubh. 

1. Miserable, ill-favoured, deformed ever-railing (goddess), go to thy 
mountain; with these exploits of Sirimbitha we scare thee away. 

2. May she be scared away from this (world), scared away from 
the next (world), the destructress of all embryos; sharp-horned 
Brihaspati approach, driving away Distress. 

3. The wood which floats by the seashore far off, remote from man, 
seize that, (O, goddess) hard to destroy, and therewith go to a 
distant shore. 

4. Utterers of discordant sounds, when swiftly moving you departed, 
all the enemies of Indra were slain, disappearing like bubbles. 

5. These (Viswadevas) have brought back the (stolen) cattle, they 
have built up the fire; they have provided food for the Gods. Who 
will overcome them? 

SUKTA XII (CLXIII) 

The deity is the cure of phthisis; the Rishi is Vivrihan, the son of 
Kasyapa; the metre is Anushtubh. 

1. I banish disease from thine eyes, from thy head, from thy nose, 
from thy ears, from thy chin, from thy brain, from thy tongue. 

2. I banish disease from thy neck, from thy sinews, from thy bones, 
from thy joints, from thy upper arms, from thy shoulders, and 
from thy fore-arms. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 24-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

3. I banish disease from thine entrails, from thy anus, from thine 
abdomen, and from thy heart, from thy kidneys, from thy liver, 
from thy (other) viscera. 

4. I banish disease from thy thighs, from thy knees, from thy heels, 
from thy toes, from thy loins, from thy buttocks, from thy private 
parts. 

5. I banish disease from thy urethra, from thy bladder, from thy 
hair, from thy nails, from thy whole person. 

6. I banish disease from each limb, from each hair, from each joint 
where it is generated, from thy whole person. 

Enough has been extracted from the Vedas to show that they contain 
nothing that can be said to be spiritually or morally elevating. Neither 
the subject matter nor contents of the Vedas justify the infallibility with 
which they have been invested. Why then did the Brahmins struggle so 
hard to clothe them with sanctity and infallibility ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


53 


RIDDLE NO. 7 

THE TURN OF THE TIDE OR HOW 
DID THE BRAHMINS DECLARE THE 
VEDAS TO BE LOWER THAN THE 
LOWEST OF THEIR SHASTRAS ? 

i 

The religious literature of the Hindus includes (1) The Vedas, (2) The 
Brahmanas, (3) The Aranyakas, (4) Upanishads, (5) Sutras, (6) Itihas, 
(7) Smritis and (8) Puranas. 

As has been pointed out there was a time when they occupied the 
same status. There was no distinction of superior or inferior, sacred or 
profane, fallible or infallible. 

Later on as we have shown the Vedic Brahmins felt that they must 
make a distinction between the Vedas and other classes of their religious 
literature. They made the Vedas not only superior to other classes of 
literature but they made them sacred and infallible. In evolving their 
dogma of the infallibility of the Vedas they made a distinction and divided 
their sacred writings in two classes (1) Shruti and (2) Non-Shruti. In 
the first division they placed only two of the eight classes of literature 
spoken of above namely — (1) Samhitas and (2) the Brahmanas. The rest 
they declared as Non-Shruti. 

II 

When this distinction was first made it is not possible to say. The 
more important question, however, is on what basis was this division 
made ? Why were Itihas and Puranas excluded ? Why were Aranyakas 
and Upanishads excluded ? Why were the Sutras excluded ? One can 
well understand why Itihas and Puranas were excluded from Shruti. 
At the time when the division took place they were too elementary 
and too undeveloped and in all probability included in the Brahmanas. 
Similarly one can well understand why the Aranyakas are not 

This is a 21-page typed MS originally entitled ‘The Supersession of the 
Vedas’, with several corrections and modifications by the author himself. 
This chapter seems complete as the last para of this chapter is concluded 
in the handwriting of the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

specifically mentioned as a part of the Shruti. They are a part of 
the Brahmanas and for that reason it was probably unnecessary 
to say expressly that they are part of the Shruti. The question of 
the Upanishads and the Sutras remains a puzzle. Why were they 
excluded from the Shruti ? The question regarding the Upanishads 
is the subject matter of another chapter. Here it is proposed to deal 
with the question of the Sutras. Because the reasons for the exclusion 
of the Sutras it is not possible to comprehend. If there were good 
reasons for including the Brahmanas in the category of Shruti the 
same reasons could not fail to justify the inclusion of the Sutras. As 
Prof. Max Muller observes : 

“We can understand how a nation might be led to ascribe a superhuman 
origin to their ancient national poetry, particularly if that poetry 
consisted chiefly of prayers and hymns addressed to their gods. But it 
is different with the prose compositions of the Brahmans. The reasons 
why the Brahmanas which are evidently so much more modern than 
the Mantras, were allowed to participate in the name of Sruti, could 
only have been because it was from these theological compositions, and 
not from the simple old poetry of the hymns, that a supposed divine 
authority could be derived for the greater number of the ambitious claims 
of the Brahmanas. But, although we need not ascribe any weight to 
the arguments by which the Brahmanas endeavoured to establish the 
contemporaneous origin of the Mantras and Brahmanas there seems 
to be no reason why we should reject as equally worthless the general 
opinion with regard to the more ancient date of both the Brahmanas 
and Mantras, if contrasted with the Sutras and the profane literature 
of India. It may easily happen, where there is a canon of sacred books, 
that later compositions become incorporated together with more ancient 
works, as was the case with the Brahmanas. But we can hardly imagine 
that old and genuine parts should ever have been excluded from a body 
of sacred writings, and a more modern date ascribed to them, unless it 
be in the interest of a party to deny the authority of certain doctrines 
contained in these rejected documents. There is nothing in the later 
literature of the Sutras to warrant a supposition of this kind. We can 
find no reason why the Sutras should not have been ranked as Sruti, 
except the lateness of their date, if compared with the Brahmanas, and 
still more with the Mantras. Whether the Brahmanas themselves were 
aware that ages must have elapsed between the period during which most 
of the poems of their Rishis were composed, and the times which gave 
rise to the Brahamanas, is a question which we need hardly hesitate to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


55 


RIDDLE NO. 7 


55 


answer in the affirmative. But the recklessness with which Indian 
theologians claim for these Brahmanas the same title and the same age 
as for the Mantras, shows that the reason must have been peculiarly 
strong which deterred them from claiming the same divine authority for 
the Sutras.” 

The exclusion of the Sutras from the category of Shruti is a riddle 
that calls for explanation. 

There are other riddles which strike the student who cares to 
investigate into the subject. They relate to the changes in the content of 
the literature comprised in the term Shruti and their relative authority. 

One such riddle relates to the class of literature called the Brahmanas. 
At one time the Brahmanas were included in the term Shruti. But later 
on they seem to have lost this position. For Manu 1 seems to exclude 
the “Brahamanas” from the category of Shruti as may be seen from 
the following extract from his Smriti : 

“By Shruti is meant the Veda, and by Smriti the institutes of law ; 
the contents of these are not to be questioned by reason, since from 
them (a knowledge of) duty has shown forth. The Brahman who, relying 
on rationalistic treatises, shall condemn these two primary sources of 
knowledge must be excommunicated by the virtuous as a sceptic and 

reviler of the Vedas To those who are seeking a knowledge of duty, 

the Sruti is the supreme authority.” 

Why were the Brahmanas excluded from Shruti ? 

Ill 

We may now turn to the class of literature called the Smritis, the most 
important of which are the Manu Smriti and the Yajnavalkya Smriti. 
The number of Smritis was ever on the increase and the composing 
of Smritis went on up to the advent of the British. Mitramistra refers 
to 57 Smritis, Nilakanta to 97 and Kamalakar to 131. The Smriti 
literature is bigger than any other class of religious literature regarded 
as sacred by the Hindus. 

There are several points regarding the relation of the Smritis to 
the Vedas. 

The first is that the Smriti was not recognized 2 as part of the 
Dharma Shastra literature represented by the Dharma Sutras such 
as that of Baudhayana, Gautama or Apastambha. A Smruti originally 

1 Some may depute this on the ground that the word Veda includes “Brahamana” also. 
This of course is a fact. Bui it seems to me that Manu uses the term Shruti in a restricted 
sense so as to exclude the Brahmanas. This is supported by the fact that there is in the 
Manu Smriti no reference to the Brahamanas except in one place (iv. 100) where he says 
that only the Mantra portion need be studied. 

2 On this subject see the illuminating article by Prof. Altekar on “The position of Smritis 
as a source of Dharma, in the Kane Memorial Volume, pp. 18-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

dealt with social customs and conventions that were approved of and 
recommended by the learned leaders of society. As Prof. Altekar observes : 

“In the beginning, Smritis were identical in nature and contents with 
Sadacara and were based upon it. When Smritis came into existence, the 
scope of Sadacara became naturally reduced, as much of it was codified by 
Smritis. It began to denote those old practices which happened not to be 
codified in Smritis, or those new ones, which had acquired social approval 
at a period subsequent to the codification of the early Dharmasastras or 
Smritis.” 

The second point to note is that the Smritis were treated as quite 
different from the Vedas or the Srutis. So far as their sanction and their 
authority were concerned they stood on absolutely different footing. The 
sanction behind the Sruti was divine. The sanction behind the Smriti 
was social. In the matter of their authority the Purva Mimamsa lays 
down two rules. The first rule is that if there is a conflict between two 
texts of Sruti then both are authoritative and the presumption will be 
that the Vedas have given an option to follow one or the other. The 
second rule is that the text of a Smriti should be summarily rejected 
if it was opposed to the text of the Sruti. These rules were rigorously 
applied with the result that the Smritis could not acquire either the 
status or the authority of the Vedas. 

Surprising as it may appear a time came when Brahmins took a 
summersault and gave the Smritis a status superior to that of the 
Vedas. As Prof. Altekar points out : 

“The Smritis have actually overruled some of the specific dicta of 
Srutis that were not in consonance with the spirit of the age, or were 
coming into direct conflict with it. The Vedic practice was to perform 
daiva karma in the morning and the pitr karma in the afternoon. In 
later times the modern pitr tarpana came into vogue and it began to 
be offered in the morning, as the morning bath became the order of 
the day. Now this procedure is in direct conflict with the Vedic practice 
prescribed in the above-mentioned rule. Devamabhatta, the author of the 
Smrticandrika, however says that there is nothing wrong in this : the 
Sruti rule must be presumed to be referring to pitr karman other than 
tarpana. The Sruti literature shows that Visvamitra adopted Sunassepa, 
though he had a hundred sons living ; this would thus permit a person 
to adopt a son even when he had a number of his own sons living. But 
Mitramisra says that such a deduction would be wrong ; we shall have to 
assume that the Smriti practice is also based upon a Sruti text, which is 
not now available but the existence of which will have to be assumed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


57 


RIDDLE NO. 7 57 

“The Vedic passage, na seso ‘gne’ nyajatamasti certainly disapproves of 
the practice of the adoption of a son, which is clearly recommended in later 
times by the Smriti literature. This is a clear example of a Sruti being thrown 
overboard by a Smriti. But Mitramisra says that there is nothing wrong 
about the procedure. The Sruti passage is a mere arthavada ; it does not 
lay down any injunction. The Smritis on the other hand prescribe adoption 
so that homas etc. should be properly performed. Arthavada Sruti is thus 
being fittingly overruled by a Smriti text, which has a vidhi for its purport.” 

“The custom of the Sati of the later age is in direct conflict with the 
vedic injunction prohibiting suicide. Apararka, however, argues that the 
conflict with Sruti should not invalidate the custom. For the Sruti passage 
lays down a general principle disapproving suicide, while the Smritis lay 
down a special exception in the case of a widow.” 

Whether the customs of a Sati and adoption are good or not is a 
different question. Somehow or other society had come to approve of 
them. Smritis gave canonical sanction to them and sought to defend 
them even against the authority of the Vedas. 

The question is why did the Brahmins after having struggled so 
hard for establishing the supremacy of the Vedas degrade the Vedas 
and invest the Smritis with authority superior to that of the Vedas ? 
They did so much to raise the authority of the Vedas above the divine. 
Why did they drag them below the Smritis which had nothing but 
social sanction ? 

The steps they adopted were so ingenious and artificial that one 
cannot help feeling that there must have been some definite motive 
which led the Brahmins to give the Smritis a status superior to that 
of the Vedas. 

To give some idea as to how artificial, ingenious and desparate these 
arguments were it might be useful to give just a brief outline of them. 

As an illustration of an artificial argument, one may refer to the 
view propounded by Brahaspati. According to him, Sruti and Smriti 
are the two eyes of the Brahmana, if he is void of one of them he 
becomes a one-eyed person. 

As an illustration of an ingenious argument one may refer to the 
argument of Kumarila Bhatt. His argument is founded on the theory 
of lost Sruti. It was argued on behalf of the Smritis that their views 
cannot be set aside even when they are in direct conflict with the Srutis 
for they may quite possibly have been based upon a lost text of Sruti, 
and so the conflict is not a conflict between a text of Sruti and that of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a Smriti. It is really a conflict between an existing and lost text of Sruti. 
Smriti therefore came to be represented as lost Sruti. 

There is a third means adopted by the Brahmins to make the Smritis 
equal if not superior to the Vedas. It is to be found in the Atri Smriti. 
Atri says that those who do not respect the Smritis will be subject to 
curse. Atri’s argument is that Brahmanyam arises only as a result of a 
joint study of the Sruti and Smriti and if a person studies the Vedas only 
but holds the Smriti in contempt he would be immediately condemned 
to be born as a beast for 21 generations. 

Why did the Brahmins adopt such desparate means to place the 
Smritis on the same footing as the Sruti ? What was their purpose ? 
What was their motive ? 

Prof. Altekar’s argument that the Smritis were given supremacy over 
the Vedas because they gave legal justification to customary law which 
was of later growth, cannot be accepted as adequate. If the case was that, 
there was law in the Vedic period and custom had grown later on ; and 
if there was a conflict between the two, one could have understood the 
argument that the Smritis were given predominance because they set 
right the conflict by recognizing the progressive doctrines of the custom. 
This is not the case. There was no such thing as law in the Vedas. As 
Professor Kane points out : 

“All law was customary and there was no necessity to give recognition 
to the customs because they were recognized by the people. Secondly the 
Smritis cannot be said to be more progressive than the Vedas. Barring 
the Chaturvarna doctrine which everybody knows the Vedas except in the 
matter of forms of worship left Society quite free to develop. What the 
Smritis have done is, take out the unprogressive element in the Vedas 
namely the Chaturvarna theory and to propagandize it and hammer it 
into the heads of the people.” 

Therefore there must be some other reason why the Brahmins gave 
supremacy to the Smritis over the Vedas. 

The Brahmins were not content with their first acrobatics. They 
performed another. 

The Smritis were followed in point of time by the Puranas. There are 18 
Puranas and 18 Up-Puranas altogether 36. In one sense the subject matter 
of the Puranas is the same. They deal with the creation, preservation 
and destruction of the world. But in the rest of their contents they differ 
altogether. Some propagate the cult of Brahma, some the cult of Shiva, 
some the cult of Vishnu, some the cult of Vayu, some the cult of Agni, 
some the cult of Surya and some the cult of Goddesses and other deities. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


59 


RIDDLE NO. 7 59 

As has been noted there was a time when the Puranas were not 
included in the Shruti. In later times however a striking change seems 
to have taken place. The Puranas which were considered as too profane 
to be included in the Shruti were given a superiority over the Vedas. 

The Vayu Purana says 1 : 

“First, of all the Shastras, the Purana was uttered by Brahma, 
Subsequently the Vedas issued from his mouth.” 

The Matsya Purana not only claims priority of creation for the Puranas 
as against the Vedas, but also the qualities of eternity and identity with 
sound, which was once predicated of the Vedas alone. 

It says 2 : 

“Pitamaha (Brahma), first of all the immortals, took shape ; then the 
Vedas with their Angas and Upangas (appendages and minor appendages), 
and the various modes of their textual arrangements, were manifested. The 
Purana, eternal, formed of sound, pure, extending to the length of a hundred 
crores of verses, was the first of the Sastras which Brahma uttered ; and 
afterwards the Vedas, issued from his mouth ; and also the Mimansa and 
the Nyaya with its eightfold system of proofs. 

The Bhagawat Purana claims equality of authority with the Vedas. 
It says 3 : 

“(Bramharatra) declared the Purana called the Bhagavata, which stands 
on an equality with the Veda.” 

The Brahma-Vaivartta Purana has the audacity to claim superiority 
over the Vedas. It says 4 : 

“That about which venerable sage, you have inquired, and which you 
desire, is all known to me, the essence of the Puranas, the pre-eminent 
Brahma-Vaivartta, which refutes the errors of the Puranas and Upa- 
puranas, and the Vedas.” 

This is the second acrobatic performed by the Brahmins in assigning 
priority, precedence, and authority to their sacred books. 

This does not complete the story of the suppression of the Vedas. The 
worse is yet to come. The Puranas were followed by another class of 
literature called the Tantras.* 5 Their number is also quite formidable. 
Shankaracharya refers to 64 Tantras. There might be many more. 


1 Muir Sanskrit Texts, Vol. III. p. 27. 

2 Ibid., p. 28. 

3 & 4 Quoted by Muir, Vol. III. 

* 5 For further discussion on Smarth Dharma and Tantrik Dharma, please see Appendices 

TV & V of this Part. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Traditionally the authorship of these works is attributed to Dattatreya, 
who was an incarnation of the Hindu trinity, Brahma, Vishnu and 
Shiva. They are therefore to be regarded as equally the revelation of 
the three supreme divinities. In form, however, they are dependent 
on Shiva alone, who in dialogue with his wife Durga, or Kali, reveals 
the mystical doctrines and observances which are to be received and 
practised by his worshippers. This authoritative or ‘higher tradition’ 
is further said to have been delivered from his central or fifth mouth. 
As such it is pre-eminently sacred and secret and may not be revealed 
to the uninitiated. They are also called by the name Agamas, and as 
such are sometimes distinguished from Nigama, the text of the Vedas, 
Dharmashastras, and other sacred books. 

The Tantras are regarded specially as the religious text-books of the 
Saktas and of their various sects. There are different Tantrik schools, with 
variant traditions, the distinctions between which are little understood 
outside of their immediate circle of adherents. The ritual of the Tantras 
of the Daksinacharins, however, is said to be pure and in harmony with 
the Vedas, while that of the Vamacharins is intended only for Shudras. 

The teaching of the Tantras, as of the Puranas is essentially based on 
the Bhakti-Marga which is regarded by them as superior to the Karma- 
Marga and Jnana-Marga of the Brahmanas and Upanishads. Adoration 
of a personal deity is inculcated, especially of the wife of Shiva, who is 
worshipped as the source of all regenerative power. In all these writings 
the female principle is personified and made prominent, to the almost 
total exclusion of the male. 

What is the relation of the Tantras to the Vedas ? Kalluka Bhatta the 
well known commentator of Manu Smriti has no hesitation in asserting 
that Shruti is two-fold- Vaidik and Tantrik — which means that the Vedas 
and the Tantras stand on equal footing. While the Vaidik Brahmins like 
Kalluka Bhatta admitted the equality of the Tantras to the Vedas, the 
authors of the Tantras went much beyond. They claimed that the Vedas, 
the Shastras, and the Puranas are alike a common woman, but the 
Tantras are like a highborn woman conveying thereby that the Tantras 
are superior to the Vedas. 

From this survey one thing is clear. The Brahmins have not been 
very steadfast in their belief regarding the sacred character of what 
they called their books of religion. They fought to maintain the thesis 
that the Vedas were not only sacred but that they were infallible. Not 
only they maintained that the Vedas were infallible but they spent 
their ingenuity to invent strange arguments to support the doctrine of 
infallibility. Yet they had not the slightest compunction to overthrow 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


61 


RIDDLE NO. 7 61 

the position of the Vedas and to subordinate them first to the Smritis, 
then to the Puranas and lastly to the Tantras. The question of all 
questions is what made the Brahmins degrade the Vedas and supersede 
them by Smritis, Puranas and the Tantras if they regarded their Vedas 
as the most sacred ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


62 


RIDDLE NO. 8 

HOW THE UPANISHADS DECLARED 
WAR ON THE VEDAS ? 


What is the position of the Upanishads in relation to the Vedas ? Are 
the two complimentary to each other or are they antagonistic ? Of course, 
no Hindu would admit that the Vedas and Upanishads are repugnant 
to each other. On the contrary, it is the common belief of all Hindus 
that there is no antagonism between them and that both form part and 
parcel of the same single system of thought. Is this belief well-founded ? 

The principal reason for the rise of such a belief is to be found in the 
fact that the Upanishads are also known by another name which is called 
Vedanta. The word Vedanta has got two meanings. In one sense, it means 
the last parts of the Vedas. In the second sense, it means the essence of 
the Vedas. The word Vedanta being another name for the Upanishads, 
the Upanishads themselves have come to acquire these meanings. It is 
these meanings which are responsible for the common belief that there 
is no antagonism between the Vedas and the Upanishads. 

To what extent are these meanings of the word Upanishads justified 
by facts ? In the first place, it is well to note the meaning of the word 
Vedanta. What was the original meaning of the word Vedanta ? Does it 
mean the last book of the Vedas ? 

As observed by Prof. Max Muller 1 : 

“Vedanta is a technical term and did not mean originally the last 
portions of the Veda, or chapters placed, as it were, at the end of a 
volume of Vedic literature, but the end i.e., the object, the highest 
purpose of the Veda. There are, of course, passages, like the one 
in the Taittiriya-aranyaka (ed-Rajendra Mitra p. 820), which have 
been misunderstood both by native and European scholars, and 
where Vedanta means simply the end of the Veda : yo vedadu svarah 

1 The Upanishads (S.B.E.) Vol. I, Introduction, p. LXXXVI. 


This 15-page typed MS with modifications in the handwriting of the 
author was originally entitled “Vedas versus Upanishads’. Concluding 
two paragraphs are added by the author in his own handwriting. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


63 


RIDDLE NO. 8 63 

prokto vedante ka pratishthitah, ‘the Om which is pronounced at the 
beginning of the Veda, and has its place also at the end of the Veda.’ 
Here Vedanta stands simply in opposition to Vedadu, it is impossible 
to translate it, as Sayana does, by Vedanta or Upanishad. Vedanta, in 
the sense of philosophy, occurs in the Taittiriya-aranyaka p. 817, in a 
verse of the Narayania-upanishad repeated in the Mundak-upanishad 
111 2, 6 and elsewhere vedantavignansuniskitarah, ‘those who have well 
understood the object of the knowledge arising from the Vedanta’ not from 
the last books of the Veda and Svetasvatara-up VI-22, vedante paramam 
guhyam, ‘the highest mystery in the Vedanta’. Afterwards it is used in 
the plural also, e.g., Kshurikopanishad, 10 (bibl. Ind. p. 210) pundariketi 
Vedanteshu nigadyate, ‘it is called pundarika in the Vedantas’ i.e., in the 
Khandogya and other Upanishads, as the commentator says, but not in 
the last books of each Veda.” 

More direct evidence on the point is that which is contained in the 
Gautama Dharma Sutras. In Chapter XIX verse 12 Gautama speaks 
of purification and says : 

“The purificatory (texts are), the Upanishads, the Vedantas, the 
Samhita — text of all the Vedas” and so on. 

From this it is clear that at the date of Gautama the Upanishads 
were distinguished from Vedantas and were not acknowledged as a part 
of the Vedic literature. Hardatta in his commentaries says “those parts 
of the Aranyakas which are not (Upanishads) are called Vedantas”. 
This is unimpeachable proof that the Upanishads did not come within 
the range of the Vedic literature and were outside the canons. 

This view is also supported by the use of the Veda in the Bhagwat 
Gita. The word Veda is used in the Bhagwat Gita at several places. 
And according to Mr. Bhat 1 the word is used in a sense which shows 
that the author did not include the Upanishads in the term. 

The subject matter of the Upanishads is not the same as that of 
the Vedas. This is also another reason why the Upanishads are not 
a part of the Vedas. What is the origin of the word Upanishad ? The 
point is somewhat obscure. Most European scholars are agreed in 
deriving Upanishad from the root sad, to sit down, preceded by the 
two prepositions, ni down and upa near, so that it would express the 
idea of session or assembly of public sitting down near their teacher 
to listen to his instructions. This is because in the Trikandasesha, the 
word Upanishad is explained by Samipasadana as sitting down near 
a person. 

1 Sacred Books of the East Vol. II p. 275. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

But as Prof. Max Muller points out there are two objections to the 
acceptance of this derivation. Firstly such a word, it would seem, would 
have been applicable to any other portion of the Veda as well as to the 
chapters called Upanishad, and it has never been explained how its 
meaning came thus to be restricted. Secondly, the word Upanishad, in 
the sense of session or assembly has never been met with. Whenever 
the word occurs, it has the meaning of doctrine, secret doctrine, or is 
simply used as the title of the philosophic treatises which contain the 
secret doctrine. 

There is another explanation proposed by Sankara in his commentary 
on the Taittiriy a -Upanishad II, 9, noted by Prof. Max Muller. According 
to it the highest bliss is contained in the Upanishad (pararn sreyo 
‘syam nishannam). That is why it is called Upanishad. Regarding this, 
Prof. Max Muller says : 

“The Aranyakas abound in such etymologies which probably were never 
intended as real as plays on words, helping, to account somehow for their 
meaning.” 

Prof. Max Muller however favours a derivation of the word ‘Upanishad’ 
from the root sad to destroy, and meant knowledge which destroys 
ignorance, the cause of Samsara, by revealing the knowledge of Brahmana 
as a means of salvation. Prof. Max Muller points out that this is the 
meaning which the native scholars have unanimously given to the word 
Upanishad. 

If it be granted that the true derivation of the word ‘Upanishad’ 
is what is suggested by Prof. Max Muller, then it would be one piece 
of evidence to show that the common belief of the Hindus is wrong 
and that the subject matter of the Vedas and the Upanishads are not 
complimentary but antagonistic. That the system of thought embodied 
in the Upanishads is repugnant to that of the Vedas is beyond doubt. 
A few citations from some of the Upanishads will suffice to show their 
opposition to the Vedas. The Mundaka Upanishad says : 

“Bramha was produced the first among the gods, maker of the universe, 
the preserver of the world. He revealed to his eldest son Atharva, 
the science of Brahma the basis of all knowledge. (2) Atharvan of old 
declared to Angis this science, which Brahma had unfolded to him ; and 
Angis, in turn, explained it to Satyavaha, descendant of Bharadvaja, who 
delivered this traditional lore, in succession, to Angiras. (3) Mahasala 
Saunaka, approaching Angiras with the proper formalities, inquired, 
‘What is that, O venerable sage, through the knowledge of which all this 
(universe) becomes known ? (4) (Angiras) answered, ‘Two sciences are to be 
known — this is what the sages versed in sacred knowledge declare — the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


65 


RIDDLE NO. 8 65 

superior and the inferior. (5) The inferior (consists of) the Rig Veda, 
the Yajur-Veda, the Sama-Veda, the Atharva-Veda, accentuation, ritual 
grammar, commentary, prosody and astronomy. The superior science 
is that by which the imperishable is apprehended” by which of course 
he means the Upanishads. 

The Chhandogya Upanishad says : 

“(1) Narada approached Sanatkumara, saying, “Instruct me, venerable 
sage. He received for answer ‘Approach me with (tell me) that which 
thou knowest ; and I will declare to thee whatever more is to be learnt.’ 

(2) Narada replied, ‘I am instructed, venerable sage, in the Rig-veda, 
the Sama-veda, the Yajur-veda, the Atharvana (which is) the fourth, the 
Itihasas and Purana (which are) the fifth Veda of the Vedas, the rites 
of the pitris, arithmetic, the knowledge of portents and of great periods, 
the art of reasoning, ethics, the science of the gods, the knowledge of 
Scripture, demonology, the science of war, the knowledge of the stars, 
the sciences of serpents and deities; this is what I have studied. (3) I, 
venerable man, know only the hymns (mantras); while I am ignorant of 
soul. But I have heard from reverend sages like thyself that ‘the man 
who is acquainted with soul overpasses grief. Now I, venerable man, 
am afflicted ; but do thou transport me over my grief. Sanatkumara 
answered, ‘That which thou hast studied is nothing but name. (4) The 
Rig-veda is name ; and so are the Yajur-veda, the Sama-veda, the 
Atharvana, which is the fourth, and the Itihasas and Puranas, the fifth 
Veda of the Vedas, etc., (all the other branches of knowledge are here 
enumerated just as above), — all these are but names; worship name. 

(5) He who worships name (with the persuasion that it is) Brahma, 
ranges as it were at will over all which that name comprehends : such 
is the prerogative of him who worships name (with the persuasion 
that it is) Brahma, ‘Is there anything, venerable man’ asked Narada, 
‘which is more than name ?’ ‘There is,’ replied, ‘something which is 
more than name’. ‘Tell it to me’, rejoined Narada.” 

The Brahadaranyaka Upanishad says : 

“In that (condition of profound slumber) a father is no father, a mother 
is no mother, the worlds are no worlds, the gods are no gods, and the 
Vedas are no Vedas, sacrifices are no sacrifices. In that condition a 
thief is no thief, a murderer of embryos is no murderer of embryos, 
a Pulkasa no Paulakasa, a Chandala no Chandala, a Sramana no 
Sramana, a devotee no devotee ; the saint has then no relation, either 
of advantage or disadvantage, to merit or to sin ; for he then crosses 
over all griefs of the heart.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This is what the Katha Upanishad has to say : 

“This soul is not to he attained by instruction, nor by understanding, 
nor by much scripture. He is attainable by him whom he chooses. The soul 
chooses that man’s body as his own abode”. 

“Although this soul is difficult to know, still it may easily be known by 
the use of proper means. This is what (the author) proceeds to say. This 
soul is not to be attained, known, by instruction, by the acknowledgement 
of many Vedas ; nor by understanding, by the power of recollecting the 
contents of books ; nor by much scripture alone. By what, then, is it to be 
attained ? 

This he declares”. 

How great was the repugnance to the Upanishads and the philosophy 
contained in them will be realized if one takes note of the origin of the 
words Anuloma and Pratiloma which are usually applied to the marriage 
tie among the Hindus. Speaking of their origin Mr. Kane, points out that 1 : 

“These two words Anuloma and Pratiloma (as applied to marriage 
or progeny) hardly ever occur in the Vedic literature. In the Br. Up. 

(II. 1.5) and Kausitaki Br. Up. IV. 8. the word ‘Pratiloma’ is applied to the 
procedure adopted by a Brahmana of going to a Kshatriya for knowledge 
about ‘Brahman’. 

Anuloma means according to the heir that is in the natural order of 
things, Pratiloma means against the heir that is contrary to the natural 
order. Reading the observations of Mr. Kane in the light of the definition 
of the word Pratiloma it is obvious that the Upanishads far from being 
acknowledged as part of the Vedic literature were if not despised, held 
in low esteem by the Vedic Brahmins. This is an additional piece of 
evidence which shows that there was a time when the relation between 
the Vedas and the Upanishads was of antagonism. 

Another illustration of the attitude of the Vedic Brahmins towards 
Brahmins who had studied the Upanishads may be given. It is to be found 
in the texts of the Dharma Sutras of Baudhayana. Baudhayana in his 
Dharma Sutras (ii. 8.3) says that at a Shradha ceremony a Rahasyavid 
is to be invited only if other Brahmins are not available. A Rahasyavid 
of course means a Brahmin versed in the Upanishads. 

The belief that the Vedas and the Upanishads are complimentary 
came into being is really a riddle. 

•• 


History of Dharma Sastra Vol. II, Part-I, p. 52. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


67 


RIDDLE NO. 9 

HOW THE UPANISHADS CAME TO 
BE MADE SUBORDINATE TO THE 
VEDAS ? 


In the preceding chapter it was shown that originally the Upanishads 
were not a part of the Vedas and that the two in the matter of doctrine 
were opposed to each other. It is instructive to compare the later relations 
between the Vedas and the Upanishads. The later relations between 
them are best illustrated by the controversy between two philosophers, 
Jaimini and Badarayana. 

Jaimini is the author of a work called the Mimamsa Sutras while 
Badarayana is the author of Brahma Sutras. Jaimini is an upholder of 
the Vedas and Badarayana is an upholder of the Upanishads. 

The point of dispute was — Is it necessary to perform sacrifices ? The 
Vedas say ‘yes’ and the Upanishads say ‘no’. 

The position of Jaimini is stated by Badarayana in his Sutras 2-7, 
and explained by Shankaracharya in his commentary. 

Jaimini contends that 1 : 

“No one undertakes a sacrificial act unless he is conscious of the 
fact that he is different from the body and that after death he will go 
to heaven, where he will enjoy the result of his sacrifices. The Texts 
dealing with self-knowledge serve merely to enlighten the agent and so 
are subordinate to sacrificial acts.” 

In short Jaimini says that all that Vedanta teaches is that self is 
different from the body and outlive the body. Such a knowledge is 
not enough. The self must have the aspiration to go to heaven. But it 
can’t go to heaven unless it performs Vedic sacrifices which is what his 
Karmakand teaches. Therefore his Karmakand is the only Salvation 
and that the Jnankand from that point of view is quite useless. For this 
Jaimini relies on the conduct of men who have believed in Vedanta 2 : 

1 See Badarayana Sutra 2 and Shankara’s comment on it. 

2 See Badarayana Sutra 3 and Shankara’s comment. 


‘Jaimini versus Badarayana’ was the title given to this chapter which 
was later scored out. This is a 9-page typed MS with modifications in 
the first two pages by the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Janaka, emperor of Videha performed a sacrifice in which gifts were 
freely distributed (Brih. 3.1.1). I am going to perform a sacrifice sirs (Chh. 
5.11.5). Now both Janaka and Asvapati were knowers of the Self. If by 
this knowledge of the Self they had attained Liberation, there was no need 
for them to perform sacrifices. But the two texts quoted show that they 
did perform sacrifices. This proves that it is through sacrificial acts alone 
that one attains Liberation and not through the knowledge of the Self as 
the Vedantins hold.” 

Jaimini makes a positive assertion that the scriptures unmistakably 
declare 1 “that knowledge of the Self stands in a subordinate relation to 
sacrificial acts”. Jaimini justifies it because he says 2 “the two (knowledge 
and work) go together (with the departing soul to produce the results).” 
Jaimini refuses to give an independent position to Badarayana’s 
Jnanakanda. He takes his stand on two grounds. 

First 3 : “Knowledge of the Self does not independently produce any 
result.” 

Second 4 : According to the authority of the Vedas “Knowledge (of Self) 
stands in a subordinate relation to work.” 

This is the position of Jaimini towards Badarayana’s Jnanakanda. 

What is the position of Badarayana towards Jaimini and his Karma 
Kanda ? This is explained by Badarayana in Sutras 8 to 17. 

The first position 5 * taken up by Badarayana is that the Self spoken of 
by Jaimini is the limited self i.e., the soul is to be distinguished from the 
Supreme soul and that the Supreme soul is recognized by the Scriptures. 

The second 8 position taken up by Badarayana is that the Vedas support 
both knowledge of Self as well as sacrifices. 

The third 7 position taken up by Badarayana is that only those who 
believe in the Vedas are required to perform sacrifices. But those 
who follow the Upanishads are not bound by that injunction. As 
Shankaracharya explains : 

“Those who have read the Vedas and known about the sacrifices are 
entitled to perform work (sacrifices). No work (sacrifice) is prescribed 
for those who have knowledge of the Self from the Upanishads. Such a 
knowledge is incompatible with work.” 

1 See Badarayana Sutra 4. 

2 See Badarayana Sutra 5. 

3 See Badarayana Sutra 6 and Shankara’s commentory. 

4 See Badarayana Sutra 7. 

6 See Badarayana Sutra 8. 

G See Badarayana Sutra 9. 

7 See Badarayana Sutra 12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


69 


RIDDLE NO. 9 69 

The fourth 1 position taken up by Badarayana is that Karmakanda is 
optional to those who have attained Bramhanand. As Shankaracharya 
explains : 

“That some have of their own accord given up all work. The point is 
that after knowledge some may choose to work to set an example to others, 
while others may give up all work. There is no binding on the knowers of 
the Self as regards work.” 

His last and final 2 position is that : 

“Knowledge of the Self is antagonistic to all work and so cannot possibly 
be subsidiary to work.” 

And as evidence in support of it he relies 3 on the scriptures which 
recognizes Sannyas as the fourth Ashram and relieves the Sannyasi from 
performing sacrifices prescribed by the Karmakanda. 

Many such Sutras can be found in Badarayana indicating the attitude 
of the two scholars of thought towards each other. But the one given 
above is enough as it is so very typical. If one stops to consider the 
matter the position wears a strange appearance. Jaimini denounces 
Vedanta as a false Shastra, a snare and a delusion, something superficial, 
unnecessary and unsubstantial. What does Badarayana do in the face of 
this attack ? Does he denounce the Karmakanda of Jaimini as a false 
Shastra, a snare and a delusion, something superficial, unnecessary and 
unsubstantial as the Upanishads themselves did ? No. He only defends 
his own Vedanta Shastra. But one would expect him to do more. One 
would expect from Badarayana a denunciation of the Karmakanda of 
Jaimini as a false religion. Badarayana shows no courage. On the contrary 
he is very apologetic. He concedes that Jaimini’s Karmakanda is based 
on the scriptures and the scriptures have authority and sanctity which 
cannot be repudiated. All that he insists on is that his Vedanta doctrine 
is also true because it has also the support of the scriptures. 

This is not all. What Badarayana does is to use the term Vedanta to 
cover two senses. He uses it so as to emphasize that the Upanishads do 
form a part of the Vedic literature. He uses it also to emphasize that 
Vedanta or the Jnyanakanda of the Upanishads is not opposed to the 
Karmakanda of the Vedas that the two are complimentary. Indeed this 
is the foundation on which Badarayana has raised the whole structure 
of his Vedanta Sutras. 

This thesis of Badarayana — which underlies his Vedanta Sutras and 
according to which the Upanishads are a part of the Veda and there is 

1 See Badarayana Sutra 15. 

2 See Badarayana Sutra 16. 

3 See Badarayana Sutra 17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no antagonism between the Vedas and Upanishads — is quite contrary to 
the tenor of the Upanishads and their relation to the Vedas. Badarayana’s 
attitude is not easy to understand. But it is quite obvious that Badarayana 
is a queer and a pathetic case of an opponent who begins his battle 
by admitting the validity of the premises of his adversary. Why did 
Badarayana concede to Jaimini on the question of infallibility of the 
Vedas which were opposed to the Upanishads ? Why did he not stand 
for truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth as expounded by 
the Upanishads ? The Badarayana has in his Vedanta Sutras betrayed 
the Upanishads. Why did he do so ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


71 


RIDDLE NO. 10 

WHY DID THE BRAHMINS MAKE THE 
HINDU GODS FIGHT AGAINST ONE 
ANOTHER ? 


The Hindu theology regarding the world is based upon the doctrine of 
Trimurti. According to this doctrine the world undergoes three stages. 
It is created, preserved and destroyed. It is endless series of cycles 
which goes on without stoppage. The three functions which comprise 
the cycle are discharged by three Gods, Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh. 
Brahma creates the world, Vishnu preserves and Mahesh destroys it for 
the purpose of creation. These gods are spoken of as forming what is 
called Trimurti. The doctrine of Trimurti postulates that three gods are 
co-equal in status and are engaged in functions which are contemporary 
and not competitive. They are friends and not rivals. They are allies of 
one another and not enemies. 

When, however, one studies the literature which depicts the deeds 
of these three gods one finds a complete difference between the theory 
and the practice. The Gods far from being friends appear to be worse 
enemies of one another, competing for supremacy and sovereignty among 
themselves. A few illustrations from the Puranas will make the matter 
clear. 

At one time Brahma appears to be the most supreme god as compared 
to Shiva and Vishnu. Brahma is said to be the creator of the universe — 
the first Prajapati. He is the progenitor of Shiva , 1 and the master of 
Vishnu because if Vishnu became the preserver of the universe it was 
because Brahma commanded him to do it. So supreme was Brahma that 
he was the arbitrator in the conflicts that took place between Rudra and 
Narayan and between Krishna and Shiva. 

Equally certain is the fact that at a subsequent stage Brahma came 
into conflict with Shiva and Vishnu and strangely enough lost his 
position and supremacy to his rivals. Two illustrations of his conflict 
with Vishnu may be given. 

1 Vishnu Purana. Muir. Ibid,., p. 392. 


The original title was ‘Gods at War’. This is a 25-page typed and corrected 
MS which includes three concluding pages handwritten by the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The first may well be the story of the Avatars. On the issue of the 
Avatars there is a rivalry between Brahma and Vishnu. The theory of 
Avatars or incarnation assumed by God to save humanity from a calamity 
began with Brahma. He was said to have assumed two Avatars (1) Boar 
and (2) Fish. But the followers of Vishnu refused to allow this. They 
asserted that these Avatars were not the Avatars of Brahma but that 
they were the Avatars of Vishnu. Not only did they appropriate these 
Avatars of Vishnu they gave to Vishnu many more Avatars. 

The Puranas have run riot with the Avatars of Vishnu and different 
Puranas have given different lists of Avatars as will be seen from the 
following : 


AVATARS OF VISHNU 


Sr. 

No. 

According 
to Hari 
Vamsa 

According 
to Narayani 
Akhyan 

According 
to Varaha 
Purana 

According 
to Vayu 
Purana 

According 
to Bhagwat 
Purana 

1 . 

Varaha 

Hansa 

Kurma 

Narasinha 

Sanatkumar 

2. 

Narasinha 

Kurma 

Matsya 

Vaman 

Boar 

3. 

Vaman 

Matsya 

Varaha 

Varaha 


4. 

Parshuram 

Varaha 

Narasinha 

Kurma 

Nara-Narayan 

5. 

Rama 

Narasinha 

Vaman 

Sangram 

Kapila 

6. 

Krishna 

Vaman 

Parshuram 

Adivaka 

Dattatraya 

7. 


Parshuram 

Rama 

Tripurari 

Jadna 

8. 


Rama 

Krishna 

Andhakarh 

Rashabha 

9. 


Krishna 

Buddha 

Dhvaja 

Prithi 

10. 


Kalkin 

Kalkin 

Varta 

Matsya 

11. 




Halahal 

Kurma 

12. 




Kolhahal 

Dhanwantari 

13. 





Mohini 

14. 





Narasinha 

15. 





Vaman 

16. 





Parshuram 

17. 





Ved Vyas 

18. 





Naradeo 

19. 





Rama 

20. 





Krishna 

21. 





Buddha 

22. 





Kalkin 


The second story may well be the issue of the first born. It is related 
in the Skanda Purana. The story says that at one time Vishnu lay 
asleep on the bosom of Devi, a lotus arose from his navel, and its 
ascending flower soon reached the surface of the flood, Brahma sprang 
from flower, and looking round without any creature on the boundless 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


73 


RIDDLE NO. 10 73 

expanse, imagined himself to be first born, and entitled to rank above all 
future beings ; yet resolved to investigate deep and to ascertain whether 
any being existed in its universe who could controvert his preeminence, 
he glided down the stock of the lotus and finding Vishnu asleep, asked 
loudly who he was ‘I am the first born’ answered Vishnu ; and when 
Brahma denied his preprogeniture, they engaged in battle, till Mahadeo 
pressed between them in great wrath, saying ‘It is I who am truly the 
first born’. But I will resign my place to either of you, who shall be able 
to reach and behind the summit of my head, or the soles of my foot. 
Brahma instantly ascended but having fatigued himself to no purpose 
in the regions of immensity yet loath to abandon his claim, returned 
to Mahadeo declaring that he had attained and seen the crown of his 
head, and called as his witness the first born cow. For this union of 
pride and falsehood, the angry God Shiva ordained that no sacred rites 
should be performed to Brahma and that the mouth of cow should be 
defiled. When Vishnu returned, he acknowledged that he had not been 
able to see the feet of Mahadeo who then told him that he was the first 
born among the Gods, and should be raised above all. It was after this 
Mahadeo cut off the fifth head of Brahma who thus suffered the loss of 
his pride, his power and his influence. 

According to this story Brahma’s claim to be the first born was false. 
He was punished by Shiva for making it. Vishnu gets the right to call 
himself the first born. But that is allowed to him by the grace of Shiva. 
The followers of Brahma had their revenge on Vishnu for stealing what 
rightfully belonged to him with the help of Shiva. So they manufactured 
another legend according to which Vishnu emanated from Brahma’s 
nostrils in the shape of a pig and grew naturally into a boar — a very 
mean explanation of Vishnu’s Avatar as a boar. 

After this Brahma tried to create enmity between Shiva and Vishnu 
evidently to better his own position. This story is told in the Ramayana. 
It says : “When King Dasaratha was returning to his capital, after 
taking leave of Janaka, the king of Mithila, whose daughter Sita had 
just been married to Rama, he was alarmed by the ill-omened sounds 
uttered by certain birds, which however were counteracted, as the 
sage Vasishtha assured the king, by the auspicious sign of his being 
perambulated by the wild animals of the forest. The alarming event 
indicated was the arrival of Parasurama, preceded by a hurricane 
which shook the earth and prostrated the trees, and by thick darkness 
which veiled the sun. He was fearful to behold, brilliant as fire, 
and bore the axe and a bow on his shoulder. Being received with 
honour, which he accepted, he proceeded to say to Rama, the son of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dasaratha that he had heard of his prowess in breaking the bow 
produced by Janaka and had brought another which he asked Rama to 
bend, and to fit an arrow on the string ; and if he succeeded in doing 
so, he (Parasurama) would offer to engage with him in single combat. 
Dasaratha is rendered anxious by this speech, and adopts a suppliant 
tone towards Parasurama, but the latter again addresses Rama, and 
says that the bow he had broken was Siva’s, but the one he himself 
had now brought was Vishnu’s. Two celestial bows, he proceeds, were 
made by Visvakarma of which one was given by the gods to Mahadeva, 
the other to Vishnu”. 

The narrative then proceeds : 

“The gods then all made a request to Brahma desiring to find out the 
strength and weakness of Sitikantha (Mahadeva) and Vishnu. Brahma, 
most excellent of the three learning the purpose of the gods, created enmity 
between the two. In this state of enmity a great and terrible fight ensued 
between Sitikantha and Vishnu each of whom was eager to conquer the 
other. Siva’s bow of dreadful power was then relaxed and the three-eyed 
Mahadeva was arrested by a muttering. These two eminent deities being 
entreated by the assembled gods, rishis, and Charanas then became pacified. 
Seeing that the bow of Siva had been relaxed by the prowess of Vishnu, 
the gods and rishis esteemed Vishnu to be superior.” 

Thus Brahma managed to avenge the wrong done to him by Mahadeo. 

Even this stratagem did not avail Brahma to maintain his position 
against Vishnu. Brahma lost his position so completely to Vishnu that 
Vishnu who at one time was at the command of Brahma became the 
creator of Brahma. 

In his contest with Shiva for supremacy Brahma suffered equal defeat. 
Here again, the position became completely inverted. Instead of being 
created by Brahma, Shiva became the creator of Bramha. Brahma lost 
the power of giving salvation. The god who could give salvation was 
Shiva and Brahma became no more than a common devotee worshipping 
Shiva and his Linga in the hope of getting salvation . 1 He was reduced to 
the position of a servant of Shiva doing the work of charioteer 2 of Shiva. 

Ultimately Brahma was knocked out of the field of worship on a charge 
of having committed adultery with his own daughter. The charge is set 
out in the Bhagwat Purana in the following terms : 

1 Mahabharata quoted in Muir IV, p. 192. 

2 Mahabharata quoted in Muir IV, p. 199. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


75 


RIDDLE NO. 10 75 

“We have heard, O Kshatriya, that Swayambhu (Brahma) had a passion 
for Vach, his slender and enchanting daughter, who had no passion for 
him. The Munis, his sons, headed by Marichi, seeing their father bent upon 
wickedness, admonished him with affection ; ‘This is such a thing as has 
not been done by those before you, nor will those after you do it, — that 
you, being the lord, should sexually approach your daughter, not restraining 
your passion. This, O preceptor of the world, is not a laudable deed even 
in glorious personages, through limitation of whose actions men attain 
felicity. Glory to that divine being (Vishnu) who by his own lustre revealed 
this (universe) which abides in himself, he must maintain ‘righteousness’. 
Seeing his sons, the Prajapatis, thus speaking before him the lord of the 
Prajapatis (Bramha) was ashamed, and abandoned his body. This dreadful 
body the regions received and it is known as foggy darkness.” 

The result of this degrading and defamatory attacks on Brahma was to 
damn him completely. No wonder that his cult disappeared from the face 
of India leaving him a nominal and theoretical member of the Trimurti. 

After Brahma was driven out of the field there remained in the field 
Shiva and Vishnu. The two however were never at peace. The rivalry 
and antagonism between the two is continuous. 

The Puranas are full of propaganda and counter-propaganda carried on 
by the Brahmins, protagonists of Shiva and Vishnu. How well matched 
the propaganda and counter-propaganda was, can be seen from the 
following few illustrations : 

Vishnu is connected with the Vedic God Sun. The worshippers of Shiva 
connect him with Agni. The motive was that if Vishnu has a Vedic origin 
Shiva must also have Vedic origin as well. One cannot be inferior to the 
other in the matter of nobility of origin. 

Shiva must be greater than Vishnu and Vishnu must not be less 
than Shiva. Vishnu has thousand 1 names. So Shiva must have thousand 
names and he has them 2 . 

Vishnu has his emblems 3 . They are four. So Shiva must have them 
and he has them. They are (1) flowing ganges, (2) Chandra (moon), 
(3) Shesh (snake) and, (4) Jata (walled hair). The only point on 
which Shiva did not compete with Vishnu was the matter of Avatars. 
The reason is not that there was no desire to compete but that 
philosophically there was an impediment in the way of Shiva taking 


1 See Vishnu Sahasranama. 

2 They are mentioned in the Padma Purana. 

3 Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Avatars. The Saivas and Vaisnavas differed fundamentally in their 

conceptions of immortal bliss. As has been pointed out by Mr. Ayyer : 

“To the Saiva the goal to be reached was final liberation from 
all fetters, bodily and mental, by their total annihilation. Hence he 
conceived of Rudra as the inextinguishable, one who could never be 
destroyed, but who extinguished or destroyed everything else. That 
was why Rudra came to be called the Destroyer. In the final stage 
of the spiritual development of an individual, there ought to be no 
separateness at all from the supreme Shiva. He ought to transcend 
his body and mind, pleasure and pain, and all opposites or dualities. 

He should attain union or Sayujya with Shiva in which condition 
he would not be able to regard himself as separate from Shiva. Till 
he reached that stage, he was imperfect, however pure he might 
be, however eligible he might be, for the highest state of Sayujya ; 
for, those who were eligible had attained only the subordinate 
stages of Salokya, Samipya and Sarupya. That was also the reason 
why the doctrine of Avatars did not appeal to the Saiva. God as 
an Avatar was only a limited being, one who had the capacity, 
perhaps, of releasing himself from his fetters but not one without 
fetters. The Vaisnava believed differently. He had also an equally 
clear conception of the highest state that could be reached, and 
that ought to be reached. But there was, according to him, nothing 
appealing in the idea of losing one’s own individuality totally. One 
should be united with the supreme, and yet be conscious of the 
union. He should be united with the universe which again should 
be regarded as the other aspect of the supreme imperishable being. 

He was not, in other words, for the extinction of the universe as if 
it were something separate and distinct from the Supreme Purusha. 

He was rather in favour of the preservation of the universe which 
was neither more nor less than the manifestation of the Purusha 
so manifested. That was the reason why Vishnu was given the 
name of the Preserver. After all it is but a difference in the way 
in which the truth is perceived or viewed. The Saiva viewed the 
universe as an object of pain and misery — as Pasha or fetters (and 
one bound by it to be Pasu) which had to be broken and destroyed. 

The Vaisnava regarded it as evidencing the greatness of the Purusa 
and so to be preserved. The Saiva, with his superior pessimism (if it 
could be so called) was not likely to respect the Dharma Shastras, 
the Artha Shastras and other scriptures all of which were framed 
with the purpose of establishing orderliness in the world, inevitable 
for its welfare. He was bound to be a non-conformist, disdaining 
rules and conventions. Ideas of caste rigidity would be repugnant 
to the highly-evolved Saiva who would at best tolerate such 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


77 


RIDDLE NO. 10 77 

notions in others who had not reached his own stage of development. 

He would pay respect to and cultivate the society of only such people, to 
whatever caste they might belong, as were eligible for Samipya, Salokya, 
Sarupya and Sayujya, with Siva. The Vaisnava, on the other hand, 
was more concerned with the preservation of all rules and regulations 
which would have the effect of promoting peace and happiness in the 
world. If ‘ Dharma ’ perished, the world would perish too, and since the 
world ought not to perish, for it was a manifestation of the glory of 
the cosmic Purusa, his duty consisted in doing everything he could for 
preserving the Dharma. If things went beyond his control he was sure 
Vishnu would take the matter up himself ; for he would come into the 
world as an Avatar. But when Vishnu did come upon the earth, it would 
be to destroy the wicked, that is, all those who were instrumental in 
upsetting the Dharma, and so it was necessary that one should be 
careful not to deserve that terrible punishment from Vishnu. Hence, 
the Agamas or rules laid down for the guidance of Siva bhaktas did not 
emphasise caste, and were concerned only with the duties of bhaktas in 
general, the proper fulfilment of which would render them fit to gain 
God vision, and ultimately union with Siva. These were regarded as 
impure by the others because they were subversive of caste ideas, and 
as stated before, they were not alluded to in the orthodox scriptures.” 

In the performance of deeds of glory the propaganda in favour of 
Shiva is fully matched by counter-propaganda in favour of Vishnu. One 
illustration of this is the story regarding the origin of the holy river 
Ganges . 1 The devotees of Shiva attribute its origin to Shiva. They take 
its origin from Shiva’s hair. But the Vaishnavas will not allow it. They 
have manufactured another legend. According to the Vaishnavite legend 
the blessed and the blessing river flowed originally out of Vaikunth (the 
abode of Vishnu) from the foot of Vishnu, and descending upon Kailasa 
fell on the head of Shiva. There is a two-fold suggestion in the legend. 
In the first place Shiva is not the source of the Ganges. In the second 
place Shiva is lower than Vishnu and receives on his head water which 
flows from the foot of Vishnu. 

Another illustration is furnished by the story which relates to the 
churning of the oceans by the Devas and the Asuras. They used the 
Mandara mountain as the churning rod and mighty serpant Shesha 
as a rope to whirl the mountain. The earth began to shake and people 
became afraid that the world was coming to an end. Vishnu took 
the Avatar of Kurma (Tortoise) and held the earth on his back and 
prevented the earth from shaking while the churning was going on. 


1. Moore’s Hindu Pantheon pp. 40-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This story is told in glorification of Vishnu. To this the Shaivites add 
a supplement. According to this supplement the churning brought out 
fourteen articles from the depth of the ocean which are called fourteen 
jewels. Among these fourteen a deadly poison was one. This deadly 
poison would have destroyed the earth unless somebody was prepared 
to drink it. Shiva was the only person who came forward to drink it. 
The suggestion is that Vishnu’s act was foolish in allowing the rivals — 
the Gods and Demons — to bring out this deadly poison. Glory to Shiva 
for he drank it and saved the world from the evil consequences of the 
folly of Vishnu. 

Third illustration is an attempt to show that Vishnu is a fool and 
that it is Shiva who with his greater wisdom and greater power saves 
Vishnu from his folly. It is the story of Akrurasura 1 . Akrur was a demon 
with the face of a bear, who, nevertheless, was continuously reading 
the Vedas and performing acts of devotion. Vishnu was greatly pleased 
and promised him any boon that he would care to ask. Akrurasura 
requested that no creature, then existing in three worlds, might have 
power to deprive him of life, and Vishnu complied with his request ; but 
the demon became so insolent that the Devatas, whom he oppressed, 
were obliged to conceal themselves, and he assumed the dominion of the 
world; Vishnu was then sitting on a bank of the Kali, greatly disquieted 
by the malignant ingratitude of the demon ; and his wrath being kindled, 
a shape, which never before had existed, sprang from his eyes. It was 
Mahadeva, in his destructive character, who dispelled in a moment the 
anxiety of the Vishnu. 

This is countered by the story of Bhasmasura intended to show that 
Shiva was a fool and Vishnu saved him from his folly. Bhasmasura 
having propitiated Shiva asked for a boon. The boon was to be the 
power to burn any one on whose head Bhasmasura laid his hands. Shiva 
granted the boon. Bhasmasura tried to use his boon power against Shiva 
himself. Shiva became terrified and ran to Vishnu for help. Vishnu 
promised to help him. Vishnu took the form of a beautiful woman and 
went to Bhasmasura who became completely enamoured of her. Vishnu 
asked Bhasmasura to agree to obey him in everything as a condition 
of surrender. Bhasmasura agreed. Vishnu then asked him to place his 
hands on his own head which Bhasmasura did with the result that 
Bhasmasura died and Vishnu got the credit of saving Shiva from the 
consequences of his folly. 

“Is Isa (Mahadeva) the Cause of causes for any other reasons ? 

We have not heard that the linga (male organ) of any other person 

is worshipped by the gods. Declare, if thou hast heard, what other 


This story is told in Vishnu Agama and is quoted in Moore’s Hindu Pantheon, pp. 19-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


79 


RIDDLE NO. 10 79 

being’s linga except that of Mahesvara is now worshipped, or has formerly 
been worshipped, by the gods ? He whose linga Brahma and Vishnu, and thou 
(Indra), with, the deities, continually worship, is therefore then most eminent. 
Since children bear neither the mark of the lotus (Brahma’s), nor of the discus 
(Vishnu’s), nor of the thunderbolt (Indra’s), but are marked with the male 
and the female organs, — therefore offspring is derived from Mahesvara. All 
women produced from the nature of Devi as their cause, are marked with the 
female organ, and all males are manifestly marked with the linga of Hara. He 
who asserts any other cause than Isvara (Mahadeva) or (affirms) that there 
is any (female) not marked by Devi in the three worlds, including all things 
movable or immovable, let that fool be thrust out. Know everything which 
is male to be Isara, and all that is female to be Uma ; for this whole world, 
movable and immovable, is pervaded by (these) two bodies.” 

The Greek Philosopher Zenophanes insists that polytheism or 
plurality of Gods is inconceivable and contradictory. That the only true 
doctrine was monotheism. Considered from a philosophical point of view, 
Zenophanes might be right. But from the historical point of view both 
are natural. Monotheism is natural where society is a single community. 
Where society is a federation of many communities polytheism is both 
natural and inevitable. Because every ancient community consisted not 
merely of men but of men and its Gods it was impossible for the various 
communities to merge and coalesce except on one condition that its God 
is also accepted by the rest. This is how polytheism has grown. 

Consequently the existence of many Gods among the Hindus is quite 
understandable because the Hindu Society has been formed by the 
conglomeration of many tribes and many communities each of whom had 
their own separate Gods. What strikes one as a strange phenomenon 
is the sight of the Hindu Gods, struggling one against the other, their 
combats and feuds and the ascriptions by one God to the other, all 
things that are a shame and disgrace to common mortals. This is what 
requires explanation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


80 


RIDDLE NO. 11 

WHY DID THE BRAHMINS MAKE THE 
HINDU GODS SUFFER TO RISE AND 
FALL? 

The Hindus are accused of idolatry. But there is nothing wrong in 
idolatry. Making an idol is nothing more than having a photograph of 
the deity and if there can be no objection to keeping a photograph what 
objection can there be to having an image. Real objection to Hindu idolatry 
is that it is not mere photography, not mere production of an image. 
It is more than that. The Hindu idol is a living being and is endowed 
with all the functions of a human being. A Hindu idol is given life by 
means of a ceremony called Pranapratishtha. The Buddhists also are 
idolatrous in as much as they too worship Buddha’s idol. But the idol 
they worship is only a photograph, a mere image. There is no soul in 
it. Why the Brahmins endowed the Hindu Gods with souls and made 
them living beings opens out an inquiry which is bound to be revealing. 
But this inquiry is outside the scope of this Chapter. 

The second charge generally levelled against the Hindus is that they 
are polytheists i.e., they worship many Gods. Here again the Hindus 
are not the only people who are guilty of the practice of Polytheism. 
Other communities have also been known to have practised polytheism. 
To mention only two. The Romans and the Greeks were essentially 
polytheists. They too worshipped many Gods. There is therefore no force 
in this charge. 

The real charge which can be levelled against the Hindus most 
people seem to have missed. That charge is that the Hindus are never 
steadfast in their devotion to their Gods. There is no such thing as 

This is a 43-page typed MS having corrections and modifications in the 
handwriting of the author. The concluding para, however, is written in 
pen by the author himself. The original title on the Chapter was ‘The 
Rise and Fall of the Gods’. This title was scored out in blue pencil, which 
was normally used by the author for scoring out the matter. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


81 


RIDDLE NO. 11 81 

loyalty or attachment or faith in one God. In the history of Hindu Gods one 
finds it a very common experience that some Gods have been worshipped 
for a time and subsequently their worship has been abandoned and the 
Gods themselves have been thrown on the scrap-heap. Quite new Gods 
are adopted and their worship goes with an intensity of devotion which 
is full and overflowing. Again the new Gods are abandoned and are 
replaced by a fresh crop of new Gods. So the cycle goes on. In this way 
the Hindu Gods are always undergoing rise and fall — a phenomenon 
which is unknown in the history of any other community in the world. 

The statement that the Hindus treat their Gods with such levity may 
not be accepted without demur. Some evidence on this point is therefore 
necessary. Fortunately there is abundance of it. At present the Hindus 
worship four Gods (1) Shiva, (2) Vishnu, (3) Rama and (4) Krishna. The 
question that one has to consider is : are these the only Gods the Hindus 
have worshipped from the beginning ? 

The Hindu Pantheon has the largest number of inmates. The Pantheon 
of no religion can rival it in point of population. At the time of the 
Rig-Veda the number of its inmates was colossal. At two places the 
Rig-Veda 1 speaks of three thousand three hundred and nine Gods. For 
some reasons, which it is not possible for us now to know, this number 
came to be reduced to thirty-three 2 . This is a considerable reduction. 
Nevertheless with thirty three, the Hindu Pantheon remains the largest. 

The composition of this group of thirty-three Gods is explained by the 
Satapatha Brahmana 3 as made up of 8 Vasus, 11 Rudras and 12 Adityas, 
together with Dyasus and Prithvi (heaven and earth). 

Of greater importance than the question of numbers is the question 
of their relative rank. Was their any distinction between the 33 Gods 
in point of their rank ? There is a verse in the Rig-Veda which seems 
to suggest that these thirty-three Gods were divided for purposes of 
honours and precedence into two classes, one being great and small and 
the other being young and old. This view seems to be against an earlier 
view also contained in the Rig-Veda. The old rule says : 

“None of you O ! Gods ! is small 
or young : You are all great”. 

This is also the conclusion of Prof. Max Muller : 

“When these individual gods are invoked, they are not conceived 

as limited by the power of others, as superior or inferior in rank. 

Each god is to the mind of the supplicants as good as all the gods. 

1 Rig-Veda iii, 99 : X 52 : 6, Vaj, S. 33, 7, Muir V, p. 12. 

2 Rig-Veda 1, 139, II, iii, 6, 9 ; VIII 28.1, VIII 30,2, VIII 35.3, Muir V. p. 10. 

3 S. B. IV 5, 7, 2, Muir V, p. II. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

He is felt, at the time, as a real divinity, as supreme and absolute, in spite 
of the necessary limitations which, to our mind, a plurality of gods must 
entail on every single god. All the rest disappear for a moment from the 
vision of the poet, and he only, who is to fulfil their desires stands in full 
light before the eyes of the worshippers.” 

“Nowhere is any of the Gods 
represented as the slave of others”. 

This is of course true only for a time. A change seems to have come 
in the old angle of vision towards the Gods. For one finds numerous 
hymns of the Veda in which some gods are represented as supreme 
and absolute. 

In the first hymn of the second Mandala, Agni is called the ruler of 
the Universe, the Lord of men, the wise king, the father, the brother, 
the son, the friend of men ; nay, all the powers and names of the others 
are distinctly ascribed to Agni. 

Then a second god came to be elevated above Agni. He is Indra. 
Indra is spoken of as the strongest god in the hymns as well as in the 
Brahmanas, and the burden of one of the songs of the Tenth Book is : 
Visvasmad Indra Uttarah ‘Indra is greater than all’. 

Then a third god is raised to the highest level. He is Soma. Of Soma, 
it is said that he was born great and that he conquers every one. He 
is called the king of the world, he has the power to prolong the life of 
men, and in one verse he is called the maker of heaven, and earth, of 
Agni, of Surya, of Indra and of Vishnu. Then Soma was forgotten and a 
fourth God was elevated. He is Varuna. Varuna was made the highest 
of all Gods. For what more could human language do than to express 
the idea of a divine and supreme power, than what the Vedic poet says 
of Varuna ; ‘Thou art Lord of all, of heaven, and earth’ or, as is said in 
another hymn (ii. 27, 10), Thou art the king of all ; of those who are 
gods, and of those who are men.” 

From this evidence it is clear that out of the 33 Vedic Gods four Gods, 
Agni, Indra, Soma and Varuna had emerged as the principal Gods. Not 
that other gods had ceased to be gods. But these four had become elevated 
above the rest. At a later stage a change seems to have taken place 
at the time of the Satapatha Brahmana in the relative position of the 
different gods. Soma and Varuna had lost their places as the principal 
gods while Agni and Indra had retained their positions. A new god has 
emerged. He is Surya. The result is that instead of Agni, Indra, Soma 
and Varuna ; Agni, Indra and Surya became the principal gods. This is 
evident from the Satapatha Brahmana which says : 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


83 


RIDDLE NO. 11 


83 


“Originally the gods were all alike, all pure. Of them being all alike, all 
pure, three desired, ‘May we become superior’ viz., Agni, Indra and Surya 
(the sun). 

“2 

“3. Originally there was not in Agni the same flame, as this flame which 
is (now) in him. He desired : ‘May this flame be in me’. He saw this grahs, 
he took it ; and hence there became this flame in him. 

4. Originally there was not in Indra the same vigour, etc. (as in para 3). 

5. Originally there was not in Surya the same lustre etc.” 

For how long these three Gods continued to hold their places of superiority 
over the rest it is difficult to say. But that at a later stage a change in 
the scene has taken place is beyond doubt. This is evident by a reference 
to the Chula-Niddessa. The Chula Niddessa is a treatise which belongs 
to the Buddhist literature. Its approximate date is.... (left incomplete). 

The Chula-Niddessa gives a list of sects which were then prevalent in 
India. Classified on the basis of creeds and cults. They may be listed as 
follows : 


I. CREEDS 


Sr. 

No. 

Name of the Sect 


1 . 

Ajivika Shravaka 1 

Ajivika 2 

2. 

Nigatta Shravakas 

Nigantha 3 

3. 

Jatil Shravakas 

Jatila 4 

4. 

Pari vraj aka Shravakas 

Pari vraj aka 5 

5. 

Avarudha Shravakas 

Avarudhaka 

II. CULTS 

Sr. 

Name of the Sect 

The deity which is 

No. 


worshipped 

1 . 

Hasti Vratikas 6 

Hasti 7 

2. 

Ashva Vratikas 

Ashva 8 

3. 

Go Vratikas 

Go 9 


1 Shravaka means a disciple. 

2 Mendicants following special rules with regard to livelihood. 

3 Mendicants who are free from all ties and hindrances. 

4 Mendicants who twist their hair on the head. 

B Mendicants who escape from society. 

6 Vratikas means a devotee. 

7 Elephant. 

8 Horse. 


9 Cow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


II. CULTS contd. 


Sr. 

No. 

Name of the Sect 

The deity which is 
worshipped 

4. 

Kukur Vratikas 

Kukku 1 

5. 

Kaka Vratikas 

Kaka 2 

6. 

Vasudeo Vratikas 

Vasudeo 

7. 

Baldeo Vratikas 

Baldeo 

8. 

Puma Bhadra Vratikas 

Puma Bhadra 

9. 

Mani Bhadra Vratikas 

Mani Bhadra 

10. 

Agni Vratikas 

Agni 

11. 

Naga Vratikas 

Naga 

12. 

Suparna Vratikas 

Suparna 

13. 

Yaksha Vratikas 

Yaksha 

14. 

Asura Vratikas 

Asura 

15. 

Gandharva Vratikas 

Gandharva 

16. 

Maharaja Vratikas 

Maharaja 

17. 

Chandra Vratikas 

Chandra 

18. 

Surya Vratikas 

Surya 

19. 

Indra Vratikas 

Indra 

20. 

Brahma Vratikas 

Brahma 

21. 

Deva Vratikas 

Deva 

22. 

Deesha Vratikas 

Deesha 


Comparing the position as it stood at the time of the Satapatha 
Brahmana with that arising from the Chula-Niddessa the following 
propositions may be said to be well-established : (1) Firstly, that the 
worship of Agni, Surya and Indra continued up to the time of the Chula 
Niddessa. (2) Secondly, the Cults of Agni, Surya and Indra although they 
had not ceased, had lost their places of supremacy. Others and quite a 
number of cults had come into being as rivals and had won the affection 
of the people. (3) Thirdly, of the new cults there are two which later 
on became very prominent. They are the cults of Vasudeo (i.e. Krishna) 
and Brahma and (4) Fourthly the cults of Vishnu, Shiva and Rama had 
not come into being. 

What is the present position as compared with that found in the Chula- 
Niddessa ? Here again, three propositions are well-established. First : 
the cults of Agni, Indra, Brahma and Surya have disappeared. Second : 
Krishna has retained his position. Three : The cults of Vishnu, Shiva and 

1 Dog. 

2 Crow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


85 


RIDDLE NO. 11 85 

Rama are new cults which have come into existence since the time of 
the Chula-Niddessa. Given this situation it raises three questions for 
considerations : One is why have the old cults of Agni, Indra, Brahma 
and Surya disappeared ? Why was the worship of these Gods abandoned ? 
Second is what are the circumstances that gave rise to the new cults of 
Krishna, Rama, Shiva and Vishnu. Third what is the relative position 
of these new Gods, Krishna, Rama, Shiva and Vishnu ? 

For the first question we can find no answer. The Brahmanic literature 
gives us no clue whatsoever as to why the Brahmins abandoned the 
worship of Agni, Indra, Surya and Brahma. There is some explanation 
as to why the cult of Brahma disappeared. It rests in a charge which 
is found to be levelled in the Brahmanic literature against Brahma. 
The charge is that he committed rape on his own daughter and hereby 
made himself unworthy of worship and devotion. Whatever be the truth 
in the charge it could not be regarded as sufficient to account for the 
abandonment of Brahma and for two reasons. In the first place, in that 
age such conduct was not unusual. In the second place, Krishna was 
guilty of greater immoralities than were charged to Brahma and yet 
they continued to worship him. 

While there is something to speculate about the abandonment of 
Brahma there is nothing to account for the abandonment of the others. 
The disappearance of Agni, Indra, Surya and Brahma is thus a mystery. 
This is no place to solve this mystery. It is enough to say that the Gods 
of the Hindus had ceased to be Gods — a terrible thing. 

The second question is also enveloped in mystery. Brahmanic literature, 
to account for the importance of the cults of these new Gods, Krishna, 
Vishnu, Shiva and Rama, is full and overflowing. But there is nothing 
in the Brahmanic literature to account for the rise of these new Gods. 
Why these new Gods were brought into action is thus a mystery. The 
mystery however deepens when one finds that some of the new Gods 
were definitely anti-Vedic. 

Let us take the case of Shiva. 

That Shiva was originally an Anti-Vedic God is abundently clear. The 
following two incidents recorded in the Bhagvata Purana (and also in the 
Mahabharata) throw a flood of light on the subject. The first incident 
shows how enmity arose between Shiva and his father-in-law Daksha. It 
appears that the Gods and Rishis were assembled at a sacrifice celebrated 
by the Prajapatis. On the entrance of Daksha, all the personages who 
were present, rose to salute him, except Brahma and Shiva. Daksha, 
after making his obeisance to Brahma, sat down by his command ; but 
was offended at the treatment he received from Shiva. This is how he 
addressed Shiva 1 : 


Bhagwat Purana quoted in Chapter IV pp. 379-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Beholding Mrida (Shiva) previously seated, Daksha did not brook his 
want of respect ; and looking at him obliquely with his eyes, as if consuming 
him, thus spake : ‘Hear me, ye Brahman rishis, with the Gods and the 
Agnis, While I, neither from ignorane nor from passion, describe what is 
the practice of virtuous persons. But this shameless being (Siva) detracts 
from the reputation of the guardians of the world, he by whom, stubborn 
as he is, the course pursued by the good is transgressed. He assumed the 
position of my disciple, inasmuchas, like a virtuous person, in the face of 
Brahmans and of fire, he took the hand of my daughter, who resembled 
Savitri. This monkey-eyed (god), after having taken of (my) fawn-eyed 
(daughter), has not even by word shown suitable respect to me whom he 
ought to have risen and saluted. Though unwilling, I yet gave my daughter 
to this impure and proud abolisher of rites and demolisher of barriers, like 
the word of the Veda to a Sudra. He roams about in dreadful cemeteries, 
attended by hosts of ghosts and spirits, like a madman, naked, with 
dishevelled hair, laughing, weeping, bathed in the ashes of funeral piles, 
wearing a garland of dead men’s (skulls), and ornaments of human bones, 
pretending to be Siva (auspicious) but in reality Asiva (in-auspicious), insane, 
beloved by the insane the lord of Pramathas and Bhutas (spirits), beings 
whose nature is essentially darkness. To this wicked-hearted lord of the 
infuriate, whose purity has perished. I have, alas ! given my virtuous 
daughter, at the instigation of Brahma’. Having thus reviled Girisa (Siva), 
Who did not oppose him, Daksha having then touched water, incensed, 
began to curse him (thus) : ‘Let this Bhava (Siva), lowest of the gods, 
never, at the worship of the gods, receive any portion along with the gods 
Indra, Upendra (Vishnu), and others.’ Having delivered his malediction, 
Daksha departed.” 

The enmity between the father-in-law and son-in-law continues. 
Daksha being elevated by Brahma to the rank of the Chief of the 
Prajapatis decided to perform a great Sacrifice called Vrihaspatisava. 
Seeing the other Gods with their wives going to this Sacrifice, Parvati 
pressed her husband, Shiva, to accompany her thither. He refers to the 
insults which he had received from her father, and advises her not to 
go. She, however (sect. 4), being anxious to see her relatives, disregards 
his warning and goes ; but being sighted by her father, Daksha, she 
reproaches him for his hostility to her husband, and threatens to abandon 
the corporeal frame by which she was connected with her parent. She 
then voluntarily gives up the ghost. Seeing this, Shiva’s attendants, who 
had followed her, rush on Daksha to kill him. Bhrigu, however, throws 
an oblation into the southern fire, pronouncing a Yajus text suited to 
destroy the destroyers of sacrifice (yajna-ghnena yajusha dakshinagnau 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


87 


RIDDLE NO. 11 87 

juhavaha). A troop of Ribhus in consequence spring up, who put Shiva’s 
followers to flight. Shiva is filled with wrath when he hears of the death 
of Sati (sect. 5). From a lock of his hair, which he tore out, a gigantic 
demon arose, whom he commended to destroy Daksha and his sacrifice. 
This demon proceeds with a troop of Shiva’s followers, and they all 
execute the mandate. How they executed the mandate is described in 
the Bhagvat Purana 1 in the following terms : 

“Some broke the sacrificial vessels, others destroyed the fires, others 
made water in the ponds, others cut the boundary-cords of the sacrificial 
ground ; others assaulted the Munis, others reviled their wives ; others 
seized the gods who were near, and those who had fled.... 19. The divine 
Bhava (Siva) plucked out the beard of Bhrigu, who was offering oblations 
with a ladle in his hand, and who had laughed in the assembly, showing 
his beard. He also tore out the eyes of Bhaga, whom in his wrath he had 
felled to the ground, and who, when in the assembly, had made a sign 
to (Daksha when) cursing (Siva) He moreover knocked out the teeth of 
Pushan (as Bala did the king of Kalinga’s), who (Pushan) had laughed, 
showing his teeth, when the great god was being cursed. Tryambaka (Siva, 
or Virabhadra, according to the commentator) then cuts off the head of 
Daksha, but not without some difficulty. The gods report all that had 
passed to Svayambhu (Brahma), who, with Vishnu, had not been present 
(sect. 6). Brahma advises the gods to propitiate Siva, whom they had 
wrongfully excluded from a share in the sacrifice. The deities, headed by 
Aja (Brahma), accordingly proceed to Kailasa, when they see Siva “bearing 
the linga desired by devotees, ashes, a staff, a tuft of hair, an antelope’s 
skin, and a digit of the moon, his body shining like an evening cloud”. 
Brahma addresses Mahadeva “as the eternal Brahma, the lord of Sakti 
and Siva, who are respectively the womb and the seed of the universe, — 
who, in sport, like a spider, forms all things from Sakti and Siva, who are 
consubstantial with himself, and preserves and reabsorbs them” (A similar 
supremacy is ascribed to Vishnu in sect. 7). Brahma adds that it was this 
great being who had instituted sacrifice, and all the regulations which 
Brahmans devoutly observe and entreat him, who is beyond all illusion, to 
have mercy on those who, overcome by its influence, had wrongly attached 
importance to ceremonial works, and to restore the sacrifice of Daksha, at 
which a share had been refused to him by evil priests. Mahadeva partly 
relents (sect. 7)” 

There can be no better evidence to prove that Shiva was an anti-vedic 
God than his destruction of Daksha’s Yajna. 


Quoted in Muir IV. p. 383-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now let us take Krishna. 

There are four persons who go by the name Krishna. One Krishna 
is the son of Satyavati and father of Dhratarashtra, Pandu and Vidur. 
Second Krishna is the brother of Subhadra and friend of Arjuna. Third 
Krishna is the son of Vasudeva and Devaki and was resident of Mathura. 
Fourth Krishna is the one brought up by Nanda and Yeshoda at Gokul 
and it was he who killed Shishupal. If the Krishna of the Krishna cult 
is the same as the Krishna son of Devaki there can be no doubt that 
Krishna originally also was anti-Vedic. From the Chhandogya Upanishad 
it appears that he was a pupil of Ghora Angiras. What did Ghora Angiras 
teach him ? This is what the Chhandogya Upanishad says on the subject : 

“Ghora, the descendant of Angiras, having declared this (the preceding 
mystical lore) to Krishna the son of Devaki, said to him that (which, when 
he heard) he became free from thirst (i.e. desire), viz., ‘let a man at the time 
of his death have recourse to these three texts, ‘Thou art the undecaying, 
thou art the imperishable, thou art the subtle principle of breath.” 

The commentator on this text of the Upanishad explains : 

“A person, Ghora by name, and an Angirasa by family, having declared 
this doctrine of sacrifice to Krishna the son of Devaki, his pupil, then 
said etc. The connexion of the last word ‘said’, is with the words which 
occur some way below, ‘these three etc., And having heard this doctrine 
he became free from desire for any kinds of knowledge. In this manner 
he praises this knowledge of the Purusha-sacrifice by saying that it was 
so distinguished that it destroyed all thirst in Krishna, the son of Devaki, 
for any other knowledge. He now tells us that Ghora Angirasa said after 
declaring this knowledge to Krishna. It was this : ‘Let him who knows the 
aforesaid sacrifice, at the time of his death have recourse to, mutter, these 
three texts, pranasamsitam means, ‘thou art the very minute, and subtle 
principle of breath.” 

Obviously the doctrine taught by Ghora Angiras to Krishna was opposed 
to the Vedas and the Vedic sacrifices as a means of spiritual salvation. 
On the contrary Vishnu is a Vedic God. Yet his cult is established much 
later than that of Shiva. Why there has been so much neglect of Vishnu 
it is difficult to understand. 

Similarly Rama though not anti-vedic is unknown to the Vedas. What 
was the necessity of starting his cult and that too at so late a stage in 
the history of the country ? 

We may now take up the third question — namely what is the relative 
position of these new Gods to the old Pauranic Gods. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


89 


RIDDLE NO. 11 89 

The rise and fall of Bramha, Vishnu and Shiva has already been 
told in a previous chapter called Gods at War. Whatever happened, 
the struggle for place and power was confined to these three Gods. 
They were not dragged below any other. But a time came when they 
were placed below the Devi by name Shri. How this happened is told 
in the Devi Bhagwat 1 . The Devi Bhagwat says that a Devi by name 
Shri created the whole world and that it is this Goddess who created 
Bramha, Vishnu and Shiva ! The Devi Bhagwat goes on to state that 
the Devi desired to rub her palms. The rubbing of palms produced a 
blister. Out of this blister was born Bramha. When Bramha was born 
the Devi asked him to marry her. Bramha refused saying she was his 
mother. The Devi got angry and burned Bramha alive by her wrath 
and Bramha was reduced to ashes then and there. Devi rubbed her 
palms a second time and had a second blister. Out of this second blister 
a second son was born. This was Vishnu. The Devi asked Vishnu to 
marry her. Vishnu declined saying that she was his mother. Devi got 
angry and burned down Vishnu to ashes. Devi rubbed her palms a 
third time and had a third blister. Out of this third blister was born 
a third son. He was Shiva. The Devi asked Shiva to marry her. Shiva 
replied : ‘I will, provided you assume another body’. Devi agreed. Just 
then Shiva’s eyes fell on the two piles of ashes. Devi replied ‘they are 
the ashes of his two brothers and that she burnt them because they 
refused to marry her.’ On this Shiva said, ‘How can I alone marry ? You 
create two other women so that we all three can marry’. The devi did 
as she was told and the three Gods were married to the Devi and her 
female creations. There are two points in the story. One is that even in 
doing evil Shiva did not wish to appear more sinning than Bramha and 
Vishnu for fear that he may appear more degraded than his other two 
competitors. The more important point however is that Bramha, Vishnu 
and Shiva had fallen in rank and had become the creatures of the Devi. 

Having dealt with the rise and fall of Bramha, Vishnu and Shiva, there 
remains the vicissitudes in the cults of the two new Gods, Krishna and Rama. 

Obviously there is a certain amount of artificiality in the cult of 
Krishna as compared with the cult of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. 
Bramha, Vishnu and Mahesh were born gods. Krishna was a man who 
was raised to godhood. It is probably to confer godhood on him that 
the theory was invented that he was the incarnation of Vishnu. But 
even then his godhood remained imperfect because he was regarded to 
be only a partial 2 avatar of Vishnu largely because of his debaucheries 

1 Summarised in Satyartha Prakash. 

2 On this point see references in Muir IV pp. 49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with the gopis which would have been inexcusable if he had been a 
full and perfect avatar of Vishnu. 

Notwithstanding this humble beginning Krishna became elevated 
to the position of a supreme God above all others. How great a God 
he became can be seen by a reference to Chapter X and XIV of the 
Bhagvat Geeta. In these chapters Krishna says : 

“Well then, O best of the Kauravas I will state to you my own divine 
emanations ; but (only) the chief (ones) for there is no end to the extent 
of my (emanations). I am the self. O Gudakesa seated in the hearts of 
all beings ; I am the beginning and the middle and the end also of all 
beings. I am Vishnu among the Adityas, the beaming Sun among the 
shining (bodies); I am Marichi among the Maruts, and the Moon among 
the lunar mansions. Among the Vedas, I am the Sama-veda. I am Indra 
among the Gods. And I am mind among the senses. I am consciousness 
in (living) beings. And I am Shankara among the Rudras, the Lord of 
Wealth among Yakshas and Rakshasas. And I am fire among the Vasus, 
and Meru among the high-topped (mountains). And know me, O Arjuna 
to be Brihaspati, the chief among domestic priests. I am Skanda among 
generals. I am the ocean among reservoirs of water. I am Bhrigu among 
the great sages. I am the Single syllable (Om) among words. Among 
sacrifices I am the Gapa sacrifice ; the Himalaya among the firmly fixed 
(mountains) ; the Asvattha among all trees, and Narada among divine 
sages : Chitraratha among the heavenly choristers, the sage Kapila among 
the Siddhas. Among horses know me to be Uchhaissravas, brought forth 
by (the labour for) the nectar ; and Airavata among the great elephants, 
and the ruler of men among men. I am the thunderbolt among weapons, 
the wish-giving (cow) among cows. And I am love which generates. 
Among serpents I am Vasuki. Among Naga snakes I am Ananta ; I am 
Varuna among aquatic beings. And I am Aryaman among the manes, 
and Yama among rulers. Among demons, too, I am Pralhada. I am the 
king of death (kala, time) among those that count. 

“Among beasts I am the lord of beasts, and the son of Vinata among 
birds. I am the wind among those that blow. I am Rama among those 
that wield weapons. Among fishes I am Makara, and among streams the 
Janhavi. Of created things I am the beginning and the end and the middle 
also. O Arjuna, among sciences, I am the science of the Adhyatma, and 
I am the argument of controversialists. Among letters I am the letter A, 
and among the group of compounds the copulative compound. I myself am 
time inexhaustible and I the creator whose faces are in all directions. I 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


91 


RIDDLE NO. 11 91 

am death who seizes all, and the source of what is to be. And among 
females, fame, fortune, speech, memory, intellect, courage, forgiveness. 
Likewise among Saman hymns, I am the Brihat-saman, and I the Gayatri 
among metres. I am Margasirsha among the months, the spring among 
the seasons, of cheats, I am the game of dice ; I am the glory of the 
glorious ; I am victory. I am industry, I am the goodness of the good. I 
am Vasudeva among the descendants of Vrishni and Arjuna among the 
Pandvas. Among sages also, I am Vyasa ; and among the discerning ones, 

I am the discerning Usanas. I am the rod of those that restrain, and the 
policy of those that desire victory. I am silence respecting secrets. I am the 
knowledge of those that have knowledge. And O Arjuna ! I am also that’ 
which is the seed of all things. There is nothing movable or immovable 
which can exist without me.” 

“Know that glory (to be) mine which, dwelling in the Sun, lights up the 
whole world, or in the moon or fire. Entering the earth, I by my power 
support all things; and becoming the juicy moon, I nourish all herbs. I 
becoming the fire, and dwelling in the bodies of (all) creatures, and united 
with the upward and downward life-breaths cause digestion of the four-fold 
food. And I am placed in the heart of all.” 

“From me (come) memory, knowledge, and their removal ; I alone am 
to be learnt from all the Vedas ; I am the author of the Vedantas ; and 
I alone know the Vedas. There are these two beings in the world, the 
destructible and the indestructible. The destructible (includes) all things. 
The unconcerned one is (what is) called the indestructible. But the being 
supreme is yet another, called the highest self, who as the inexhaustible 
lord, pervading the three worlds, supports (them). And since I transcend the 
destructible, and since I am higher also than the indestructible therefore 
am I celebrated in the world and in the Vedas as the best of things.” 

It is therefore clear that so far as the Gita is concerned there is no 
God greater than Krishna. He is, Alla ho Akbar. He is greater than 
all other Gods. 

Let us now turn to the Mahabharata. What do we find ? We find 
a change in the position of Krishna. There is a rise and fall in his 
position. In the first place we find Krishna elevated above Shiva. Not 
only that, Shiva is made to admit and acknowledge the greatness 
of Krishna. Along with this we also find Krishna degraded to a 
rank below that of Shiva and is made to acknowledge the greatness 
of Shiva. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As a piece of evidence in support of the elevation of Krishna above 
Shiva the following passage from the Amisasana-Parvan 1 is very 
illuminating : 

“Superior even to Pitamaha (Bramha) is Hari, the eternal Purusha, 
Krishna, brilliant as gold, like the sun risen in a cloudless sky, ten-armed, 
of mighty force, slayer of the foes of the gods, marked with the srivatsa, 
Hrishikesa, adored by all the gods. Bramha is sprung from his belly and 
I (Mahadeva) from his head, the luminaries from the hair of his head, 
the gods, and Asuras from the hairs of his body, and the rishis as well as 
everlasting worlds, have been produced from his body. He is the manifest 
abode of Pitamaha, and of all the deities. He is the creator of this entire 
earth, the lord of the three worlds, and the destroyer of creatures, of the 
stationary and the moveable. He is manifestly the most eminent of the gods, 
the lord of the deities, the vexer of his foes. He is omniscient, intimately 
united (with all things), omnipresent facing in every direction, the supreme 
spirit, Hrishikesa all-pervading, the mighty Lord. There is none superior 
to him in the three worlds. The slayer of Madhu is eternal, renowned as 
Govinda. He, the conferer of honour, born to fulfil the purposes of the gods, 
and assuming a human body, will slay all the kings in battle. For all the 
hosts of the gods, destitute of Trivikrama (the god who strode thrice), are 
unable to effect the purposes of the gods, devoid of a leader. He is the 
leader of all creatures, and worshipped by all creatures. 

“Of this lord of the gods, devoted to the purposes of the gods, who is 
Brahma, and is the constant refuge of gods and rishis, Brahma dwells within 
the body, abiding in his face, and all the gods are easily sheltered in his 
body. This god is lotus-eyed, the producer of Sri, dwelling together with Sri 
... For the welfare of the gods, Govinda shall arise in the family of the great 
Manu, possessed of eminent intelligence and (walking) in the excellent path 
of the Prajapati Manu, characterized by righteousness (Govinda’s ancestors 
are then detailed). In this family, esteemed by Brahmans, of men renowned 
for valour, distinguished by good conduct and excellent qualities, priests, 
most pure, this sura, the most eminent of Kshatriya heroic, renowed, 
conferring honour, shall beget a son Anakadundubhi, the prolonger of his 
race, known as Vasudev to him shall be born a four-armed son, Vasudeva, 
liberal, a benefactor of Brahmans, one with Brahma, a lover of Brahmans.” 

“You the gods, should, as is fit, worship this deity, like the eternal 
Brahma, approaching him with reverential and excellent garlands of 


Muir IV pp. 273-74. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


93 


RIDDLE NO. 11 93 

praise. For the divine and glorious Vasudev should be beheld by him who 
desires to see me and Brahma and Parent. In regard to this, I have no 
hesitation, that when he is seen I am seen, or the Parent (Brahma), the 
lord of the gods : know this ye whose wealth is austerity.” 

We shall now see how Krishna after having been elevated to the 
position being highest among the Gods is being degraded. 

The Mahabharata is so full of incidents and occasions which demonstrate 
Krishna’s inferiority to Shiva that it is difficult to recite the whole of 
them. One must be content with a few. 

The first incident relates to the view taken by Arjuna to slay Jayadratha 
on the following day. After the vow, Arjuna became very dejected thinking 
that Jayadratha’s friends would do their utmost to save him and that 
unless he had sure weapons he would not be able to fulfil his vow. 
Arjuna goes to Krishna for advice. Krishna suggests to Arjuna that he 
should supplicate to Mahadeva for the Pasupata weapon with which 
Mahadev himself had formerly destroyed all the Daityas and which, if 
he obtained it, he would be sure to kill Jayadrath. 

The Drone -Parvan which relates the story proceeds to say : 

“The righteous Vasudeva (Krishna) then, together with the son of Pritha 
(Arjuna), reciting the eternal Veda, bowed his head to the ground, beholding 
him the source of the worlds, the maker of the universe, the unborn, the 
imperishable lord, the supreme source of mind, the sky, the wind, the 
abode of the luminaries, the creator of the oceans, the supreme substance 
of the earth, the framer of gods, Danavas, Yakshas and men, the supreme 
Brahma of meditative systems, the satisfied, the treasure of those who 
know Brahma, the creator of the world and also its destroyer, the great 
impersonated destructive Wrath, the original of the attributes of Indra and 
Surya. Krishna then reverenced him with voice, mind, understanding and act. 
Those two (heroes) had recourse to Bhava (Mahadeva) as their refuge, — to 
him whom the wise, desiring the subtle spiritual abode, attain, — to him the 
unborn cause. Arjuna, too, again and again reverenced that deity, knowing 
him to be the beginning of all beings, the source of the past, the future, 
and the present. Beholding those two, Nara and Narayana, arrived Sarva 
(Mahadeva), then greatly gratified, said, as if smiling : ‘Welcome, most 
eminent of men, rise up freed from fatigue, and tell me quickly, heroes, 
what your mind desires. Shall I accomplish for you the object for which 
you have come ? Choose what is most for your welfare. I will give you all.” 

Krishna and Arjuna then recite a hymn in honour of Mahadeva, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


94 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the course of which he is designated as the soul of all things, the 
creator of all things, and the pervader of all things. Arjuna now, 
after reverencing both Krishna and Mahadeva, asks the latter for 
the celestial weapon. They are thereupon sent by Mahadeva to a 
lake where he says he had formerly deposited his bow and arrows. 

They there saw two serpents, one of which was vomiting flames, and 
approached them, bowing to Mahadeva and uttering Satarudriya. 
Through the power of Mahadeva, the serpents change their shape 
and become a bow and arrow, which Krishna and Arjuna bring to 
Mahadeva. Eventually Arjuna receives as a boon from Mahadeva the 
Pasupata weapon, with the power of fulfilling his engagement to slay 
Jayadratha after which they both return to their camp.” 

The Anusasana-Parvan of the Mahabharata contains a dialogue between 
Yudhishthira and Bhishma. Yudhishthira asks Bhishma to tell him the 
attributes of Mahadeva. This is what Bhishma says in reply : 

“I am unable to declare the attributes of the wise Mahadeva, 
who is an all-pervading god, yet is nowhere seen, who is the creator 
and the lord of Brahma, Vishnu and Indra, whom the gods, from 
Brahma to the Pisachas, worship, who transcends material natures 
as well as spirit (Purusha), who is meditated upon by rishis versed 
in contemplation (yoga), and possesing an insight into truth, who is 
the supreme, imperishable Brahma, that which is both non-existent, 
and at once existent and non-existent. Having agitated matter and 
spirit by his power, this god of gods and lord of creatures (Prajapati) 
thence created Bramha. What human being like me, who has been 
subject to gestation in the womb, and to birth, and is liable to decay 
and death, can declare the attributes of Bhava, the supreme lord — 

(who can do this) except Narayana, the bearer of the shell, the discus, 
and the cub ? This Vishnu, wise, eminent, in qualities, very hard to 
overcome, with divine insight, of mighty power, beholds (him) with 
the eye of contemplation. Through his devotion to Rudra, the world is 
pervaded by the mighty Krishna. Having then propitiated that deity 
(Mahadeva) at Badari, he (Krishna) obtained from the golden-eyed 
Mahesvara the quality of being in all worlds more dear than wealth. 

This Madhava (Krishna) performed austerity for a full thousand years, 
propitiating Siva, the god who bestows boons, and the preceptor of 
the world. But in every mundane period (yuga) Mahesvara has been 
propitiated by Krishna and has been gratified by the eminent devotion 
of that great personage. This unshaken Hari (Krishna) when seeking, 
for offspring, has beheld distinctly of what character is the glory of 
that great parent of the world. Than him I behold none higher. This 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


95 


RIDDLE NO. 11 


95 


large-armed (Krishna) is able to recount fully the names of the god of 
gods, to describe the qualities of the divine (being) and the real might of 
Mahesvara in all its extent”. 

This dialogue between Yudhishthira and Bhishma took place in the 
presence of Krishna. For immediately after his reply Bhishma calls upon 
Krishna to celebrate the greatness of Mahadeva. And this supreme God 
Krishna proceeds to do so without feeling any offence and says : 

“The course of the deeds of Isa (Mahadeva) cannot be really known. He 
whose essence neither the gods headed by Hiranyagarbha, nor the great 
rishis with Indra, nor the Adityas, the perceivers of the minutest objects, 
understand, — how can he, the refuge of saints, be known by any mere 
man ? I shall declare to you exactly some of the attributes of that divine 
slayer of the Asuras. of the lord of religious ceremonies.” 

Here not only do we find that Krishna acknowledges his inferiority 
to Shiva but we also find Shiva conscious of the fact that Krishna has 
been beaten down and is no longer his superior, indeed is not even his 
equal. This is evident from Sauptika-parvan where Mahadeva says to 
Asvathaman 1 : 

“I have been duly worshipped by Krishna, the energetic in action, with 
truth, purity, honesty, liberality, austerity, ceremonies, patience, wisdom, 
self-control, understanding and words : Wherefore no one is dearer to me 
than Krishna”. 

Krishna from being above Shiva, above every God, indeed a Parmeshwar 
is reduced to the position of being a mere follower of Shiva, begging for 
petty boons. 

This does not complete the story of the degradation of Krishna. He 
is made to undergo further humiliation. Krishna not only accepted a 
position of inferiority vis-a-vis Shiva but he is sunk so low that he 
became a disciple of Upamanyu who was a great devotee of Shiva and 
took Diksha from him in Shaivism. Krishna himself says : 

“On the 8th day I was initiated by that Brahamana (Upamanyu) according 
to the Shastras. Having shaved my entire head, anointing myself with ghee, 
and taking the staff and kusa grass in my arms I dressed myself in bark 
fastened with the mekhala (the waist string).” 

Krishna then performs penance and has a sight of Mahadeo. 

Can there be a more glaring instance of so great a rise and so much 
of a fall in the status of a God ? Krishna who was a Parmeshwar as 
compared to Shiva who was only an Ishwar does not even remain an 
Ishwar. He actually becomes a devotee of Shiva and seeks initiation in 
Shaiva Shastras from a common Brahmin like Upamanyu. 


Quoted in Muir p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The case of Rama as a God is much more artificial than that of 
Krishna. Rama himself was unware of the fact that he was a God. After 
recovering Sita on the defeat and death of Ravana, Sita was suspected 
of unchastity, Rama felt very dejected on hearing the words of those 
who thus spoke about Sita. The Ramayana says : 

“Then King Kuvera, and Yama with the Pitris and Indra, Lord 
of the gods, and Varuna, lord of the waters, and the glorious three- 
eyed Mahadeva, whose ensign is a bull, and Bramha, the creator of 
the whole world, the most eminent of the knowers of the Veda : (and 
that King Dasaratha, moving in the air on a celestial car, arrived in 
that region, equal in lustre to the king of the gods); these all having 
come on cars brilliant as the Sun, and arrived in the city of Lanka, 
came near to Raghava (Rama). Then these most eminent gods, holding 
the large arms of Rama, adorned with armlets, addressed him as 
he stood with joined hands : How dost thou, the maker of the whole 
universe, the most eminent of the wise, the pervading, disregard Sita’s 
throwing herself into the fire ? How dost thou not perceive thyself to 
be the chief of the host of the gods ? (Thou wast) formerly the Vasu 
Ritadhaman, and the Prajapati of the Vasus. Thou art the primal 
maker of the three worlds, the self dependent lord, the eighth Rudra 
of the Rudras, and the fifth of the Sadhyas. The Asvins are thine 
ears, the Moon and Sun thine eyes.” 

“Thou, vexer of thy foes, art seen in the end and at the beginning of 

created beings. And yet thou disregardest Sita like a common man”. 

On being thus addressed by these Gods, Rama became surprized and 
replied : 

“I regard myself as a man, Rama, son of Dasharath : do you, divine 
being tell me who and whence I am”. 

On this, Brahma replying to Rama said : 

“Hear my true word, O being of genuine power. Thou art the 
god, the glorious lord, Narayana, armed with the discus. Thou art 
the one-horned boar, the conqueror of thy foes, past and future, 
the true, imperishable Brahma, both in the middle and end. Thou 
art the supreme righteousness of the worlds, Vishvaksena, the 
four-armed ; the bearer of the bow, Saranga, Hrishikesa (lord of 
the senses). Purusha (the male), the highest of Purushas, the 
unconquered, sword-wielding, Vishnu, and Krishna of mighty force, 
the general, the leader the true. Thou art intelligence, thou art 
patience, and self-restraint. Thou art the source of being and cause 
of destruction, Upendra (the younger Indra), the Madhusudana. 

Thou art Mahendra (the elder Indra) fulfilling the function of Indra, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


97 


RIDDLE NO. 11 97 

he from whose navel springs a lotus, the ender of battles. The great 
divine rishis call thee the refuge, the resort of suppliants. Thou art 
the hundred-horned, composed of the Veda, the thousand-headed the 
mighty. Thou art the primal maker of the three worlds, the self- 
dependent lord, and the refuge of the Siddhas and Sahyas, O thou 
primevally born. Thou art sacrifice, thou art the vashatkara, and 
the omkara, higher than the highest. Men know not who thou art, 
the source of being, or the destroyer. Thou art seen in all creatures, 
in Brahmans and in cows, in all the regions, in the mountains and 
rivers, thousand-footed, glorious, hundred-headed, thousand-eyed. Thou 
sustainest creatures, and the earth with its mountains ; thou art seen 
Rama, at the extremity of the earth, in the waters, a mighty serpent 
supporting the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas, and Danavas. I am 
thy heart, Rama, the goddess Sarasvati is thy tongue. The gods have 
been made by Brahma the hairs on thy limbs. The night is called the 
closing, and the day the opening, of thine eyes. The Vedas are thy 
thoughts. This (universe) exists not without thee. The whole world 
is thy body ; the earth is thy stability. Agni is thine anger, Soma is 
thy pleasure, O thou whose mark is the Srivatsa. By thee the three 
worlds were traversed of yore with thy three paces, and Mahendra 
was made king after thou hadst bound the terrible Bali. That which 
is known as the chiefest light, that which is known as the chiefest 
darkness, that which is the higher than the highest — thou art called 
the highest Soul. It is thou who art hymned as that which is called 
the highest, and is the highest. Men call thee the highest source of 
continuance, production and destruction.” 

Obviously, there is the same degree of artificiality in the cult of 
Rama. Like Krishna he was a man who was made God. Unlike Brahma, 
Vishnu and Mahesh, he was not one who was born God. It is probably 
to make his Godhood perfect that the theory was invented that he was 
the incarnation of Vishnu and that Sita his wife was the incarnation of 
Lakshmi the wife of Vishnu. 

In another respect, Rama was fortunate. He did not have to suffer 
degradation to other Gods as did Brahma, Vishnu and Krishna. There 
was however an attempt to degrade him below Parasurama the hero of 
the Brahmins. The story is told in the Ramayana which says : 

“When King Dasaratha was returning to his capital, after taking 
leave of Janaka, the King of Mithila, whose daughter Sita had just 
been married to Rama he was alarmed by the ill-omened sounds by 
certain birds, which however were counteracted, as the sage Vasishta 
assured the king by the auspicious sign of his being perambulated by 
the wild animals of the forest. The alarming event indicated was the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

arrival of Parasurama, preceded by hurricane which shook the earth and 
prostrated the trees, and by thick darkness which veiled the Sun. He was 
fearful to behold, “brilliant as fire, and bore his axe and a bow on his 
shoulder. Being received with honour, which he accepted, he proceeded 
to say to Rama, the son of Dasaratha that he has heard of his prowess 
in breaking the bow produced by Janak and had brought another which 
he asked Rama to bend, and to fit an arrow on the string ; and if he 
succeeded in doing so, he (Parasurama) would offer to engage with him 
in single combat.” 

“Rama replied that though his warlike qualities are condemned by his 
rival, he will give him a proof of his powers. He then snatches, in anger, 
the bow from the hand of Parasurama, bends it, fits an arrow on the 
string ; and tells his challenger that he will not shoot at him because he 
is a Brahman, and for the sake of his kinsman Visvamitra ; but will either 
destroy his superhuman capacity of movement, or deprive him of the blessed 
abodes he has acquired by austerity. The gods now arrive to be witnesses 
of the scene. Parasurama becomes disheartened and powerless and humbly 
entreats that he may not be deprived of his faculty of movement lest he 
should be incapacitated from fulfilling his promise to Kasyappa to leave the 
earth every night but consents that his blissful abodes may be destroyed.” 

With this exception Rama had no rivalry with any of the other Gods. 
He managed to be where he was. With regards to other Gods there is 
a different story to tell. Poor creatures they became nothing more than 
mere toys in the hands of the Brahmins. Why did the Brahmins treat 
the Gods with so scant a respect ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


99 


RIDDLE NO. 12 

WHY DID THE BRAHMINS 
DETHRONE THE GODS AND 
ENTHRONE THE GODDESSES ? 


The worship of Gods is a thing common to all. But the worship of 
Goddesses is quite uncommon. The reason is that Gods are generally 
unmarried and have no wives who can be elevated to the position of 
Goddesses. How repugnant is the idea of a God being married is well 
illustrated by the difficulties which early Christians had in persuading 
the Jews to accept Jesus as the son of God. The Jews retorted saying 
God is not married and how can Jesus be the son of God. 

With the Hindus the position is quite otherwise. They not only worship 
Gods they also worship Goddesses. This is so from the very beginning. 

In the Rig-Veda several Goddesses are mentioned such as Prithvi, 
Aditi, Diti, Nishtigri, Indrani, Prisni, Usha, Surya, Agnayi, Varunani, 
Rodasi, Raka, Sinivali, Sradha, Aramati, Apsaras and Sarasvati. 

Prithvi is a very ancient Aryan Goddess. She is represented either as 
wife of Dyaus heaven or of Parjanya. Prithvi is an important Goddess 
because she is said to be the mother of many Gods. 

Aditi is chronologically one of the older Vedic Goddesses. She is 
described as the mighty mother of the Gods. The Gods, Mitra, Aryaman 
and Varuna are her sons. To whom Aditi was married does not appear 
from the Rig-Veda. We do not know much about Diti except that she is 
mentioned as a goddess along with and in contrast to Aditi and that the 
Daityas who were regarded in later Indian mythology as the enemies of 
the Devas were her sons. 

The original title of the Chapter was ‘Vedic and non-Vedic Goddesses’. 
From the subject dealt with in this chapter and from the concluding 
para, we have placed this at Riddle No. 12 in accordance with the subject 
mentioned in the Table of Contents. This is a 21-page typed copy having 
some modifications and also concluding para in the handwriting of the 
author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


100 


100 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The goddess Nishtigri is the mother of Indra and the goddess Indrani 
is the wife of Indra. Prisni is the mother of Maruts. Usha is described 
as the daughter of the sky, the sister of Bhaga and the kinswoman of 
Varuna and the wife of Surya. The goddess Surya is the daughter of 
Surya and the wife of the Gods Asvins or Soma. 

The goddesses Agnayi, Varunani and Rodasi are the wives of Agni, 
Varuna and Rudra respectively. Of the rest of the goddesses are mere 
personifications of rivers or are mentioned without any details. 

From this survey two things are clear. One is that a Hindu God can 
enter a married state and neither the God nor his worshipper need feel 
any embarrassment on account of the God acting as though he was no 
better than a common man. The second is that the God’s wife automatically 
becomes a goddess worthy of worship by the followers of the God. 

Leaving the Vedic times and coming to the Pauranic times we 
come across the names of various Goddesses such as Devi, Uma, Sati, 
Ambika, Parvati, Haimavati, Gauri, Kali, Nirriti, Chandi and Katyayini, 
Durga, Dassbhuja. Singhavahini, Mahishasuramardini, Jagaddhatri, 
Muktakesi, Tara, Chinnamustaka, Jagadgauri, Pratyangira, Annapurna, 
Ganeshjanani, Krishnakrora and Lakshmi. It is very difficult to construct 
a who is who of these Goddesses. In the first place it is difficult to say 
whether each name stands for a distinct and separate Goddess or they 
are the names of one Goddess. It is equally difficult to be sure of their 
parentage. Nor can any one say with certainty as to who their husbands 
are. 

According to one account Uma, Devi, Sati, Parvati, Gauri and Ambika 
are different names of the same Goddess. On the other hand Devi is said 
by some to be the daughter of Daksha, Ambika to be the sister of Rudra. 
Regarding Parvati the Varaha Purana in describing her origin says 1 : 

“Brahma when on a visit to Siva on Mount Kailasa is thus addressed 
by him : “Say, quickly, O, Brahma, what has induced you to come to me ?’ 
Brahma replies, ‘There is a mighty Asura named Andhaka (Darkness), by 
whom all the gods, having been distressed, came for protection, and I have 
hastened to inform you of their complaints’. Brahma then looked intently at 
Siva, who by thought summoned Vishnu into their presence. As the three 
deities looked at each other, ‘from their three refulgent glances sprang into 
being a virgin of celestial loveliness, of hue cerulean, like the petals of a 
blue lotus, and adorned with gems, who hashfully bowed before Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva. On their asking her who she was, and why she was 


Quoted in Wilkins “Hindu Mythology” pp. 290-91. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


101 


RIDDLE NO. 12 101 

distinguished by the three colours black, white and red, she said, ‘From 
your glances was I produced : do you not know your own omnipotent 
energies ?’ Brahma then praising her said, ‘Thou shalt be named the 
goddess of three times (past, present and future), the preserver of the 
universe, and under various appellations shalt thou be worshipped, as 
thou shalt be the cause of accomplishing the desires of thy votaries. 
But, O goddess, divide thyself into three forms, according to the colours 
by which thou art distinguished. She then, as Brahma had requested, 
divided herself into three parts ; one white, one red, and one black. The 
white was ‘Saraswati of a lovely, felicitious form, and the co-operator 
with Brahma in creation ; the red was Lakshmi, the beloved of Vishnu, 
who with him preserves the universe ; the black was Parvati endowed 
with many qualities and energy of Siva.” 

Here is an attempt to suggest that Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati 
are different forms of one and the same divinity. When one remembers 
that Sarasvati is the wife of Brahma, Lakshmi is the wife of Vishnu 
and Parvati is the wife of Shiva, and also that Brahma, Vishnu and 
Shiva were at war, this explanation given by the Varah Puran seems 
very odd. 

Who is Gauri ? The Purana says that Gauri is another name for 
Parvati. The reason how Parvati was called Gauri 1 is that when Shiva 
and Parvati lived on mount Kailasa, occasionally there were quarrels 
between them, and on one occasion Shiva reproached her for the 
blackness of her skin. This taunt so grieved her that she left him for 
a time, and, repairing to a deep forest, performed a most severe course 
of austerities, until Brahma granted her as a boon that her complexion 
should be golden and for this circumstance she is known as Gauri. 

Taking the other Goddesses it is not quite certain whether they are 
different names for one and the same Goddess or whether they are 
different Goddesses. In the Mahabharata there is a hymn sung by 
Arjuna to Durga in which he says 2 : 

“Reverence be to thee, Siddha-Senani (generalaless of the Siddhas), the 
noble, the dweller on Mandara, Kumari (Princess), Kali, Kapali, Kapila, 
Krishna-pingala. Reverence to thee, Bhadrakali ; reverence to thee, Maha 
Kali, Chandi, Chanda, Tarini (deliveress), Varavarini (beautiful-coloured). 

O fortunate, Kalyani, O Karali, O Vijaya, O Jaya (victory), younger sister 
of the chief of cowherds (Krishna), delighting always in Mahisha’s blood’. 

0 Uma, Sakambhari, thou white one, thou black one, O destroyer of 

1 Wilkins pp. 289-90. 

2 Quoted in Wilkins pp. 306-07. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Kaithabha ! Of science, thou art the science of Brahma (or of the Vedas), 

the great sleep of embodied beings. O mother of Skanda (Kartikeya), divine 

Durga, dweller in wildernesses’. Thou, great goddess, art praised with a 

pure heart. By thy favour let me ever be victorious in battle.” 

From this hymn it does appear that some of the Goddesses listed above 
are simply different names of Durga. Similarly, Dasabhuja, Singhavahini, 
Mahishamardini, Jagaddhatri, Chinnamustaka, Jagadgauri, Pratyangiri, 
Annapurna are the same as Durga or different forms of Durga. 

There are thus two principal Goddesses. One is Parvati and the other 
is Durga. The rest are mere names. Parvati is the daughter of Daksha 
Prajapati and the wife of Shiva and Durga is the sister of Krishna and 
the wife of Shiva. The relationship of Durga and Kali is not quite clear. 
According to the hymn sung by Arjuna, Durga and Kali would appear to 
be one and the same. But the Linga Purana seems to suggest a different 
view. According to it 1 , Kali is distinct from Durga. 

A comparison between the Vedic Goddesses and the Puranic Goddesses 
cannot be avoided by a student whose business it is not merely to write 
history but to interpret history. On one point there is a striking contrast, 
between the two. The worship of the Vedic Goddesses was worship by 
courtesy. They were worshipped only because they were the wives of 
Gods. The worship of the Puranic Goddesses stand on a different footing. 
They claim worship in their own right and not because they are wives 
of Gods. This difference arises because the Vedic Goddesses never went 
to the battlefield and never performed any heroic deed. The Puranic 
Goddesses on the other hand went to the battlefield and performed great 
heroic deeds. Their worship was not by courtesy. It was based upon their 
heroic and thundering deeds. 

There was a great battle, it is said, between Durga and the two asuras 
which brought renown to Durga. The story is told in the Markandeya 
Purana in full details. It says 2 : 

At the close of the Treta Age, two giants, named Sumbha and Nishumbha 
performed religious austerities for 10,000 years, the merit of which brought 
Shiva from heaven, who discovered that by this extraordinary devotion, they 
sought to obtain the blessing of immortality. He reasoned long with them, 
and vainly endeavoured to persuade them to ask for any other gift. Being 
denied what they specially wanted, they entered upon still more severe 


1 Wilkins Ibid,., pp. 313. 

2 Wilkins Ibid., pp. 302-306. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


103 


RIDDLE NO. 12 103 

austerities for another thousand years, when Shiva again appeared, but 
still refused to grant what they asked. They now suspended themselves 
with their heads downwards over a slow fire, till the blood streamed 
from their necks ; they continued thus for 800 years. The Gods began 
to tremble, lest, by performing such rigid act of holiness, these demons 
should supplant them on their thrones. The king of the Gods thereupon 
called a council, and imparted to them his fears. They admitted that 
there was ground for anxiety, but asked what was the remedy. 

Acting upon the advice of Indra, Kandarpa (the God of love), with 
Rambha and Tilotama, the most beautiful of the celestial nymphs, were 
sent to fill the minds of the giants with sensual desires. Kandarpa with 
his arrow wounded both ; upon which, awaking from their absorption, 
and seeing two beautiful women, they were taken in the snare, and 
abandoned their devotions. With these women they lived for 5000 
years; after which they saw the folly of renouncing their hopes of 
immortality for the sake of sensual gratifications. They suspected this 
snare must have been a contrivance of Indra ; so, driving back the 
nymphs to heaven, they renewed their devotions, cutting the flesh off 
their bones, and making burnt offerings of it to Shiva. They continued 
in this way for 1000 years till at last they became mere skeletons ; 
Shiva again appeared and bestowed upon them his blessing — that in 
riches and strength they should excel the Gods. 

Being exalted above the Gods, they began to make war upon them. 
After various successes on both sides, the giants became everywhere 
victorious ; when Indra and the Gods, reduced to a most deplorable 
state of wretchedness, solicited the interference of Brahma and Vishnu. 
They referred them to Shiva, who declared that he could do nothing 
for them. When, however, they reminded him that it was through his 
blessing they had been ruined, he advised them to perform religious 
austerities to Durga. They did so : and after some time the goddess 
appeared, and gave them her blessing ; then disguising herself as a 
common female carrying a pitcher of water, she passed through the 
assembly of the gods. She, then assumed her proper form, and said, 
‘They are celebrating my praise’. 

‘This new goddess now ascended Mount Himalaya where Chanda 
and Manda, two of Sumbha and Nisumbha’s messengers resided. As 
these demons wandered over the mountain, they saw the goddess ; 
and being exceedingly struck with her charms, which they described 
to their masters, advised them to engage her affections, even if they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

gave her all the glorious things which they had obtained in plundering 
the heavens of the gods. 

Sumbha sent Sugriva as messenger to the goddess, to inform her that 
the riches of the three worlds were in his palace ; that all the offerings 
which used to be presented to the gods were now offered to him ; and 
that all these offerings, riches, etc., would be hers, if she would come 
to him. The goddess replied that the offer was very liberal, but that 
she had resolved that the person she married must first conquer her in 
war, and destroy her pride. Sugriva, unwilling, _ to return unsuccessful, 
pressed for a favourable answer, promising that he would conquer her 
in war, and subdue her pride ; and asked in an authoritative strain ; 
‘Did she know his master, before whom none of the inhabitants of the 
worlds had been able to stand, whether gods, demons, or men ? How 
then could she, a female think of resisting his offers ? If his master 
had ordered him, he would have compelled her to go into his presence 
immediately. She agreed that this was very correct, but that she had 
taken her resolution, and exhorted him, therefore to persuade his master 
to come and try his strength with her. 

The messenger went and related what he had heard. On hearing his 
account, Sumbha was filled with rage, and, without making any reply, 
called for Dhumlochana his commander-in-chief and gave him orders to 
go to Himalaya and seize the goddess and bring her to him, and, if any 
attempted a rescue, utterly to destroy them. 

The commander went to Himalaya, and acquainted the goddess with 
his master’s orders. She, smiling, invited him to execute them. On the 
approach of this hero, she set up a dreadful roar, by which he was 
reduced to ashes. After which she destroyed the army of the giant, 
leaving only a few fugitives to communicate the tidings. Sumbha and 
Nisumbha, infuriated, sent Chanda and Manda, who on ascending the 
mountain, perceived a female sitting on an ass, laughing. On seeing 
them she became enraged, and drew to her ten, twenty or thirty of their 
army at a time, devouring them like fruit. She next seized Manda by the 
hair, cut off his head and holding it over her mouth, drank the blood. 
Chanda, on seeing the other commander slain in this manner, himself 
came to close quarters with the goddess. But she, mounted on a lion, 
sprang on him, and, despatching him as she had done Manda, devoured 
part of his army, and drank the blood of the slain. 

The giants no sooner heard this alarming news than they 
resolved to go themselves, and collecting their forces, an infinite 
number of giants, marched to Himalaya. The gods looked down with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


105 


RIDDLE NO. 12 105 

astonishment on this vast army, and the goddesses descended to help 
Mahamaya (Durga), who, however, soon destroyed her foes, Raktavija, 
the principal commander under Sumbha and Nishumbha, seeing all 
his men destroyed encountered the goddess in person. But though she 
covered him with wounds, from every drop of blood which fell to the 
ground a thousand giants, arose equal in strength to Raktavija himself. 
Hence innumerable enemies surrounded Durga, and the gods were filled 
with alarm at the amazing sight. At length Chandi, a goddess, who had 
assisted Kali (Durga) in the engagement, promised that if she would 
drink the giant’s blood before it fell to the ground, she (Chandi) would 
engage him and destroy the whole of his strangely formed offspring. 
Kali consented, and the commander and his army were soon despatched. 

Sumbha and Nishumbha, in a state of desperation, next engaged the 
goddess in single combat, Sumbha making the first onset. The battle 
was inconceivably dreadful on both sides, till at last both the giants 
were slain, and Kali sat down to feed on the carnage she had made. 
The gods and the goddesses chanted the praises of the celestial heroine, 
who in return bestowed a blessing on each.” 

The Markandeya Purana also gives a short account of the valorous 
deeds of Durga done in the various forms it took. It says : 

“As Durga she received the message of the giants ; As Dasabhuja (the 
ten-armed) she slew part of their army ; As Singhavahini (seated on 
a lion) she fought with Raktavija ; As Mahishamardini (destroyer of a 
buffalo) she slew Sumbha in the form of a buffalo ; As Jagaddhatri (the 
mother of the world) she overcame the army of the giants ; As Kali (the 
black woman) she slew Raktavija ; As Muktakesi (with flowing hair) she 
overcame another of the armies of the giants ; As Tara (the saviour) she 
slew Sumbha in his own proper shape ; As Chinnamastaka (the headless) 
she killed Nisumbha ; As Jagadgauri (the golden-coloured lady renowned 
through the world) she received the praises and thanks of the gods.” 

A comparison between the Vedic and Puranic Goddesses raises some 
interesting questions. One of them is quite obvious. Vedic literature is 
full of references to wars against the Asuras. The literature known as 
Brahmanas replete with them. But all these wars against the Asuras 
are fought by the Vedic Gods. The Vedic Goddesses never took part 
in them. With the Puranic Goddesses the situation has undergone a 
complete change. In the Puranic times there are wars with the Asuras 
as there were in the Vedic times. The difference is that while in the 
Vedic times the wars with the Asuras are left to be fought by the Gods 
in the Puranic times they are left to be fought by the Goddess. Why is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that Puranic Goddesses had to do what the Gods in Vedic times did ? 
It cannot be that there were no Gods in Puranic times. There were 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva gods who ruled in the Puranic times. When 
they were there to fight the Asuras why were the Goddesses enrolled 
for this purpose. This is a riddle which requires explanation. 

The second question is what is the source of this power which the 
Puranic Goddesses possessed and which the Vedic Goddesses never had ? 
The answer given by the Puranic writers is that this power was the 
power of the Gods which dwelt in the Goddesses. The general theory 
was that every God had energy or power which was technically called 
Sakti and that the Sakti of every God resided in his wife the Goddess. 
This had become such an accepted doctrine that every goddess is called 
a Sakti and those who worship the Goddess only are called Saktas. 

With regard to this doctrine there are one or two questions that call 
for a reply. 

First is this. We may now take it that notwithstanding the many names 
of the Goddesses as we find in the Puranas we have really five Puranic 
Goddesses before us — namely, Sarasvati, Lakshmi, Parvati, Durga and 
Kali. Sarasvati and Lakshmi are the wives of Brahma and Vishnu who 
along with Shiva are recognized as the Puranic Gods. Parvati, Durga and 
Kali are the wives of Shiva. Now Sarasvati and Lakshmi have killed no 
Asura and have in fact done no deed of valour. Question is why ? Brahma 
and Vishnu had Sakti which in conformity with the theory must have 
dwelt in their wives. Why then did Sarasvati and Lakshmi not take part 
in the battle with the Asuras ? This part is only reserved for the wives 
of Shiva. Even here Parvati’s role is quite different from that of Durga. 
Parvati is represented as a simple woman. She has no heroic deeds to 
her credit like the ones claimed for Durga. Like Durga, Parvati is also 
the Sakti of Shiva. Why was Shiva’s Sakti dwelling in Parvati so dull, 
so dormant, and so inactive as to be non-existent ? 

The second point is that though this doctrine may be a good justification 
for starting the worship of Goddesses independently of Gods, it is difficult 
to accept either the logical or historical basis of the doctrine. Looking 
at it purely from the point of view of logic if every God has Sakti then 
even the Vedic Gods must have had it. Why then was this doctrine not 
applied to the wives of the Vedic Gods ? Looking at it from the point 
of view of history, there is no justification for saying that the Puranic 
Gods had Sakti in them. 

Further the Brahmins do not seem to have realized that by making 
Durga the heroine who alone was capable of destroying the Asuras, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


107 


RIDDLE NO. 12 107 

they were making their own Gods a set of miserable cowards. It seems 
that the Gods could not defend themselves against the Asuras and had 
to beg of their wives to come to their rescue. One illustration from the 
Markandeya Purana is enough to prove how imbecile the Puranic Gods 
were shown by the Brahmins against the Asuras. Says the Markandeya 
Purana : 

“Mahisha, king of the giants, at one time overcame the gods in war, and 
reduced them to such a state of want that they wandered through the earth 
as beggars. Indra first conducted them to Brahma, and then to Siva ; but 
as these gods could render no assistance, they turned to Vishnu, who was 
so grieved at the sight of their wretchedness, that streams of glory issued 
from his face, whence came a female figure named Mahamaya (another 
name of Durga). Streams of glory issued from the faces of the other gods 
also, which in like manner entered Mahamaya ; in consequence of which 
she became a body of glory, like a mountain of fire. The gods then handed 
their weapons to this dreadful being, who with a frightful scream ascended 
into the air, slew the giant, and gave redress to the gods.” 

How can such cowardly Gods have any prowess ? If they had none, how 
can they give it to their wives. To say that Goddesses must be worshipped 
because they have Sakti is not merely a riddle but an absurdity. It 
requires explanation why this doctrine of Sakti was invented. Was it to 
put it a new commodity on the market that the Brahmins started the 
worship of the Goddesses and degraded the Gods ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


108 


RIDDLE NO. 13 

THE RIDDLE OF THE AHIMSA 


Any one who compares the habits and social practices of the latter- 
day Hindus with those of the Ancient Aryans he will find a tremendous 
change almost amounting to a social revolution. 

The Aryans were a race of gamblers. Gambling was developed to science 
in very early days of the Aryan Civilization so much so that they had even 
devised certain technical terms. The Hindus used the words Krita, Treta, 
Dwapara and Kali as the names of the four Yugas or periods into which 
historical times are divided. As a matter of fact originally these are the 
names of the dices used by the Aryans at gambling . The luckiest dice 
was called Krita and the unluckiest was called Kali. Treta and Dwapara 
were intermediate between them. Not only was gambling well developed 
among the ancient Aryans but the stakes were very high. Gambling with 
high money stakes have been known elsewhere. But they are nothing 
as compared with those which are known to have been offered by the 
Aryans. Kingdoms and even their wives were offered by them as stakes 
at gambling. King Nala staked his kingdom and lost it. The Pandavas 
went much beyond. They not only staked their kingdom they also staked 
their wife Draupadi and lost both. Among the Aryans gambling was 
not the game of the rich. It was a vice of the many. So widespread was 
gambling among the Ancient Aryans that the burden of all the writers 
of the Dharma Sutras (Shastras ?) was to impress upon the King the 
urgency of controlling it by State Authorities under stringent laws. 

The original Table of Contents shows Riddle No. 13 as ‘How the Brahmins 
who were once cow-killers became the worshippers of the Cow ?’ This 
chapter is not found in the papers. However, few pages entitled ‘Riddle 
of Ahimsa’ have been found. The Riddle has been placed here as it seems 
to deal with the same topic. This chapter consisting of 10 typed pages is 
obviously incomplete as the remaining text is missing. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


109 


RIDDLE NO. 13 109 

The relation of the sexes among the Aryans were of a loose sort. 
There was a time when they did not know marriage as a permanent tie 
between a man and a woman. This is evident from the Mahabharata 
where Kunti the wife of Pandu refers to this in her reply to Pandu’s 
exhortation to go to produce children from some one else. There was a 
time when the Aryans did not observe the rule of prohibited degrees in 
their sex relations. There are cases among them of brother cohabiting 
with sister, son with mother, father with daughter and grand-father with 
grand-daughter. There was a communism in women. It was a simple 
communism where many men shared a woman and no one had a private 
property in or exclusive right over a woman. In such a communism 
the woman was called Ganika, belonging to many. There was also a 
regulated form of communism in women among the Aryans. In this 
the woman was shared among a group of men but the day of each was 
fixed and the woman was called Warangana one whose days are fixed. 
Prostitution flourished and has taken the worst form. Nowhere else have 
prostitutes consented to submit to sexual intercourse in public. But the 
practice existed among the Ancient Aryans. Bestiality also prevailed 
among the Ancient Aryans and among those who were guilty of it are 
to be reckoned some of the most reverend Rishis. 

The Ancient Aryans were also a race of drunkards. Wine formed a 
most essential part of their religion. The Vedic Gods drank wine. The 
divine wine was called Soma. Since the Gods of the Aryans drank 
wine the Aryans had no scruples in the matter of drinking. Indeed to 
drink it was a part of an Aryan’s religious duty. There were so many 
Soma sacrifices among the Ancient Aryans that there were hardly any 
days when Soma was not drunk. Soma was restricted to only the three 
upper classes, namely the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishas. 
That does not mean the Shudras were abstainers. Who were denied 
Soma drank Sura which was ordinary, unconsecrated wine sold in the 
market. Not only the male Aryans were addicted to drinking but the 
females also indulged in drinking. The Kaushitaki Grihya Sutra I. 11-12 
advises that four or eight women who are not widowed after having 
been regaled with wine and food should be called to dance for four times 
on the night previous to the wedding ceremony. This habit of drinking 
intoxicating liquor was not confined to the Non-Brahmin women. Even 
Brahmin women were addicted to it. That drinking was not regarded 
as a sin ; it was not even a vice, it was quite a respectable practice. 
The Rig-Veda says : 

“Worshipping the sun before drinking madira (wine)”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Yajur-Veda says : 

“Oh, Deva Soma ! being strengthened and invigorated by Sura (wine), 
by thy pure spirit, please the Devas ; give juicy food to the sacrificer and 
vigour to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas.” 

The Mantra Brahmana says : 

“By which women have been made enjoyable by men, and by which 
water has been transformed into wine (for the enjoyment of men),” etc. 

That Rama and Sita both drank wine is admitted by the Ramayana. 
Uttar Khand says : 

“Like Indra in the case (of his wife) Shachi, Ramachandra saw that 
Sita drank purified honey called wine. Servants brought for Ramahandra 
meat and sweet fruit. 

So did Krishna and Arjuna. The Udyoga Parva of the Mahabharata 
says : 

“Arjuna and Shrikrishna drinking wine made from honey and being 
sweet-scented and garlanded, wearing splendid clothes and ornaments, sat 
on a golden throne studded with various jewels. I saw Shrikrishna’s feet 
on Arjuna’s lap, and Arjuna’s feet on Draupadi and Satyabhama’s lap.” 

The greatest change that has taken place is in the diet. The present 
day Hindus are very particular about their diet. There are twofold 
limitations on commensality. A Hindu will not eat food cooked by a Non- 
Hindu. A Hindu will not eat food cooked even by a Hindu unless he is 
a Brahmin or a man of his caste. The Hindu is not only particular on 
the question of whose food he should eat, he is also particular to what 
he should eat. From the point of view of diet Hindus may be divided 
into two main classes. 

(1) Those who are vegetarians. 

(2) Those who are non-vegetarians. 

The non- vegetarians again fall into several sub-divisions : 

Those who will eat all kinds of flesh and fish. 

Those who will eat only fish. 

Those who will eat flesh are sub-divided into following categories : 

(i) Those who will eat the flesh of any animal except the cow. 

(; ii ) Those who will eat the flesh of any animal including that of the 

cow. 

(Hi) Those who will eat flesh but not of a cow (whether dead or 
slaughtered) nor of chicken. 

Classifying the Hindu Population from the point of view of its diet 
the Brahmins are divided into two classes (1) Pancha Gauda and (2) 
Panch Dravida. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


111 


RIDDLE NO. 13 111 

Of these Panch Dravida are completely vegetarian. The Panch Gauda’s 
with the exception of one section namely Gauda Saraswatas are also 
completely vegetarian. The Untouchables who are at the other end of 
the Hindu Society are non-vegetarian. They eat meat, not merely of 
goats and fowls but also of the cow irrespective whether it is dead or 
slaughtered. The Non-Brahmins who are midway between the Brahmins 
and the Untouchables have different ways. Some like the Brahmins are 
Vegetarians. The rest unlike the Brahmins are non-vegetarians. All of 
them are alike in one thing namely that all of them are opposed to 
eating the cow’s flesh. 

There is one other aspect of the question which needs to be mentioned. 
It is the question of killing an animal for purposes of food. On this the 
Hindu mind is more or less united. No Hindu will kill an animal not 
even for food. Except for a small caste known as Khatiks there are no 
butchers among the Hindus. Even the Untouchables will not kill. He eats 
the flesh of a dead cow. But he will not kill a cow. In India today the 
butcher is a Musalman and any Hindu who wants to kill an animal for 
his food has to seek the services of a Musalman. Every Hindu believes 
in Ahimsa. 

Since when did vegetarianism come into India ? When did Ahimsa 
become an established belief? There are Hindus who do not understand 
the propriety of this question. They hold that vegetarianism and Ahimsa 
are not new things in India. 

The evidence in support of the contention that the ancient Aryans 
the ancestors of present-day Hindus were not only meat-eaters but. 
beef-eaters is really overwhelming. As evidences in support of this view 
it is enough to draw attention to the following facts : 

They are quite indisputable. 

Take the case of Madhuparka. 

Among the ancient Aryans there was well established procedure of 
reception to be given to a guest which is known as Madhuparka the 
detailed descriptions regarding which will be found in the various Grihya 
Sutras. According to most of the Grihya Sutras there are six persons 
who deserve Madhuparka. Namely (1) Ritvij or the Brahmin called to 
perform a sacrifice, (2) Acharya, the teacher, (3) the Bridegroom, (4) 
The King, (5) The Snatak, the student who has just finished his studies 
at the Gurukul and (6) Any person who is dear to the host. Some add 
Atithi to this list. Except in the case of the Ritvij, King and Acharya, 
Madhuparka is to be offered to the rest once in a year. To the Ritvij, 
King and Acharya it is to be offered each time they come. The procedure 
consisted first in washing by the host the feet of his guest, then the offer 
of the Madhuparka and the drinking of it by the quest accompanied by 
certain Mantras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 21-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What were the components of the Madhuparka ? Madhuparka literally 
means a ceremony in which honey is shed or poured on the hand of a 
person. This is what Madhuparka was in its beginning. But in course 
its ingredients grew and included much more than honey. At one time 
it included three ingredients — curds honey and butter. There was a time 
when it was made of five things curds, honey, ghee, yava and barley. 
Then it came to be a mixture of nine items. The Kausika Sutra speaks 
of nine kinds of mixtures, viz. Brahma (honey and curds), Aindra (of 
payasa), Saumya (curds and ghee), Mausala (same and ghee, this being 
used only in Sautramani and Rajasuya sacrifices), Varuna (water and 
ghee). Sravana (sesame oil and ghee). Parivrajaka (sesame oil and oil 
cake). Then we come to the time of the Manava Grahya Sutra which says 
that the Veda declares that the Madhuparka must not be without flesh 
and so it recommends that if the cow is let loose, goat’s meat or payasa 
(rice cooked in milk) may be offered ; The Hir gr. i. 13.14 says that other 
meat should be offered ; Baud. gr. says (1.2.51-54) that when the cow is 
let off. the flesh of a goat or ram may be offered or some forest flesh (of 
a deer & c.,) may be offered, as there can be no Madhuparka without 
flesh or if one is unable to offer flesh one may cook ground grains. But 
in the final stage flesh became the most essential part of Madhuparka. 
In fact some of the Grihya Sutras go to the length of saying that there 
can be no Madhuparka without flesh. This they base upon an express 
injunction contained in the Rig-Veda (VIII. 101.5) which says “Let the 
Madhuparka not be without flesh”. 

Flesh eating was thus quite common. From the Brahmins to the 
Shudras everybody ate meat. In the Dharmasutras numerous rules are 
given about the flesh of beasts and birds and about fishes. Gaut. 17.27- 
31. Ap. Dh. S. 1.5.17.35 Vas. Dh. S. 14.39-40. Yaj. I. 177. Vishnu Dh. 
S. 51.6. Sankha (quoted by Apararka p. 1167). Ramayana (Kiskindha 
17.39). Markendey Purana (35.2-4) prescribe that one should avoid the 
flesh of all five-nailed animals except of porcupine, hare, svavidh (a boar 
of hedgehog), iguana, rhinoceros and tortoise (some of these works omit 
the rhinoceros). Gautama adds that one should also avoid the flesh of 
all animals with two rows of teeth in the two jaws, of hairy animals, 
of hairless animals (like snakes), of village cocks and hogs and of cows 
and bulls. Ap. Dh. S. 1.5.17. 29-31 first forbids the flesh of animals 
with one hoof only, of camels, of gavaya (Gayal), of the village hog, of 
the sarabha and of cows, but adds the exception that the flesh, of milch 
cows and of bulls may be eaten as the Vajasaneyaka declares the flesh 
of these to be pure. Ap. Dh. S. (II. 2. 5. 15) forbids the use of flesh to a 
teacher of the Veda in the 


(INCOMPLETE. FURTHER TEXT MISSING) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


113 


RIDDLE NO. 14 

FROM AHIMSA BACK TO HIMSA 


“From Himsa to Ahimsa” is only a part of the story of Ahimsa. There 
is another part of the story which can only be described, under the 
heading “From Ahimsa back to Himsa”. The second part of the story will 
be clear if only one were to note the religious practices of the Tantras 
and Tantraism to which a reference has already been made. 

The essentials of Tantrik worship are the five Makars. These five 
Makars consists of: 

1. The drinking of wine and liquors of various kinds ... (Madya); 


2. The eating of meat (Mansa); 

3. The eating of fish (Matsya); 

4. The eating of parched or fried grain (Mudra); 

5. The sexual union (Maithuna). 


It is unnecessary to say at this stage anything about Maithuna or 
Sexual intercourse having been made an element of religious worship. 

It is sufficient to take note of Madya and Mansa. 

With regard to the first four of these acts the Tantras prescribe twelve 
sorts of liquors, three sorts of wine, and three sorts of meat. Pulastya, 
one of the ancient sages who is the supposed author of certain law-books, 
also enumerates twelve kinds of liquors, as follows: 

“1. Liquor extracted from the bread fruit (panasa), called Jack-liquor; 

2. From grapes (draksha); 

3. From date-palm (kharjuri); 

4. From common palm (tali), or toddy: 

5. From coconut (narikela); 

6. From sugarcane (ikshu); 

7. From Madhavika plant; 


The chapter seems to be a continuation of the previous chapter on ‘Ahimsa’. 
There are six typed pages with few corrections and having the title written 
by the author himself- Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


114 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


8. Long-pepper liquor (saira); 

9. Soap-berry liquor (arishta); 

10. Honey-liquor (madhuka); 

11. A kind of rum or liquor prepared from molasses, etc. (called 
Gaudi, or sometimes Maireya); 

12. Arrack, or liquor prepared from rice and other grain (sura or 
Varuni, or paishti). 

Besides the above twelve kinds of spirituous drink others are frequently 
mentioned, for example, Tanka, made from wood-apple, Koli, made 
from the jujbe; and Kadambari; the last being the favourite beverage 
of Bala-Rama. 

The meat may be that of birds, beasts, or fish. The parched grain is 
eaten, like dry biscuit, as a relish with the wine and spirituous liquors. 
The drinking of each kind of drink is supposed to be attended with its own 
peculiar merit and advantage. Thus one liquor gives salvation, another 
learning, another power, another wealth, another destroys enemies, 
another cures diseases, another removes sin, another purifies the soul.” 

The Tantrik worship had gone deep into Bengal. Referring to his own 
experience Rajendra Lai Mitra says 1 : 

“I knew a highly respectable widow lady, connected with one of the 
most distinguished families in Calcutta, who belonged to the Kaula sect, 
and had survived the 75th birthday, who never said her prayers (and 
she did so regularly every morning and evening) without touching the 
point of her tongue with a tooth-pick dipped in a phial of arrack, and 
sprinkling a few drops of the liquor on the flowers which she offered 
to her god. I doubt very much if she had ever drunk a wine-glassful 
of arrack at once in all her life, and certain it is that she never had 
any idea of the pleasures of drinking; but, as a faithful Kaula, she 
felt herself in duty-bound to observe the mandates of her religion 
with the greatest scrupulousness. That thousands of others do so, I 
have every reason to believe. In some parts of Bengal, where arrack 
is not easily accessible, such female votaries prepare a substitute by 
dropping the milk of a coconut in a bell-metal pot, or milk in a copper 
vessel, and drink a few drops of the same. Men are, however, not so 
abstemious, and the Tantras ordain a daily allowance of five cupsful, 
the cup being so made as to contain five tolas, or two ounces, i.e. they 
are permitted to take ten ounces or about a pint of arrack daily”. 

This Tantrik worship was not confined to the small corner of Bengal. 
As is pointed out by Mahamahopadhyaya Jadaveshwara Tarkaratna 2 : 


Rajendralal Mitra — Indo-Aryans Vol. pp. 405-6. 

Quoted by Avalon in his principles of Tantra Part-I. Introduction p. XXXVIII. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


115 


RIDDLE NO. 14 115 

“Just as the Bengalis of the higher castes are divided into Shaktas, 
Vaishnavas, and Shaivas, so it is with the peoples of Kamarupa, 
Mithila, Utkala, and Kalinga, and the Kashmirian pandits. The 
Shakti Mantra, Shiva Mantra, and Vishnu Mantra, are each Tantrik. 
Amongst Dakshinatyas, Mahamahopadhyaya Subramanya Shastri, 
and many others, are Shaktas. The late Mahamahopadhyaya Rama 
Mishra Shastri, Bhagavatacharya, and many others, were and 
are Vaishnavas. Mahamahopadhyaya Shivakumara Shastri, and 
a number of others, are Shaivas. In Vrindavana there are many 
Shaktas as well as Vaishnava Brahmanas, though amongst the 
higher castes in Maharashtra and other Southern Indian countries, 
Shaivas and Vaishnavas are more numerous than Shaktas. Followers 
of the Pashupata and Jangama cults are Shaivas whereas those of 
Madhavacharya and Ramanujacharya are Vaishnavas. Many in the 
North-West are initiated in the Rama-Mantra, which is to be found 
only in the Tantra. It is still more remarkable that, according to 
this author, the pandas of Shri Purushottama are all Shaktas, and 
the priests of Kamakhya Devi are all Vaishnavas.” 

Although it is not possible to give the exact date when the Tantras 
and Tantra worship came into existence there is no doubt that their 
date is after Manu. This fact makes the rise of the Tantra worship a 
matter of great surprize. The Tantras not only lifted the prohibition 
enacted by Manu against wine and flesh but they made drinking and 
flesh eating articles of faith. 

The surprising thing is the part that the Brahmins have played in 
furthering the Tantra and Tantra worship. The Tantras had no respect 
for the Vedas. The Tantrikas said that the Vedas were like a common 
woman open to all but that the Tantra was like a high-born woman 
kept secluded. The Tantra was never repudiated by the Brahmins. 
On the other hand they recognized it as a fifth Veda. So orthodox 
a Brahmin as Kulluka-Bhatt the celebrated Commentator on Manu 
Smriti says that Shruti is of two kinds, Vaidik and Tantrik. Not only 
did the Brahmins not repudiate the Tantras but actually promoted the 
Tantrik worship. The Matrika Bheda Tantra makes Shiva address his 
wife Parvati as follows 1 : 

“O sweet speaking goddess, the salvation of Brahmanas depends 
on drinking wine. I impart to you a great truth, O mountain born, 
when I say that the Brahman who devotes himself to drinking and 
its accompaniments, forthwith becomes a Siva. Even as water mixes 
with water, and metal blends with metal; even as the confined 


lQuoted by Rajendralal Mitra in Indo-Aryans Vol. p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

space in a pitcher merges into the great body of the confining vessel, and air 
mingles with air, so does a Brahman melt into Brahma, the universal soul”. 

“There is not the least doubt about this. Likeness to the divinity and 
other forms of beatitude are designed for Kshatriyas and others; but true 
knowledge can never be acquired without drinking spirituous liquor; therefore 
should Brahmans always drink. No one becomes a Brahman by repeating 
the Gayatri, the mother of the Vedas: he is called a Brahman only when 
he has knowledge of Brahma. The ambrosia of the gods is their Brahma, 
and on earth it is arrack (or liquor distilled from rice); and because one 
attains through it the condition of a god (suratva), therefore is that liquor 
called sura.” 

Why did the Brahmins repudiate father Manu and start again drinking 
liquor and flesh eating which Manu had stopped? This is a riddle. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


117 


RIDDLE NO. 15 

HOW DID THE BRAHMINS WED AN 
AHIMSAK GOD TO A BLOODTHIRSTY 
GODDESS ? 

Having started drinking and flesh eating the Brahmins did not hesitate 
to write puranas advocating animal sacrifices. One such Purana requires 
a special mention. It is called the Kali Purana. This Purana is written 
with the express purpose of propagating the worship of the goddess Kali. 
In this Purana there is an adhhyaya called Rudhir Adhhyaya which 
means the bloody chapter. 

I give below a summary of the Rudhir Adhhyaya. In this chapter 1 the 
God Shiva addresses his three sons Betal, Bhairawar, and Bhairava in 
the following terms: 

“I will relate you, my sons, the ceremonies and rules to be observed in 
sacrifices which being duly attended to are productive of the divine favour. 

“The forms laid down in the Vaishnaivi Tantra, are to be followed on 
all occasions and may be observed by sacrifices to all Deities.” 

“Birds, tortoise, allegators, fish, nine species of wild animals, buffaloes, 
bulls, he-goats, inchneumons, wild boars, rhinoceroses, antelopes, guanas, 
reindeer, lions, tigers, men and blood drawn from the offerer’s own body, are 
looked upon as proper oblations to the Goddess Chandica, the Bhairavas &c.” 

“It is through sacrifices that princes obtain bliss, heaven, and victory 
over their enemies.” 

“The pleasure which the Goddess receives from an oblation of the 
fish and tortoises is of one month’s duration, and three from that 
of a crocodile. By the blood of the nine specifies of wild animals 
the Goddess is satisfied nine months, and for that space of time 

1 The chapter is translated in English by Mr. W. C. Blaquiere and will be found in the 
Asiatic Researches vol. pp. 


This is a 1 6-page typed MS having modifications by the author himself. 
All the pages are numbered serially and the treatment of the subject 
seems complete. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


118 


118 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

continues propitious to the offerer’s welfare. The blood of the wild 
bull and Guana give pleasure for one year, and that of the antelope 
and wild boar for twelve years. The Sarabhas blood satisfies the 
Goddess for twenty-five years, and buffalo’s and rhinoceros’s blood 
for a hundred, and that of the tiger an equal number. That of the 
lion, reindeer, and the human species produces pleasure, which lasts 
a thousand years. The flesh of these, severally, gives the pleasure 
for the same duration of time as their blood. Now attend to the 
different fruits attending an offering of the flesh of a rhinoceros or 
antelope, as also of the fish called Rohita.” 

“The flesh of the antelope and rhinoceros pleases the Goddess five 
hundred years and the Rohita fish and Bardhrinasa give my beloved 
(i.e. the Goddess Cali) delight for three hundred years.” 

“A spotless goat, who drinks only twice in twenty-four hours, whose 
limbs are slender, and who is the prime among a herd, is called 
Bardhrinasa, and is reckoned as the best of Havyas (i.e. offerings to 
the Deities) and Cavyas, (i.e. offerings to the deceased progenitors).” 

“The bird whose throat is blue and head red and legs black with 
white feathers, is called also Barshrinasa, and is king of the birds, 
and the favourite of me and Vishnu.” 

“By a human sacrifice attended by the forms laid down, Devi 
is pleased one thousand years and by sacrifice of three men, one 
hundred thousand years. By human flesh, Camachya, Chandica, 
and Bhairava who assumes my shape, are pleased one thousand 
years. An oblation of blood which has been rendered pure by holy 
texts, is equal to ambrosia; the head also afford much delight to the 
Goddess Chandica. Let therefore the learned when paying adoration 
to the Goddess, offer blood and the head, and when performing the 
sacrifices to fire, make oblations of flesh.” 

“Let the performer of the sacrifice be cautious never to offer bad 
flesh, as the head and blood are looked upon by themselves equal 
to ambrosia.” 

“The gourd, sugar cane, spirituous liquors, and fermented liquors 
are looked upon as equivalent to other offerings, and please the 
Goddess for the same duration of time as the sacrifice of a goat.” 

“The performance of the sacrifice, with a Chandrahasa, or Gatri, 
(two weapons of the king) is reckoned the best mode, and with a 
hetcher or knife, or a sangeul, the second best, and the beheadings 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


119 


RIDDLE NO. 15 

with a hoe a Bhallac (an instrument of the spade kind) the inferior 
mode.” 

“Exclusive of these weapons no others of the spear of arrow kind 
ought ever to be used in performing a sacrifice, as the offering is not 
accepted by the Goddess, and the giver of it dies. He who, with his 
hands, tears off the head of the consecrated animal, or bird, shall be 
considered equally guilty with him who has slain a Brahman, and 
shall undergo great sufferings. 

“Let not the learned use the axe, before they have invoked it by 
holy texts, which have been mentioned heretofore, and framed by the 
learned for the occasion; let those I now tell you, be joined to them 
and the axe invoked, and particularly so, where the sacrifice is to be 
made to the Goddesses Durga and Camachya.” 

“Let the sacrificer repeat the word Kali twice, then the words 
1 Devi Bajreswari, the Lawha Dandayai, NamahF which words may be 
rendered ‘Hail! Cali, Cali! Hail! Devi! goddess of thunder, Hail Iron 
sceptered Goddess /’ Let him then take the axe in his hand, and again 
invoke the flame by the Calratriya text as follows: 

“Let the sacrificer say: Hrang Hring. Cali, Cali.’ O horrid toothed 
Goddess: eat, cut, destroy all the malignant, cut with this axe, bind; 
seize; drink blood; spheng secure, Salutations to Cali.” Thus ends the 
Calratriya Mantra.” 

“The Charge (the axe) being invoked by this text called the Calratriya 
Mantra, Calratri (the Goddess of darkness) herself presides over the 
axe uplifted for the destruction of the sacrificer’s enemies.” 

“The sacrificers must make use of all the tests directed previous 
to the sacrifice, and also of the following, addressing himself to the 
victim.” 

“Beasts were created by the self existing, himself to be immolated 
at sacrifices. I therefore immolate thee, without incurring any sin in 
depriving thee of life.” 

“Let the sacrificer then name the Deity to whom the sacrifice is 
made, and the purpose for which it is performed; and by the above 
text immolate the victim, whose face is to be towards the north, or 
else let the sacrificer turn his own face to the north, and the victim’s 
to the east; Having immolated the victim, let him without fail mix 
salt &c., as before mentioned with the blood.” 

“The vessel in which the blood is to be presented, is to be according 
to the circumstances of the offerer, of gold, silver, copper, brass, or 
leaves sewed together, or of earth, or of tutenague, or of any of the 
species of wood used in sacrifices.” 


119 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


120 


120 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Let it not be presented in an iron vessel, nor in one made of the 
hide of an animal, or the bark of tree; nor in a pewter, tin, or leaden 
vessel. Let not the blood be represented in the holy vessel named Srub 
and Sruch, nor on the ground. Let it not be presented in the Ghata 
(i.e. an earthern-jar always used in other religious ceremonies). Let 
it not be presented by pouring it on the ground, or into any of the 
vessels used at other times for offering food to the Deity, Let not 
the good man who wishes for prosperity, offer the blood in any of 
these vessels. Human blood must always be presented in a metallic 
or earthern vessel; and never on any account in a vessel made of 
leaves, or similar substance. 

“The offering of a horse, except at the Aswamedha sacrifice, is 
wrong, as also offering an elephant, except at the Gaja Medha; Let 
therefore the ruler of men observe never to offer them except on those 
occasions. And on no account whatsoever let him offer them to the 
Goddess Devi, using the wild bull called Chanrara as a substitute for 
the horse, when the occasion required one.” 

“Let not the Brahman ever offer a lion or a tiger, or his own blood, 
or spirituous liquors to the Goddess Devi. If a Brahmen sacrifices either 
a lion, a tiger, or a man, he goes to hell, and passes but a short time 
in this world attended with misery and misfortune.” 

“If a Brahman offers his own blood, his guilt is equal to that of 
the slayers of a Brahman; and if he offers spirituous liquors he is no 
longer a Brahman.” 

“Let not a Cshectree offer an entelope; if he does, he incurs the guilt 
of a Brahmin slayer where the sacrifice of lions, or tigers, or of the 
human species is required, let the three first classes act thus; having 
formed the image of the lion, tiger, or human shape with butter, paste, 
or barley meal, let them sacrifice the same as if a living victim, the 
axe being first invoked by the text Nomo, &e. 

“Where the sacrifice of a number of animals is to take place it is 
sufficient to bring and present two or three to the Deity, which serves 
as a consecration of the whole. I have now related to you, O Bhairava, 
in general terms, the ceremonies and forms of sacrifices attend now 
to the different texts to be used on the several different occasions.” 

“When a buffalo is presented to Devi, Bhairavee, or Bhairava let 
the sacrificer use the following Mantra in invoking the victim.” 

“In the manner that thou destroyest, Horses, in the manner that 
thou earnest Chandica, destroy my enemies, and bear prosperity to 
me, O Buffalo!” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


121 


RIDDLE NO. 15 


121 


“O steed of death, of exquisite and unperishable form, produce me 
long life and fame. Salutation to thee, o buffalo!” 

“Now attend to the particulars relative to the offering of human 
blood.” 

“Let a human victim be sacrificed at a place of holy worship, or 
at a cemetery where dead bodies are burried. Let the oblation be 
performed in the part of the cemetery called Heruca, which has been 
already described, or at a temple of Camachya, or on a mountain. 
Now attend to the mode.” 

“The cemetery represents me, and is called Bhairava, it has also a 
part called Tantarange; the cemetery must be divided into these two 
division, and a third called Heruca.” 

“The human victim is to be immolated in the east division which is 
sacred to Bhairava, the head is to be presented in the south division, 
which is looked upon as the place sculls sacred to Bhairavi, and the 
blood is to be presented in the west division, which is denominated 
Heruca.” 

“Having immolated a human victim, with all the requisite ceremonies 
at a cemetery or holy place, let the sacrificer be cautious not to cast 
eyes upon the victim.” 

“On other occasion also, let not the sacrificer, cast eyes upon the 
victim immolated, but present the head with eyes averted.” 

“The victim must be a person of good appearance, and be prepared 
by ablutions, and requisite ceremonies, such as eating consecrated food 
the day before, and by abstinance from flesh and venery; and must be 
adorned with chaplets of flowers and besmeared with sandal wood.” 

“Then causing the victim to face the north, let the sacrificer worship 
the several deities presiding over the different parts of the victims 
body; let the worship be then paid to the victim himself by his name.” 

“Thus let the sacrificer worship the victim, adding whatever other 
texts are applicable to the occasion, and have been before mentioned. 

“Let not the female, whether quadruped or bird, or a woman be ever 
sacrificed; the sacrificer of either will indubitably fall into hell, where 
the victim of either the beasts or birds creation, are very numerous, 
the immolation of a female is excusable; but this rule does not hold 
good, as to the human species.” 

“Let not a Brahman or a Chandala be sacrificed; nor a prince; nor 
that which has already been presented to a Brahmen, or a deity; 
nor the offspring of a prince, nor who has conquered in battle; nor 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


122 


122 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the offspring of a Brahman, or of a Cshettree; nor a childless brother, 
nor a father, nor a learned person, nor one who is unwilling, nor 
the maternal uncle of the sacrificer. Those not here named, and 
animals, and birds of unknown species are unfit. If these named are 
not forthcoming, let their place be supplied by a male ass or camel. 
If other animals are forthcoming, the sacrifice of a tiger, camel, or 
ass must be avoided.” 

“Having first worshipped the victim, whether human, beast, or 
bird, as directed, let the sacrificer, immolate him uttering the Mantra 
directed for the occasion, and address the deity with the text laid 
down before.” 

“Let the head and blood of a human victim be presented on the 
right side of Devi, and the sacrificer address her standing in front. 
Let the head and blood of birds be presented on the left and the 
blood of a person’s own body in front. Let the ambrosia proceeding 
from the heads of carnivorous animals and birds be presented on 
the left hand, as also the blood of all aquatic animals.” 

“Let the antelope’s head and blood, and that of the tortoise, 
rhinoceros and hare and crocodile, and fish be presented in front.” 
“Let a lion’s head and blood, be presented on the right hand, and 
the rhinoceros’s also; let not, on any account, the head or blood of 
a victim ever be presented behind the Deity, but on the right, left 
and in front.” 

“Let the consecrated lamp, be placed either on the right hand, or in 
front but on no account, on the left. Let incense be burnt on the left, 
and in front, but not on the right hand. Let perfumes, flowers and 
ornaments, be presented in front; with respect to the different parts 
of the circle, where to present the offerings, the mode already laid 
down may be observed. Let Madira (spirituous liquor) be presented 
behind other liquids on the left.” 

“Where it is absolutely necessary to offer spirits, let the three 
first classes of men supply their place, by coconut juice in a brass 
vessel, or honey in a copper one. Even in a time of calamity, let not 
a man of the three first classes, offer spirituous liquor, except that 
made from flowers, or stewed dishes. Let princes, ministers of state, 
counsellors, and vendors of spirituous liquors, make human sacrifices, 
for the purpose of attaining prosperity and wealth.” 

“If a human sacrifice is performed, without the consent of the 
prince, the performer incurs sin. In cases of imminent danger or 
war, sacrifices may be performed at pleasure, by princes themselves 
and their ministers, but by none else.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


123 


RIDDLE NO. 15 123 

“The day previous to a human sacrifice, let the victim be prepared 
by the text Manastac, and three Devi Gandha Sucthas, and the texts 
Wadrang; and by touching his head with the axe, and besmearing the 
axe with sandal &c, perfumes, and then taking some of the sandal, 

&c, from off the axe, and besmearing the victim’s neck therewith.” 

“Then let the text Ambe Ambica, &c, and the Towdra and Bhairava 
texts be used, and Devi herself will guard the victim who, when 
thus purified, malady does not approach him, nor does his mind 
suffer any derangement from grief and similar causes, nor does the 
death or birth of a kinsman render him impure.” 

“Having secured the victim with cords, and also with (Mantras) 
let him strike off the head, and present it to Devi, with due care. 

Let him make these sacrifices in proportion to the increase or 
decrease of his enemies, chopping off the heads of victims for the 
purpose of bringing destruction on his foes, infusing, by holy texts, 
the soul of the enemy into the body of the victim, which will when 
immolated, deprive the foe of life also.” 

“The blood must be drawn for the express purpose of an oblation, 
and from a man pure in body and mind, and free from fear; it must 
be caught in the petal of lotus and presented. It may be presented 
in a gold, silver, brass or iron vessel, with the due from, the texts 
recited.” 

“The blood, if drawn by incision made with a knife, axe or sangeul, 
gives pleasure, in proportion to the size of the weapon.” 

“The sacrificer may present one fourth of the quantity which a 
lotus petal will contain, but he must not give more on any account; 
nor cut his body more than is necessary. He who willingly offers the 
blood of his body and his own flesh, the size of a grain of linseed, 
Masha, tila, or mudya, with zeal and fervency, obtains what he 
desires in the course of six months.” 

He who performs sacrifices according to these rules, obtains, his 
wishes to the utmost extent.” 

This is the Dharma which the Kali Purana preaches. 

After centuries of Ahimsa ordained by Manu here is Himsa in full 
blast sanctioned by the Tantras in its worst and all inclusive form — 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

animal and human Himsa. These Himsa practices preached in the 
sanguinary chapter of Kali Purana had become quite widespread. As 
to the revival of animal sacrifice what happens at the Kali Temple in 
Calcutta furnishes unmistakable proof. That this temple should have 
become a perfect slaughter house where daily hundreds of goats are 
sacrificed to appease the Goddess Kali can only be explained by the 
teachings of the Kali Purana. Today human beings are not sacrificed 
to the Goddess Kali. But it does not mean that it never happened. On 
the contrary there is abundant evidence to show that human sacrifice 
like animal sacrifice was practised as taught by the Kali Purana. Dr. 
Rajendralal Mitra says 1 : 

“The fact is well known that for a long time the rite (of Human 
Sacrifice) was common all over Hindustan; and persons are not wanting 
who suspect that there are still nooks and corners in India, where 
human victims are occasionally slaughtered for the gratification of 
the Devi. In old families which belong to the sect of the Vamacharis, 
and whose ancestors formerly offered human victims at the Durga 
and the Kali Pujas, a practice still obtains of sacrificing an effigy, 
in lieu of a living man. The effigy, a foot long, is made of dried 
milk (khira), and sacrified according to the formula laid down in 
the Kalika Purana the only addition being a few mantras designed 
typically to vivify the image. A friend of mine, Babu Hemachandra 
Ker, Deputy Magistrate of twenty four Pergunnahs and author of an 
excellent work on the culture of Jute in Bengal informs me that in 
the eastern districts of Bengal this sacrifice is frequently performed; 
but the image instead of being slaughtered by a single individual, is 
cut up simultaneously by all the grown up members of the family, 
either with separate knives, or with a single knife held jointly by all. 

This is known by the name of Satruball or “sacrifice of any enemy”. 

The sacrifice, both in the case of Nara Bali and the Satru Bali is 
performed secretly, generally at midnight. The Satrubali, however, 
is a distinct rite, apart from the Narabali of the Kalika Purana, and 
authority for it occurs in the Vrihannila Tantra, in which it is said, 
after performing certain other rites therein described, “a king should 
sacrifice his enemy (in an effigy) made with dried milk (khira). He 
should slaughter it himself, looking at it with a fiery glance, striking 
deep, and dividing it into two with a single stroke. This should be 
done after infusing life into it by the rite of Prana Pratishtha, and 
repeating the name of the person to be destroyed. O consort of Mahesa, 
he doubtless destroys thereby his enemies.” 

Tndo-Aryans Vol. II. pp. 109-111. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


125 


RIDDLE NO. 15 125 

Now the important point to note in this connection is that Kali is 
the wife of Shiva. The question that arises is does Shiva accept animal 
sacrifice? The answer to this question is that at one time Shiva did 
live on animal sacrifice. This statement may come as a surprise to the 
present day worshippers of Shiva. But it is a fact and those who need any 
evidence in support of it, have only to refer to the Ashvalayan Grihya- 
Sutra which gives a most elaborate description of a bull- sacrifice for the 
appeasement of Shiva. I give below the actual text from the Ashavalayan 
Grihya Sutra 1 . This is what it says: 

1. “Now the spit-ox (sacrificed to Rudra). 

2. In autumn or in spring, under the (Nakshatra) Ardra. 

3. The vest of his herd. 

4. (An ox) which is neither leprous nor speckled. 

5. One with black spots, according to some. 

6. If he likes, a black one, if its colour incline to copper-colour. 

7. He sprinkles it with water, into which he has thrown rice and 
barley. 

8. From head to tail. 

9. With (the formula), ‘Grow up, agreeable to Rudra the great god’. 

10. He should let it grow up. When it has cut its teeth, or when it 
has become a bull. 

11. To a quarter (of the horizon) which is sacrificially pure. 

12. At a place which cannot be seen from the village. 

13. After midnight. 

14. According to some, after sunrise. 

15. Having caused a Brahman who is versed in learning and knows 
the practice (of this sacrifice), to sit down, having driven a fresh 
branch with leaves into the ground as a sacrificial post, (having 
taken) two creeping plants or two kusa ropes as two girdles, and 
having wound the one round the sacrificial post, and tied the 
other round the middle of the animal’s head, he binds it to the 
sacrificial post or to the girdle (which he had tied to that post) with 
(the formula), ‘Agreeable to him to whom adoration (is brought), 
I bind thee’. 

16. The sprinkling with water and what follows is the same as at the 
animal sacrifice. 

17. We shall state what is different. 

18. Let him sacrifice the omentum with the Patri or with a leaf-thus 
it is understood (in the Sruti). 

>S. B. of East. Vol. XXIX p. 255-259 (Max-Muller). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

19. With (the formula), ‘To Hara, Mrida, Sarva, Siva, Bhava, Mahadeva, 
Ugra, Bhima, Pasu-pati, Rudra, Sankara, Isana svaha’! 

20. Or with the last six (parts of that formula). 

21. Or with (the formula), ‘To Rudra svaha’! 

22. Let him make Bali offerings towards the four quarters (of the horizon, 
to each on four rings of Kusa net-work, with the formulas), ‘The 
hosts, Rudra, which thou hast towards the estern direction, to them 
this (offering is brought). Adoration to thee! Do no harm to me ! ‘In 
this way the assigning (of the offerings is performed) according to 
the different quarters (of the horizon). 

23. With the following four hymns he should worship the four quarters, 
viz., ‘what shall we do Rudra,’ ‘These prayers to Rudra,’ ‘To thee, 0 
father,’ ‘These songs to Rudra with the strong bow.’ (Rig-Veda 1,43, 
114; II, 33; VII, 46). 

24. (This) worship to the quarters (of the horizon (is performed) at all 
sacrifices to Rudra. 

25. The husks and chaff (of the rice), the tail, the skin, the head, the 
feet (of the sacrificial animal) he should throw into the fire. 

26. He should turn the skin to some use according to Samvatya. 

27. To the north of the fire, on rows of Darbha grass, or on rings of Kusa 
network, he should pour out the blood (of the sacrificial animal) with 
(the formula) ‘Hissing ones! Noisy ones! Searching ones ! Seizing ones ! 
Serpents ! What here belongs to you, take that.’ 

28. Then, turning to the north (he assigns it) to the serpents (in the 
words) ‘Hissing ones! What here belongs to you take that’. 

Then the serpents take whatever has flowed down there of blood or 
of the contents of stomach and entrails. 

29. All names, all hosts, all exaltations belong to him — to a sacrificer 
who knows that, he gives joy. 

30. Even to a man who only with words sets forth (some part) of that 
(ceremony), he will do no harm; thus it is understood (in the Sruti). 

31. He should not partake of that (sacrifice). 

32. They should not take anything belonging to it into the village. For 
this God will do harm to (human) creatures. 

33. He should keep away his people from the vicinity (of the place where 
he has sacrificed). 

34. On an express injunction, however, he should partake (of that sacrificial 
food) for it will bring luck. 

35. This split-ox sacrifice procures wealth, (open) space, purity, sons, 
cattle, long life, splendour. 

36. After he has sacrificed, he should let loose another (animal). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


127 


RIDDLE NO. 15 127 

37. He should not be without such an animal. 

38. Then he will not be without cattle — thus it is understood (in the 
Sruti). 

39. Muttering the Santatiya hymn, he should go to his house. 

40. If disease befalls his cattle, he should sacrifice to that same God 
in the midst of his cow-stable. 

41. A mess of cooked food, which he sacrificed in its entirety. 

42. Having thrown the sacrificial grass and the Agya into the fire, 
he should lead his cows through the smoke. 

43. Murmuring the Santatiya hymn, he should go in the midst of his 
cattle. 

44. Adoration to Saunaka; Adoration to Saunaka!” 

Today Shiva does not accept animal sacrifice. This change in the form 
of worship of Shiva is the result of the acceptance by the principle of 
Ahimsa. Having changed from himsa to Ahimsa the Brahmans changed 
Shiva from a Himsak God to an Ahimsak God. The cult of Kali has come 
into being long after Shiva had become an Ahimsak God. Never the less 
Kali his wife was made an himsak Goddess. The result is that we have 
a cruel contrast of a bloodless god having a blood-thirsty Goddess as his 
wife. Isn’t it a riddle? Why did the Brahmins do such a thing? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


128 


APPENDIX I 

THE RIDDLE OF THE VEDAS 


The Vedas are the sacred Books of the Hindus. There are several 
questions that arise in connection with them. What is their origin, who is 
their author, what is their authority, these are some of them (questions). 

To begin with the first. According to the Hindus they are Sanatana 
which means that they are “eternally pre-existing”. There is no justification 
for this view unless it be based upon a statement which occurs in the 
Atharva-Veda. It says 1 : 

“From Time the Rig verses sprang; the Yajus sprang from Time”. But 
there are other views quite opposed to this. 

Starting from the Atharva-Veda it must be noted that besides this 
view there are two other views propounded in that Veda. The first of 
these is not very intelligent and may be given in its own language which 
runs as follows 2 : 

“Declare who that Skambha (supporting principle) is in whom the 
primeval rishis, the rich, saman, and yajush, the earth, and the one 
rishi, are sustained .... 20. Declare who is that Skambha from whom 
they cut off the rich verses, from whom they scraped off the yajush, of 
whom the saman verses are the hairs and the verses of Atharvan and 
Angiras the mouth”. 

The second explanation given in the Atharva-Veda is that the Vedas 
sprang from Indra 3 . 

Explanation of the Rig-Veda is to be found in the Purusha-Sukta. 
According to it there was a universal sacrifice in which the victim was 
the mystical being called Purusha and it is out of the sacrifice of this 

1 Atharva-Veda XIX 54, 3. 

2 Quoted in Muir’s Sanskrit Texts vol. Ill, p. 3. 

3 Quoted in Muir Sanskrit Texts, p. 

This is a consolidated chapter on the Riddle of the Vedas dealing with 
most of the subjects discussed by the author in the earlier chapter Nos. 2 
to 6 of this book. In all there are 61 typed pages bearing no corrections 
at all. This copy is a typed carbon copy. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


129 


APPENDIX I 129 

Purusha that the three Vedas namely Rig, Saman and Yajur came 
into being. 

The Sam-Veda and the Yajur-Veda make no reference to the origin 
of the Vedas. 

Proceeding to the writings called Brahmanas we find attempts 
to explain the origin of the Vedas in the Satapatha Brahmana, the 
Taitteriya Brahmana, Aitareya Brahmana and Kaushitaki Brahmana. 

The Satapatha Brahmana has a variety of explanations. It attributes 
the origin of the Vedas to Prajapati. According to it Prajapati by his 
austerity created three worlds — Earth, Air and Sky. He infused warmth 
into these three worlds. From them, thus heated, three lights were 
produced, — Agni (fire), Vayu (wind) and Surya (the sun). From them 
so heated the three Vedas were produced,- the Rig-Veda from Agni, 
the Yajur-Veda from Vayu and Sam-Veda from the Sun. 

This is also the explanation given by the Aitereya and the Kaushitaki 
Brahmana. 

The Satapatha Brahmana gives another variant 1 of this explanation of 
the origin of the Veda from Prajapati. The explanation is that Prajapati 
created the Vedas from waters. Says the Satapatha Brahmana — 

“This Male Prajapati, desired, ‘May I multiply, may I be propagated’. 

He toiled in devotion he practised austere-fervour. Having done so he first 
of all created sacred knowledge, the triple Vedic science. This became a 
basis for him. Wherefore men say, ‘sacred knowledge is the basis of this 
universe.’ Hence after studying the Veda a man has a standing ground: 
for sacred knowledge is his foundation. Resting on this basis he (Prajapati) 
practised austere fervour. 9. He created the waters from Vach (speech), 
as their world. Vach was his; she was created. She pervaded all this 
whatever exists. As she pervaded (apnot), waters were called ‘apah’. As 
she covered (avrinot) all, water was called ‘var’. 10. He desired, ‘May I 
be propagated from these waters.’ Along with this triple Vedic science 
he entered the waters. Thence sprang an egg. He gave it an impulse; 
and said, ‘let there be, let there be, let there be again’. Thence was first 
created sacred knowledge, the triple Vedic science. Wherefore men say, 
‘Sacred knowledge is the first-born thing in this universe. Moreover, it was 
sacred knowledge which was created from that Male in front, wherefore 
it was created as his mouth. Hence they say of a man learned in the 
Veda, He is like Agni; for the sacred knowledge is Agni’s mouth?”. 


Muir Sanskrit Texts. Ill p. 8. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


130 


130 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“As from a fire made of moist wood various modifications of smoke 
proceed, so is the breathing of this great being; the Rig-Veda, the Yajur- 
veda, the Sama-veda, the Atharv-angirases, the Itihasas, Puranas, 
science, the Upanishads, verses (slokas), aphorisms, comments of 
different kings — all these are his breathings”. 

There is a third explanation 1 given in the Satapatha Brahmana: 

“I settle thee in the ocean as they seat” Mind is the ocean. From 
the mind-ocean with speech for a shovel the gods dug out the triple 
Vedic science. Hence this verse has been uttered: ‘May the brilliant 
deity to-day know where they placed that offering which the gods dug 
out with sharp shovels. Mind is the ocean; speech is the sharp shovel; 
the triple Vedic science is the offering. In reference to this the verse 
has been uttered. He settles it in Mind”. 

The Taitteriya-Brahmana has three explanations to offer. It speaks 
of the Vedas as being derived from Prajapati. It also says Prajapati 
created King Soma and after him the three Vedas were created 2 . This 
Brahmana has another explanation 3 quite unconnected with Prajapati. 
According to it: 

“Vach (speech) is an imperishable thing, and the first-born of 
the ceremonial, the mother of the Vedas, and the centre-point of 
immortality. Delighting in us, she came to the sacrifice. May the 
protecting goddess be ready to listen to my invocation, she whom 
the wise rishis, the composers of hymns, the gods, sought by austere- 
fervour, and by laborious devotion.” 

To crown all this the Taitteriya Brahmana offers a third explanation. 
It says that the Vedas came from the beard of Prajapati. 

Legends regarding the origin of the Vedas are also to be found in the 
Upanishads. 

The legend recorded in the Chhandogya Upanishad is the same as that 
found in the Satapatha Brahmana — namely that the Rig-Veda originated 
from Agni, Yajus from Vayu and Sam from the Sun. 

The Brahad Aranyaka Upanishad which is a part of the Satapatha 
Brahmana, records quite a different legend. It says: 

“Prajapati (identified with Death, or the Devourer) is said to have 
produced Vach (speech), and through her, together with soul, to have 
created all things, including the Vedas.” 

“By that speech and that soul he created all things whatsoever, rich, 
yajush, and saman texts, metres, sacrifices, creatures, and animals. 

The three Vedas are (identifiable with) these three things (speech, 
mind and breath). Speech is the Rig-veda, mind the Yajur-veda, and 
breath the Sama-veda.” 

1 Muir I pp. 9-10. 

2 Muir I p. 8. 

3 Ibid. I p. 10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


131 


APPENDIX I 131 

Coming to the Smritis there are two theories as to the origin of the 
Vedas to be found in the Manu Smriti. In one place it is said that 
the Vedas were created by Brahma: 

“He (Brahma) in the beginning fashioned from the worlds of the 
Veda the several names, functions and separate conditions of all 
(creatures). That Lord also created the subtle host of active and 
living deities, and of Sadhyas, and eternal sacrifice, he drew forth 
from Agni, from Vayu, and from Surya, the triple eternal Veda, 
distinguished as Rich, Yajush, and Saman.” 

In another place he seems to accept the story of Prajapati being 
the originator of the Vedas as would be evident from the following: 

“Prajapati also milked out of the three Vedas the letters a, u 
and m, together with the words bhuh, bhuvah and svar. The same 
supreme Prajapati also milked from each of the three Vedas one of 
the (three) portions of the text called savitri (or gayatri), beginning 

with the word tat The three great imperishable particles {bhuh, 

bhuvah, svar) preceded by om, and the gayatri of three lines, are 
to be regarded as the mouth of Brahma”. 

It is also interesting to note what the Puranas have to say about the 
origin of the Vedas. The Vishnu Purana says: 

“From his eastern mouth Brahma formed the gayatri, the rich 
verses, the trivrit, the samarathantara, and of sacrifices, the 
agnishtoma. From his southern mouth he created the yajush verses 
the trishtubh metre, the panchadasa stome, the vrihat-saman and 
the ukthya. From his western mouth he formed the saman verses, 
the jagati metre, the saptadasa- stome, the vairupa, and the atiratra. 

From his northern mouth he framed the ekavinsa, the atharvan, 
the aptoryaman, with the annushtubh and biraj metres.” 

The Bhagvat Purana says: 

“Once the Vedas sprang from the four-faced creator, as he was 

meditating ‘how shall I create the aggregate world as before?’ 

He formed from his eastern and other mouths the Vedas called 
rich, yajush, saman, and atharvan, together with praise, sacrifice, 
hymns, and expiration”. 

The Markandeya Purana says : 

“From the eastern mouth of Brahma, who sprang by an 
imperceptible birth from that divided egg, there suddenly issued 
first of all the Rich verses, 2. resembling China roses, brilliant in 
appearance, internally united, though separated from each other, 
and characterized by the quality of passion (rajas). 3. From his 
southern mouth came, unrestrained, the Yajush verses of the colour 
of gold, and disunited. 4. From the western mouth of the supreme 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Brahma appeared the Saman verses and the metres. 5 and 6. 

From the northern mouth of the Vedas (Brahma) was manifested 
the entire Atharvana of the colour of black bees and collyrium, 
having a character at once terrible and not terrible, capable of 
neutralising the arts of enchanter pleasant, characterized by the 
qualities both of purity and darkness, and both beautiful and the 
contrary. The verses of the Rich are distinguished by the quality of 
passion (rajas), those of the Yajush by purity ( satva ) those of the 
Saman by darkness (tamas), and those of the Atharvan by both 
darkness and purity.” 

The Harivamsa supports both theories that of Brahma and Prajapati: 

“For the emancipation of the world, Brahma, sunk in 
contemplation, issuing in a luminous form from the region of the 
moon, penetrated into the heart of Gayatri, entering between her 
eyes. From her there was then produced a quadruple being in the 
form of a Male, lustrous as Brahma, undefined, eternal, undecaying 
devoid of bodily senses or qualities, distinguished by the attribute 
of brilliancy, pure as the rays of the moon, radiant, and emboidied 
in letters. The god fashioned the Rigveda, with the Yajush from his 
eyes, the Sama-veda from the tip of his tongue, and the Atharvan 
from his head. These Vedas, as soon as they are born, find a body 
(kshetra). Hence they obtain their character of Vedas, because they 
find (vindanti) that abode. These Vedas then create the pre-existent 
eternal brahma (sacred science), a Male of celestial form, with their 
own mind-born qualities”. 

It also accepts Prajapati as the origin. It says that when the Supreme 
being was intent on creating the Universe, Hiranyagarbha, or Prajapati, 
issued from his mouth, and was desired to divide himself — a process 
which he was in great doubt how he should effect; the Harivamsa 
proceeds: 

“While he was thus reflecting, the sound W issued from him, 
and resounded through the earth, air, and sky. While the god of 
gods was again and again repeating this, the essence of mind, 
the vashatkara proceeded from his heart. Next, the sacred and 
transcendent vyahritis, ( bhuh , bhuvah, svar), formed of the great 
smiriti, in the form of sound, were produced from earth, air, and 
sky. Then appeared the goddess, the most excellent of metres, 
with twenty-four syllables ( the gayatri). Reflecting on the divine 
text (beginning with) “tax”, the Lord formed the savitri. He then 
produced all the Vedas, the Rich. Saman, Atharvan, and Yajush, 
with their prayers and rites.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


133 


APPENDIX I 133 

Here we have eleven different explanations regarding the origin of the 
Vedas — (1) as originating from the mystical sacrifice of Purusha, (2) as 
resting on Skambha (3) as cut of scrapped off from him, as being his 
hair, and his mouth, (4) as springing from Indra, (5) as produced from 
Time, (6) as produced from Agni, Vayu and Surya, (7) as springing from 
Prajapati, and the Waters, (8) as being the breath of Brahma, (9) as 
being dug by the Gods out of the mind-ocean, (10) as being the hair of 
Prajapati’s beard and (11) as being the Offspring of Vach. 

This bewildering multiplicity of answers to a simple question is a 
riddle. The writers who have come forward to furnish these answers 
are all Brahmins. They belong to the same Vaidic School of thought. 
They alone were the guardians of the ancient religious lore. Why should 
such a coherent body of scholars should have given such incoherent and 
chaotic answers to a very simple question? 

II 

Who is the author of the Vedas? The belief of the Hindus is that the 
Vedas are supernatural productions. To use the technical term the Vedas 
are Apaurusheya i.e. made by a non-human agency. 

What is the evidence in support of this dogma? Among the Ancient 
Sanskrit literature there is a class of works called Anukramanis. They 
are systematic indices to various portions of the Ancient Vedic literature. 
Every Veda has an Anukramani, sometimes more than one Anukramani. 
Seven Anukramanis for the Rig-Veda are known to be in existence, 
five by Shaunaka, one by Katyayana and one by an unknown author. 
For the Yajur-Veda there exist three Anukramanis, one for each of the 
three Shakhas, Atreyi, Charayaniyas, and Madhyandina. For the Sam- 
Veda there are two Anukramanis, one is called Arsheya-Brahmana and 
the other is known by the name Parishistas. One Anukramani to the 
Atharya-Veda is known to exist. Its title is Brihat-Sarvanukramani. 

The most perfect Anukramani according to Prof. Max-Muller is 
Katyayana’s Sarvanukramani to the Rig-Veda. Its importance lies in 
the fact that it gives (1) the first words of each hymn, (2) the number 
of verses, (3) the name and the family of the Rishi who composed it, 
(4) the names of the deities and (5) the metres of every verse. What 
emerges from a reference to the Sarvanukramani is that the Rishis are 
the Authors of the hymns which make up the Rig-Veda. The Rig-Veda 
therefore on the evidence of the Anukramani cannot but be regarded 
as a man-made work. The same must be the conclusion regarding the 
other Vedas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

That the Anukramanis are realistic is proved by many passages in 
the Rig-Veda in which the Rishis describe themselves as the composers 
of the hymns. 

Below are given a few of such passages: 

“The Kanvas make a prayer to you; hear well their invocations.” 

“Thus, O Indra, yoker of steeds, have the Gotamas made hymns for 
thee efficaciously.” 

“This hymn has efficaciously been made to you, O opulent Asvins, by 
the Manas.” 

“These magnifying prayers, (this) hymn, O Asvins, the Gritsamadas 
have made for you.” 

“Aspiring to heaven, the sage Kusikas have made a hymn with praises 
to thee, O Indra.” 

“Nodhas, descendant of Gotama, fashioned this new hymn for (thee), 
Indra, who art of old, and who yokest thy steeds.” 

“Thus, O hero, have the Gritsamadas, desiring succour, fashioned for 
thee a hymn, as men make works.” 

“The sages generated an efficacious production and a prayer of Indra.” 

“These hymns, Agni, generated for thee, celebrate thy bounty in cows 
and horses.” 

“Our father hath discovered (or invented) this great, seven-headed hymn, 
born of sacred truth; Ayasya, friend of all men, celebrating Indra, has 
generated the fourth song of praise.” 

“We, the Rahuganas, have uttered to Agni honied speech; we incessantly 
laud him with eulogies.” 

“Thus, all ye Adityas, Aditi, and ye ruling powers, has the wise son of 
Plati magnified you. The celestial race has been lauded by the immortal 
Gaya.” 

“He it is whom they call a rishi, a priest, a pious sacrificer, a chaunter 
of prayers, a reciter of hymns; he it is who knows the three bodies of the 
brilliant (Agni), — the man who is most prominent in bestowing gifts.” 

Apart from the evidence of the Anukramanis there is another sort 
of evidence which mistakes against the theory of the Vedas being 
Apaurushya. The Rishis themselves have treated the Vedas as a human 
and as a historical product. The hymns of Rig-Veda distinguish between 
ancient and modern Rishis. Here are a few of them: 

“Agni, who is worthy to be celebrated by former, as well as modern 
rishis, will bring the gods hither.” 

“The former rishis who invoked thee for succour.” 

“Hear the hymn of me this modern sage, of this modern (sage).” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


135 


APPENDIX I 135 

“Indra, as thou hast been like a joy to former worshippers who praised thee, 
like waters to the thirsty, I invoke thee again and again with this hymn.” 

“The ancient rishis, resplendent and sage, have placed in front of them 
(Brihaspati) with gladdening tongue”. 

“Neither the ancients nor later men, nor any modern man, has attained 
to (conceive) thy prowess, O Madhavan.” 

“As (Indra’s) former worshippers were (may we be) blameless, irreproachable, 
and unharmed.” 

“For now, O energetic god, men are thy worshippers, as the ancients born 
of old and the men of the middle and later ages have been thy friends. And, 

O much-invoked, think of the most recent of all”. 

“To Him (Indra) our ancient fathers, the seven Navagva sages, desiring 
food, (resorted) with their hymns.” 

“Glorified by our newest hymn, do thou bring to us wealth and food with 
progeny.” 

A close study of the Rig- Veda will show that the Rig- Veda itself makes 
a distinction between old hymns and new hymns. Some of them are given 
below: 

“Glorified by our newest hymn, do thou bring to us wealth and food with 
progeny.” 

“Agni, thou hast announced (or do thou announce) among the gods this 
our offering, our newest hymn”. 

“Through our new hymns, do thou, vigorous in action, destroyer of cities, 
sustain us with invigorating blessings.” 

“I bring to Agni, the son of strength, a new and energetic hymn, a production 
of thought uttered by the voice (vachah)”. 

“I present to the mighty protector a mental production, a new utterance 
(now) springing up”. 

“May the new prayer impel thee, the heroic, well-accounted; the loud- 
thundering to succour us.” 

“I seek life, the ancients, to stimulate thee the ancients, with a new hymn.” 

“May the new hymns made to praise you, may these prayers gratify you.” 

“Sing, O Sobhari, with a new hymn to these youthful, vigorous, and 
brilliant (gods).” 

“Indra, slayer of Vrittra, thunderer, invoked of many, we (thy) numerous 
(worshippers) bring to thee, as thy hire, hymns which never before existed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“I will address to this ancient (deity) my new praised, which he 
desires; may he listen to us.” 

“Desiring horses, cattle and wealth, we invoke thee to approach us.” 

Given this abundance of evidence to prove the human origin of the 
Vedas it is a riddle to find that the Brahmins should so strenuously 
propagate so extravagent view that the Vedas are of supernatural origin. 
What made the Brahmins propagate such a view? 

Ill 

What is the authority of the Vedas? With regard to this there prevail 
two distinct dogmas amongst the Hindus. The first is that the Vedas are 
eternal. Stopping to examine this dogma the question is what justification 
is there for such a view? If the Hindus believed that the Vedas were 
the most ancient works in the world no one can have any quarrel with 
them. But there is nothing to justify the extraordinary proposition that 
they are eternal in the sense that they had no beginning in time. Once 
it is established that the Rishis are the makers of the Vedas it needs 
no additional proof to establish that the Vedas have a beginning in 
time which must coincide with the existence of the Rishis. Given that 
the Rishis are the authors of the Vedas the dogma as to their eternal 
character is an absurdity. 

The dogma is sought to be sustained by a series of reasoning which 
is no less absurd. 

In the first place let it be noted that this dogma does not rest on the 
ground that the Vedas are created by God. That was the view of one 
school of philosophers called Naiyayiks. But strange as it may appear 
Jaimini the author of the Purva Mimansa whose views on this subject 
have become the dogmas of the Hindus was not prepared to accept this 
ground. The following quotation from the Mimansakas is worthy of note: 

“But (asks the Mimansaka) how can the Veda have been uttered by 
the incorporeal Paramesvara (God), who has no palate or other organs 
of speech, and therefore cannot be conceived to have pronounced the 
letters (of which it is composed)? This object (answers the Naiyayika) 
is not happy, because, though Parameshvara is by nature incorporeal, 
he can yet, by way of sport, assume a body, in order to show kindness 
to his devoted worshippers. Consequently the arguments in favour of 
the doctrine that the Veda had no personal author are inconducive. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


137 


APPENDIX I 137 

“I shall now (says the Mimansaka) clear up all these difficulties. 

What is meant by this Paurusheyatva (‘derivation from a personal 
author’) which it is sought to prove? Is it (1) mere procession from a 
person (purusha) like the procession of the Veda from persons such as 
ourselves, when we daily utter it? or (2) is it the arrangement — with 
a view to its manifestation — of knowledge acquired by other modes 
of proof, in the sense in which persons like ourselves compose a 
treatise? If the first meaning be intended, there will be no dispute. 

If the second sense be meant, I ask whether the Veda is proved (to 
be authoritative) in virtue (a) of its being founded on inference, or 
(i b ) of its being founded on supernatural information? The former 
alternative (a) (i.e. That the Veda derives its authority from being 
founded on inference) cannot be correct, since this theory breaks 
down, if it be applied to the sentences of the Malati Madhava or 
any other secular poem (which may contain inferences destitute 
of authority). If, on the other hand, you say (6) that the contents 
of the Veda are distinguished from those of other books having 
authority, this explanation also will fail to satisfy a philosopher. 

For the word of the Veda is (defined to be) a word which proves 
things that are not provable by any other evidence. Now if it could 
be established that this Vedic word did nothing more than prove 
things that are provable by other evidence, we should be involved 
in the same sort of contradiction as if a man were to say that his 
mother was a barren woman. And even if a man were conceded 
that (in that case) he should perceive things beyond the reach of 
the senses, from the want of any means of apprehending objects 
removed from him in place, in time, and in nature. Nor is it to 
be thought that his eyes and other senses alone would have the 
power of producing such knowledge since men can only attain to 
conceptions, corresponding with what they have perceived. This 
is what has been said by the Guru (Prabhakara) when he refutes 
(this supposition of) an omniscient author: ‘Whenever any object is 
perceived (by the organ of sight) in its most perfect exercise, such 
perception can only have reference to the vision of something very 
distant or very minute, since no organ can go beyond its own proper 
objects, as e.g. the ear can never become cognizant of form. Hence 
the authority of the Veda does not arise in virtue of any supernatural 
information (acquired by the Deity) in a corporeal shape.” 

What is then the reasoning on which this dogma of the eternity of 
the Veda is founded? The reasoning can be best appreciated if I give 
it in the very words of Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


138 


138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“In the preceding aphorism it was declared that the connection of words 
and their meanings is eternal. Desiring now to prove that this (eternity 
of connection) is dependent on the eternity of words (or sound), he begins 
by setting forth the first side of the question, viz., the doctrine of those 
who maintain that sound is not eternal.” 

“Some, i.e. the followers of the Nyaya philosophy, say that sound is a 
product, because we see that it is the result of effort, which it would not 
be if it were eternal.” 

“That it is not eternal, on account of its transitoriness, i.e. because after 
a moment it ceases to be perceived.” 

“Because, we employ in reference to it the expression ‘making’, i.e. we 
speak of ‘making’ a sound”. 

“Because it is perceived by different persons at once, and is consequently 
in immediate contact with the organs of sense of those both far and near, 
which it could not be if it were one and eternal”. 

“Because sounds have both an original and a modified form; as e.g. in 
the case of dadhi atra, which is changed into dadhya atra, the original 
letter being altered into by the rules of permutation. Now, no substance 
which undergoes a change is eternal. Because sound is augmented by the 
number of those who make it. Consequently the opinion of the Mimansaka, 
who say that sound is merely manifested, and not created, by human effort, 
is wrong, since even a thousand manifesters do not increase the object 
which they manifest, as a jar is not made larger by a thousand lamps.” 

These objections against the Mimansaka theory that sound is 
manifested, and not created, by those who utter it, are answered in 
the following Sutras: 

“But, according to both schools, viz., that which holds sound to be created, 
and that which regards it as merely manifested, the perception of it is 
alike momentary. But of these two views, the theory of manifestation is 
shown in the next aphorism to be the correct one.” The non-perception at 
any particular time, of sound, which, in reality, perpetually exists, arises 
from the fact that the utterer of sound has not come into contact with 
his object, i.e. sound. Sound is eternal, because we recognise the letter 
k, for instance, to be the same sound which we have always heard, and 
because it is the simplest method of accounting for the phenomenon to 
suppose that it is the same. The still atmosphere which interferes with 
the perception of sound, is removed by the conjunctions and disjunctions of 
air issuing from a speaker’s mouth, and thus sound (which always exists 
though unperceived) becomes perceptible. This is the reply to the objection 
of its ‘transitoriness’.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


139 


APPENDIX I 139 

“The word ‘making’ sounds, merely means implying or uttering them”. 

“One sound is simultaneously heard by different persons, just as one 
Sun is seen by them at one and the same time. Sound, like the Sun, is 
a vast, and not a minute object, and thus may be perceptible by different 
persons, though remote from one another.” 

“The letter y, which is substituted for i in the instance referred to under 
Sutra 10, is not a modification of i, but a distinct letter. Consequently 
sound is not modified.” 

“It is an increase of ‘noise’, not of sound, that is occasioned by a 
multitude of speakers. The word ‘noise’ refers to the ‘conjunctions’ and 
‘disjunctions’ of the air which enter simultaneously into the hearer’s ear 
from different quarters; and it is of these that an increase takes place”. 

“Sound must be eternal, because its utterance is fitted to convey a 
meaning to other persons. If it were not eternal (or abiding), it would 
not continue till the hearer had learned its sense, and thus he would not 
learn the sense, because the cause had ceased to exist.” 

“Sound is eternal, because it is in every case correctly and uniformly 
recognized by many persons simultaneously; and it is inconceivable that 
they should all at once fall into a mistake”. 

“When the word go (cow) has been repeated ten times, the hearers will 
say that the word Go has been ten times pronounced, not that ten words 
having the sound of Go have been uttered; and this fact also is adduced 
as a proof of the eternity of sound in Sutra 20”. 

“Because each sound is not numerically different from itself repeated.” 

“Sound is eternal, because we have no ground for anticipating its 
destruction.” 

“But it may be urged that sound is a modification of air, since it arises 
from its conjunctions, and because the Siksha (or Vedanga treating of 
pronunciation) says that ‘air arrives at the condition of sound’ and as it 
is thus produced from air, it cannot be eternal”. A reply to this difficulty 
is given in Sutra 22 — 

“Sound is not a modification of air, because, if it were, the organ of 
hearing would have no appropriate object which it could perceive. No 
modification of air (held by the Naiyayikas to be tangible) could be perceived 
by the organ of hearing, which deals only with intangible sound”. 

“And the eternity of sound is established by the argument 
discoverable in the vedic text, ‘with an eternal voice, O Virupa’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


140 


140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now, though this sentence had another object in view, it, nevertheless, 
declares the eternity of language, and hence sound is eternal”. 

Reduced to simple syllogism the sound is eternal, the words of the 
Vedas are sound, therefore words of the Vedas are eternal. Absurdity 
in reasoning cannot go further. The riddle is why did the Brahmins 
propound this doctrine of the eternity of the Vedas? Why did the 
Brahmins adopt such an absurd reasoning in support of their doctrine? 
Why did the Brahmins refuse to accept the view that the Vedas were 
the word of God? 

The second dogma relating to the authority of the Vedas is that 
they are not only sacred but they are also infallible. 

It is difficult to understand why the Brahmins endeavoured to invest 
the Vedas with infallibility? 

There is no law in the Vedas in the strict sense of the term law. 

The Vedas do not preach Dharma in the sense of morality. The 
three following extracts from the Vedas can hardly be said to be 
consonant with morality. 

“(Yami speaks). I invite my friend to friendship, having come o’er the 
vast and desert ocean; may Vedhas, after reflecting, place in the earth 
the offspring (of thee) the father, endowed with excellent qualities”. 

“(Yama speaks). Thy friend desires not this friendship, for although of 
one origin, she is of a different form; the hero sons of the great Asura 
(are) the upholders of heaven, enjoying vast renown.” 

“(Yami speaks). The immortals take pleasure in (a union) like this 
which is forbidden to every mortal; let thy mind then concur with mine, 
and as the progenitor (of all) was the husband (of his daughter), do thou 
enjoy my person.” 

“(Yama speaks). We have not done what was done formerly; for how 
can we who speak truth, utter now that which is untrue? Gandharva 
(the Sun) was in the watery (firmament), and the water was his bride. 
She is our common parent, hence our near affinity.” 

“(Yami speaks). The divine omniform generator Twashtri, the progenitor, 
made us two, husband and wife, even in the womb; none frustrate his 
undertaking; earth and heaven are conscious of this our (union).” 

“(Yama speaks). Who knows anything of this (his) first day (of 
existence)? Who has beheld it? Who has here revealed it? The dwelling 
of Mitra and of Varuna is vast. What saysest thou, who punishest men 
with hell?” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


141 


APPENDIX I 141 

“(Yami speaks). The desire of Yama hath approached me Yami, to lie 
with him in the same bed; I will abandon my person as a wife to her 
husband; let us exert ourselves in union like the two wheels of a waggon.” 

“(Yama speaks). The spies of the Gods, which wander upon earth, 
never stop, never close their eyes. Associate quickly, destructress, with 
some other than with me, and exert yourselves in union, like the two 
wheels of a waggon.” 

“(Yami speaks). To him (Yama) let every worshipper sacrifice both day 
and night, on him let the eye of the Sun repeatedly rise; (for him may) 
the kindred pair (day and night unite) with heaven and earth. Yami will 
adhere to the non-affinity of Yama”. 

“(Yama speaks). The subsequent ages will come, when sisters will choose 
one who is not a brother (as a husband); therefore, auspicious one, choose 
another husband that me, and make thine arm a pillow for thy mate.” 

“(Yami speaks). Is he a brother whose sister has no lord? Is she a sister 
(whose brother) misfortune approaches? Overcome by desire, I strongly 
urge this one request; unite thy person with mine.” 

“(Yama speaks). I will not unite my person with thine; they call him 
who approaches a sister, a sinner. Enjoy pleasure with some other than 
me; thy brother, auspicious one, has no such desire.” 

“(Yami speaks). Alas, Yama, thou art feeble; we understand not thy 
mind or thy heart. Some other female embraces thee as a girth a horse, 
or as a creeper a tree.” 

“(Yama speaks). Do thou, Yami, embrace another; and let another 
embrace thee as a creeper a tree; seek his affection, let him seek thine; 
and make a happy union”. 

“May Agni, the destroyer of the Rakshasas consenting to our prayer, 
drive hence (the evil spirit) who (in the form of) sickness assails thine 
embryo, who, as the disease durnaman, assails thy womb.” 

“May Agni, concurring in our prayer, destroy the cannibal who is 
sickness, assails thine embryo, who as the disease durnaman, assails 
thy womb.” 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit) who destroys the 
impregnating energy, the germ as it settles, the moving embryo, who 
seeks to destroy (the babe) when born.” 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit) who separate thy 
thighs, who lies between husband and wife, who, entering thy womb, 
devours (the seed).” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit), who in the form of 
brother, husband, or paramour, approaches thee, and seeks to destroy 
thy offspring.” 

“May we exterminate from hence (the evil spirit) who, having beguiled 
thee by sleep or darkness, approaches thee, and seeks to destroy thy 
offspring.” 

The Vedas contain two things. In the first place they contain 
the hopes and wishes of the Aryans as expressed by the Rishis. As 
observed by Mr. Muir: 

“The whole character of these compositions, and the circumstances 
under which, from internal evidence, they appear to have arisen, are 
in harmony with the supposition that they were nothing more than the 
natural expression of the personal hopes and feelings of those ancient 
bards by whom they were first recited. In these songs the Aryan sages 
celebrated the praises of their ancestral gods (while at the same time 
they sought to conciliate their goodwill by a variety of oblations supposed 
to be acceptable to them), and besought of them all the blessings which 
men in general desire — health, wealth, long life, cattle, offspring, victory 
over their enemies, forgiveness of sin, and in some cases also celestial 
felicity.” 

This is also the view of Yaska the author of Nirukta who says: 

“(Of the four kinds of verses specified in the preceding section) (a) 
those which address a god as absent, ( b ) those which address him as 
present, and (c) those which address the worshippers as present and the 
god as absent, are the most numerous, while those (d) which refer to the 
speaker himself are rare. It happens also that a god is praised without 
any blessing being invoked, as in the hymn (R. V. i. 32). ‘I declare the 
heroic deeds of Indra’, etc. Again blessings are invoked without any 
praise being offered, as in the words, May I see well with my eyes, be 
resplendent in my face, and hear well with my ears’. This frequently 
occurs in the Adhvaryava (Yajur), and in the sacrificial formula. Then 
again we find oaths and curses as in the words (R. V. vii. 104, 15), May 
I die to-day, if I am a Yatudhana,’ etc. Further, we observe the desire 
to describe some particular state of things, as in the verse (R. V. x. 129, 

2), ‘Death was not then, nor immortality,’ etc. Then there is lamentation, 
arising out of a certain state of things, as in the verse (R. V. x. 95, 14), 
‘The beautiful god will disappear and never return,’ etc. Again, we have 
blame and praise, as in the words (R. V. x. 117, 6), ‘The man who eats 
alone, sins alone, etc. So, too, in the hymn to dice (R. V. x. 34, 13) there 
is a censure upon dice, and a commendation of agriculture. Thus the 
objects for which the hymns were seen by the rishis were very various.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


143 


APPENDIX I 143 

SUKTA XII (CLXIII) 

The deity is the cure of Phthisis; the Rishi is Vivrihan, the son of 
Kasyapa; the metre is Anushtubh. 

1. I banish disease from thine eyes, from thy head, from thy nose, 
from thy ears, from thy chin, from thy brain, from thy tongue. 

2. I banish disease from thy neck, from thy sinews, from thy bones, 
from thy joints, from thy upper arms, from thy shoulders, and 
from thy fore-arms. 

3. I banish disease from thine entrails, from thy anus, from thine 
abdomen, and from thy heart, from thy kidneys, from thy liver, 
from thy (other viscera). 

4. I banish disease from thy thighs, from thy knees, from thy heels, 
from thy toes, from thy loins, from thy buttocks, from thy private 
parts. 

5. I banish disease from thy urethra, from thy bladder, from thy 
hair, from thy nails, from thy whole person. 

6. I banish disease from each limb, from each hair, from each joint 
where it is generated, from thy whole person. 

As Prof. Wilson observes there is in the Rig- Veda (which is the stock 
Veda) scarcely any indication of doctrinal or philosophical speculation, 
no allusion to the later notions of the several schools, nor is there any 
hint of metempsychosis, or of the doctrine intimately allied to it, of the 
repeated renovation of the world. The Vedas may be useful as a source 
of information regarding the social life of the Aryans. As a picture of 
primitive life it is full of curiosity but there is nothing elevating. There 
are more vices and a few virtues. 

Given the nature and substance of the contents of the Vedas it is 
a riddle why the Brahmins claimed infallibility for such superstitious 
writings as the Vedas. 

There would have been some justification for this doctrine of infallibility 
if the Rishis who made the hymns had claimed it for themselves. But 
it is quite clear that the Rishis have made no such pretentions. On the 
contrary they have occasionally confessed their ignorance of matters in 
which they had interest and curiosity. Compare the following utterances 
of the Rishis as given in the Rig- Veda: 

“Ignorant, not knowing in my mind, I enquire after these hidden abodes 
of the gods; the sages have stretched out seven threads for a hoof over the 
yearling calf (or over the sun, the abode of all things). 

6. Not comprehending, I ask those sages who comprehend this matter; 
unknowing (I ask) that I may know; what is the one thing, in the form of 
the uncreated one, who has upheld these six worlds? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


37. I do not recognize if I am like this; I go on perplexed and bound 
in mind. When the first born sons of sacrifice (or truth) come to me, 
then I enjoy a share of that word.” 

“What was the forest, what the tree, out of which they fashioned heaven 
and earth, which continue to exist undecaying, whilst days, and many 
dawns have passed away? 

“Which of these two (Heaven and Earth) is the first? Which is the last? 
How were they produced? Who, o sages, knows?” 

“How many fires are there? How many suns ? how many dawns ? How 
many waters ? I do not, fathers, say this to you in jest; I really ask you, 
sages, in order that I may know”. 5. “There ray (or cord), obliquely extended, 
was it below, or was it above? There were generative sources, and there 
were great powers, svadha (a self-supporting principle) below, and effort 
above. 6. Who knows, who hath here declared, whence this creation was 
produced, whence (it came) ? The gods were subsequent to the creation of 
this universe; who then knows whence it sprang. 7. When this creation 
sprang, whether any one formed it or not, he who, in the highest heavens, 
is the overseer of this universe, — he indeed knows or he does not know.” 


There are other points with regard to this dogma of infallibility which 
are noteworthy. 


IV 


The first point is, is this dogma original or is this a new contention 
raised at sometime later in the history of India. The general view is 
that it is the original doctrine. A reference to the Dharma Sutras which 
are the earliest law books which deal with this subject go to show that 
this is not a correct view. The Gautama Dharma Sutra lays down the 
following rule on the question of the infallibility of the vedas. 

“The Veda is the source of the sacred law”. 1.1. 


“And the tradition and practice of those who know the (Veda)” — 1.2. 

“If (authorities) of equal force are conflicting (either may be followed 
at) pleasure”. 1.4. 

The Vashishta Dharma Sutra propounds the following view: 

“The Sacred law has been settled by the revealed texts and by the 
tradition of the sages” 1.4. “On the failure of (rules given in) these (two 
sources) the practice of Shistas has authority.” 1.5. 

“He whose heart is free from desire (is called) a shista”. 1.6. The views 
of Baudhayana are given below: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


145 


APPENDIX I 145 

Prasna 1, Adhyaya 1, Kandika 1. 

1. The sacred law is taught in each Veda. 

2. We will explain (it) in accordance with that. 

3. (The sacred law), taught in the Tradition (Smriti, stands) second. 

4. The practice of the Sishtas (stands) third. 

5. Sishtas, forsooth, (are those) who are free from envy, free from 
pride, contented with a store of grain sufficient for ten days, free 
from covetousness, and free from hypocrisy, arrogance, greed, 
perplexity, and anger. 

6. ‘(Those are called) Sishtas who, in accordance with the sacred law, 
have studied the Veda together with its appendages, know how 
to draw references from that, (and) are above to adduce proofs 
perceptible by the senses from the revealed texts’. 

7. On failure of them, an assembly consisting at least of ten members 
(shall decide disputed points of law). 

8. Now they quote also (the following verses): ‘Four men, who each 
know one of the four Vedas, a Mimansaka, one who knows the 
Angas, one who recites (the works on) the sacred law, and three 
brahamanas belonging to (three different) order, (constitute) an 
assembly consisting, at least of ten members’. 

9. ‘There may be five, or there may be three, or there may be one 
blameless man, who decides (questions regarding) the sacred law. 
But a, thousand fools (can) not (do it).’ 

10. ‘As an elephant made of wood, as an antelope made of leather, 
such an unlearned Brahmana; those three having nothing but the 
name (of their kind)’. 

The view taken by the Apastamba Dharma Sutra is clear from the 
following extract from that Sutra: 

“Now, therefore, we will declare the acts productive of merit which form 
part of the customs of daily life”. 1.1. 

“The authority (for these duties) is the agreement (samaya) of these who 
know the law”. 1.2. 

“And (the authorities for the latter are) the Vedas alone”. 1.3. 

A review of the Dharma Sutras show how this dogma of the infallibility 
of the Veda is a historical product. It shows that the (1) Veda, (2) Tradition 
(Smriti), (3) Practice of Sishta and (4) Agreement in an Assembly were the four 
different authorities about which the controversy as to which of these should 
be regarded as infallible. It also shows that there was a time when the Vedas 
were not the sole infallible authorities. That was the time represented by the 
Dharma Sutras of Vasistha and Baudhayana. It is only in the time of Gautama 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that the Vedas came to be regarded as the only authority. There was 
a time when an agreed decision of the Assembly was admitted as one 
source of authority. That is the period represented by Baudhayana. 
Lastly the review shows that there was a time when the Veda was not 
at all regarded as a book of authority and when the only recognized 
source of authority was an agreement arrived at in an assembly of the 
learned. That is the period when Apastamba 1 wrote his Dharma Sutras 
i.e. somewhere between 600 and 200 B.C. 2 

It is thus obvious that there was a deliberate attempt to invest the 
Vedas with an infallible authority which they did not at one time possess 
and the question is what were the circumstances and the motives which 
led the Brahmins to propagate the sole and final authority of the Vedas. 

The second point connected with this subject of infallibility of the 
Vedas relates to the discrimination made by the Brahmins in limiting 
the virtue of infallibility to certain Vedic writings only and not extending 
it to the whole range of them. To understand this point it is necessary 
to know what is meant by the phrase Vedic literature. 

The phrase Vedic literature can be used in two senses. In its limited 
sense it includes (1) The Samhita, (2) The Brahmanas, (3) Aranyakas, 
(4) Upanishads and (5) Sutras. When used in an extended sense it 
includes two other heads (6) Itihasas and (7) Puranas. 

The first thing to note is that there was a time when all these 
writings were classed in the same category, and no distinction was 
made between them on the basis of revealed and profane or on the basis 
of supernatural and human or on the basis of authoritative and non- 
authoritative. This is clear from the view expressed in the Satapatha 
Brahmana which says: 

“This Male, Prajapati, desired, ‘May I multiply, may I be propagated.’ 

He toiled in devotion; he practised austere-fervour. Having done so he 
first of all created sacred knowledge the triple Vedic science. This became 
a basis for him. Wherefore men say, sacred knowledge is the basis of 
this universe.’ Hence after studying the veda a man has a standing 
ground; for sacred knowledge is his foundation. Resting on this basis he 
(Prajapati) practised austere-fervour. (9) He created the waters from Vach 
(speech) as their world. Vach was his: She was created. She pervaded all 
this whatever exists. As she pervaded (apnot) waters were called “apah”. 

As she covered (avrinot) all, water was called ‘var’. (10) He desired, 

1 The reference to the Vedas in the Apastamba Dharma Sutras must not be misunderstood. 
Apastamba does not invest the Vedas with any authority at all. Knowledge of Vedas is 
made by him as an electoral qualification for membership of the Assembly whose agreed 
decision is the law and the only law. 

2 This is the period assigned to the Sutras by Prof. Max-Muller. The Apastamba being 
the oldest. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


147 


APPENDIX I 147 

May I be propagated from these waters. Along with this triple Vedic science 
he entered the waters. Thence sprang an egg. He gave it an impulse; and 
said, “Let there be, let there be, let there be again. Thence was first created 
sacred knowledge, the triple Vedic science. Wherefore men, say, ‘Sacred 
knowledge is the first-born thing in this universe. Moreover, it was sacred 
knowledge which was created from that Male in front, wherefore it was 
created as his mouth. Hence they say of a man learned in the Veda,’ ‘He 
is like Agni; for sacred knowledge is Agni’s Mouth’.” 

“As from a fire made of moist wood various modifications of smoke 
proceed, so is the breathing of this great being. The Rig-Veda, the Yajur- 
veda, the Sama-veda, the Atharvan-girases, the Itihasas, Puranas, science, 
the Upanishads, verses (slokas), aphorims, comments of different kinds — all 
these are his breathings.” 

But when the Brahmans sought to establish their dogma of infallibility 
they made a distinction and divided the Vedic writings in two classes 
(1) Shruti and (2) Non-Shruti. In the first division they placed only two 
of them (1) Sanhitas and (2) the Brahmanas and invested them with 
infallibility. The rest they declared as non-Shruti therefore of no authority. 
When this distinction, was first made it is not possible to say. One can 
well understand why the last two categories were excluded from the 
Shruti part division of the Vedic literature. They were too elementary 
and too undeveloped and in all probability included in the Brahmanas. 

One can well understand why the Aranyakas are not specifically 
mentioned as a part of the Shruti. They are part of the Shruti and must 
be for the simple reason that they are a part of the Brahmanas. The 
position of the Upanishads is not clear. But if they are not included in 
the Shruti one can well understand why they were excluded. But the case 
of the Sutras stands on a different footing. They are definitely excluded 
from the category of Shruti and for reasons, which it is not possible to 
comprehend. If there were good reasons for including the Brahmanas 
in the category of Shruti the same reasons could not fail to justify the 
inclusion of the Sutras. As Prof. Max Muller observes: 

“We can understand how a nation might be led to ascribe a 
superhuman origin to their ancient national poetry, particularly if 
that poetry consisted chiefly of prayers and hymns addressed to 
their gods. But it is different with the prose compositions of the 
Brahamanas. The reason why the Brahmanas, which are evidently so 
much more modern than the Mantras, were allowed to participate in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


148 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the name of Sruti, could only have been because it was from these 
theological compositions, and not from the simple old poetry of the 
hymns, that a supposed divine authority could be derived for the 
greater ‘number of the ambitious claims of the Brahmans. But, 
although we need not ascribe any weight to the arguments by 
which the Brahmans endeavoured to establish the contemporaneous 
origin of the Mantras and Brahmanas there seems to be no reason 
why we should reject as equally worthless the general opinion 
with regard to the more ancient date of both the Brahmanas and 
Mantras, if contrasted with the Sutras and the profane literature 
of India. It may easily happen, where there is a cannon of sacred 
books, that later compositions become incorporated together with 
more ancient works, as was the case with the Brahmanas. But we 
can hardly imagine that old and genuine parts should ever have 
been excluded from a body of sacred writings, and a more modern 
date ascribed to them, unless it be in the interest of a party to 
deny the authority of certain doctrines contained in these rejected 
documents. There is nothing in the later literature of the Sutras to 
warrant a supposition of this kind. We can find no reason why the 
Sutras should not have been ranked as Sruti, except the lateness 
of their date, if compared with the Brahmanas, and still more with 
the Mantras. Whether the Brahmanas themselves were aware that 
ages must have elapsed between the period during which most 
of the poems of their rishis were composed, and the times which 
gave rise to the Brahmanas, is a question which we need hardly 
hesitate to answer in the affirmative. But the recklessness with 
which Indian theologians claim for these Brahmanas the same title 
and the same age as for the Mantras, shows that the reasons must 
have been peculiarly strong which deterred them from claiming the 
same divine authority for the Sutras.” 

The third point relates to the changes that took place in the scope 
of the term Shruti and in their infallibility. Manu excludes 1 the 
“Brahamanas” from the category of Shruti as may be seen from the 
following extract from his Smriti: 

“By Sruti is meant the Veda, and by Smriti the institutes of law; 
the contents of these are not to be questioned by reason, since from 
them (a knowledge of) duty has shown forth. The Brahman who, 
relying on rationalistic treatises, shall contemn these two primary 

1 some may dispute this on the ground that the word Veda includes ‘Brahmana’ also. 
This of course is a fact. But it seems to me that Manu uses the term Shruti in a restricted 
sense so as to exclude the Brahmanas. This is supported by the fact that there is in the 
Manu Smriti no reference to the Brahmanas except in one place (iv. 100) where he says 
that only the Mantra portion need be studied. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

APPENDIX I 

sources of knowledge must be excommunicated by the virtuous as a 

sceptic and reviler of the Vedas 13. To those who are seeking a 

knowledge of duty, the Sruti is the supreme authority.” 

The fourth point relates to the claim put forth in the Puranas for 
precedence over the Vedas in the order of creation. 

The Vayu Purana says 1 : 

“First of all the Shastras, the Purana was uttered by Brahma. 
Subsequently the vedas issued from his mouth”. 

The Matsya Purana not only claims priority of creation for the Puranas 
as against the Vedas, but also the qualities of eternity and identity with 
sound, which was once predicated of the Vedas alone. It says 2 : 

“Pitamaha (Brahma), first of all the immortals, took shape; then 
the Vedas with their Angas and Upangas (appendages and minor 
appendages), and the various modes of their textual arrangement, 
were manifested. (3) The Purana, eternal, formed of sound, pure, 
extending to the length of a hundred crores of verses, was the first 
of the Sastras which Brahma uttered; and afterwards the Vedas, 
issued from his mouth; and also the Mimansa and the Nyaya with its 
eightfold system of proofs. (5) From him (Brahma), who was devoted 
to the study of the Vedas, and desirous of offspring, sprang mind- 
born sons, so called because they were at first created by his mind.” 

The Bhagwat Purana claims equality of authority with the Vedas. It 
says: 

“(Bramharatra) declared the Purana called the Bhagavata, which 
stands on an equality with the Veda.” 

The Brahma-Vaivartta Purana has the audacity to claim superiority 
over the Vedas. It says: 

“That about which venerable sage, you have inquired, and which 
you desire, is all known to me, the essence of the Puranas, the pre- 
eminent Brahma-Vaivarta, which refutes the errors of the Puranas 
and Upapuranas, and the Vedas.” 

This survey discloses a number of riddles in regard to the Vedas. 
In addition to the three riddles namely why did the Brahmins insist 
that the Vedas were eternally pre-existing, that they were non-man, 
non-God made, that they were infallible. There are other riddles 
regarding the Vedas which are equally puzzling — The Vedas at 
one time did not have any precedence or infallibility. Why did the 


149 

149 


1 Quoted in Muir Sanskrit Texts Vol. Ill p. 27. 

2 Ibid,., p. 28. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


150 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Brahmins feel it necessary to give the Vedas this infallibility, why did 
the Brahmins exclude the Sutras from the term Sruti and why did the 
Brahmins give up the infallibility of the Vedas and sought to give infallibility 
to the Puranas? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


151 


APPENDIX II 

THE RIDDLE OF THE VEDANTA 


Of the six schools of philosophy which were expounded by the ancient 
philosophers of India the most famous is of course the Vedanta philosophy. 
Not only has it the name but it has also a hold on the Hindus which 
none of its rivals has ever had. Every follower of the Vedas is proud of 
the Vedanta. He not only owns it but regards it as the most valuable 
contribution which India has made to the philosophic thought of the 
world. He regards Vedanta philosophy as embodying the end or aim 
of the teachings of the Vedas, a sort of culmination or flowering of 
the teachings of the Veda. He never suspects that there was any time 
in the history of India when the Vedanta Philosophy was regarded as 
repugnant and hostile to the Vedas. He would never believe that there 
was a time when the word Vedanta had a totally different meaning than 
the meaning which is now current and according to which the word 
Vedanta far from being used in the sense of culmination of Vedic thought 
was used to designate a body of thought contained in a body which was 
outside the range of the cannonical part of the Vedic literature. Yet that 
was in fact the case. 

It is true that this repugnance between the Vedas and the Vedanta 
does not become manifest from the word Upanishad which is the generic 
name of the literature on which the Vedanta philosophy came to be built 
up and about the etymology of which there is a considerable difference 
of opinion. 

Most European scholars are agreed in deriving Upanishad from the 
root sad, to sit down, preceded by the two prepositions ni, down, and 
upa, near, so that it would express the idea of session, or assembly 
of public sitting down near a person. As Prof. Max Muller points out 
there are two objections to the acceptance of this derivation. Firstly 
such a word, it would seem, would have been applicable to any other 

This is a 21-page typed first copy entitled ‘The Riddle of the Vedanta’. 
The chapter seems complete and does not contain any modifications hy 
the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

portion of the Veda as well as to the chapters called Upanishad, and it 
has never been explained how its meaning came thus to be restricted. 
Secondly the word Upanishad, in the sense of session or assembly has 
never been met with. Whenever the word occurs, it has the meaning of 
doctrine, secret doctrine, or is simply used as the title of the philosophic 
treatises which contains the secret doctrine. There is a third explanation 
noted by Prof. Max Muller proposed by Sankara in his commentary on 
the Taittiriya-Upanishad II, 9, is that the highest bliss is contained in 
the Upanishad (pararn sreyo’syam nishannam). Regarding this Prof. 
Max Muller says: 

“The Aranyakas abound in such etymologies, which probably were never 
intended as real as plays on words, helping to account somehow for their 
meaning.” 

Prof. Max Muller however favours a derivation of the word Upanishad 
from the root sad to destroy and meant knowledge which destroys 
ignorance, the cause of Samsara, by revealing the knowledge of Brahma 
as a means of salvation. Prof. Max Muller points out that this is the 
meaning which the native scholars have unanimously given to the word 
Upanishad. 

If it be granted that this is the true derivation of the word Upanishad 
it would be one piece of evidence in support of the thesis that there was 
a time in the history of India when Vedanta was regarded as a system 
of thought which was repugnant to the Vedas. But it is not necessary to 
depend upon the help of etymology to support the thesis. There are other 
evidences better and more direct. In the first place the word Vedanta 
was never used to denote “the last books of the Vedas” which they are. 
As observed by Prof. Max Muller 1 : 

“Vedanta as a technical term, did not mean originally the last portions 
of the Veda, or chapters placed, as it were, at the end of a volume of Vedic 
literature, but the end, i.e. the object, the highest purpose of the Veda. There 
are, of course, passages, like the one in the Taittirya-Aranyaka (ed. Rajendra 
Mitra p. 820), which have been misunderstood both by native and European 
scholars, and where Vedanta means simply the end of the Veda : yo vedadu 
svarah prokto vedante ka pratishthitah, ‘the Om which is pronounced at 
the beginning of the Veda, and has its place also at the end of the Veda”. 
Here Vedanta stands simply in opposition to Vadadu, it is impossible to 
translate it, as Sayana does, by Vedanta or Upanishad. Vedanta, in the 
sense of philosophy, occurs in the Taittiriya-Aranyaka (p. 817), in a verse of 
the Narayania-Upanishad, repeated in the Mundak-Upanishad III, 2, 6 and 


The Upanishads (S.B.E.) Vol. I, Introduction p. Ixxxvi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


153 


APPENDIX II 153 

elsewhere Vedantavignansuniskitarhah, ‘those who have well understood 
the object of the knowledge arising from the Vedanta,’ not ‘from the last 
books of the Veda’, and Svetasvatara-up. VI, 22, vedante paramam guhyam, 
‘the highest mystery in the Vedanta’. Afterwards it is used in the plural 
also, e.g. Kshurikopanishad, 10 (bibl. Ind. p. 210) pundariketi vedantesfau 
nigadyate, ‘it is called pundarika in the Vedantas’, i.e. in the Khandogya 
and other Upanishads, as the commentator says, but not in the last books 
of each Veda.” 

More direct evidence on the point is that which is contained in the 
Gautama Dharma Sutras. In Chapter XIX verse 12 speaks of purification 
and says 1 : 

“The purificatory (texts are), the Upanishads, the Vedantas, the Samhita 
text of all the Vedas” and so on. 

From this it is clear that at the date of Gautama the Upanishads 
were distinguished from Vedantas and were not acknowledged as a part 
of the Vedic literature. Hardatta in his commentaries says “those parts 
of the Aranyakas which are not (Upanishads) are called Vedantas”. This 
is unimpeachable proof that the Upanishads did not come within the 
range of the Vedic literature and were outside the cannon. 

This view is also supported by the use of the Veda in the Bhagwat 
Gita. The word Veda is used in the Bhagwat Gita at several places. 
And according to Mr. Bhat 2 the word is used in a sense which shows 
that the author did not include the Upanishads in the term. 

That the Upanishads were excluded from the cannonical literature of 
the Vedas is provided by the opposition of the Upanishads to the views 
preached in the Vedas that the religious observances and sacrifices were 
the only means of salvation. A few citation from some of the Upanishads 
will suffice to show their opposition to the Vedas. 

The Mundaka Upanishad says: 

“Brahma was produced the first among the gods, maker of the universe, 
the preserver of the world. He revealed to his eldest son Atharva, the 
science of Brahma, the basis of all knowledge. (2) Atharvan of old 
declared to Angis this science, which Brahma had unfolded to him; and 
Angis, in turn, explained it to Satyavaha, descendent of Bharadvaja, who 
delivered this traditional lore, in succession, to Angiras. (3) Mahasala 
Saunaka, approaching Angiras with the proper formalities, inquired, 
‘What is that, O venerable sage, through the knowledge of which all this 
(universe) becomes known?’ (4) (Angiras) answered, ‘Two sciences are to 
be known — this is what the sages versed in sacred knowledge declared — 
the superior and the inferior. (5) The inferior (consists of) the Rig-veda, 


Sacred Books of the East Vol. II. p. 275. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Yajur-veda, the Sama-veda, the Atharva-veda, accentuation, ritual, 
grammar, commentary, prosody, and astronomy. The superior science 
is that by which the imperishable is apprehended.” 

The Chhandoyaga Upanishad says: 

“(1) Narada approached Sanatkumara, saying, ‘Instruct me, 
venerable sage’. He received for answer, ‘Approach me with (tell me) 
that which thou knowest; and I will declare to thee whatever more 
is to be learnt.’ (2) Narada replied, ‘I am instructed, venerable sage, 
in the Rig-veda, the Sama-Veda, the Yajur-veda, the Atharva-veda 
(which is) the fourth, the Itihasas and Puranas (which are) the fifth 
Veda of the Vedas, the rites of the pitris, arithmetic, the knowledge of 
portents, and of great periods, the art of reasoning, ethics, the science 
of the gods, the knowledge of scripture, demonology, the science of 
war, the knowledge of the stars, the science of serpents and deities; 
this is what I have studied. (3) I, venerable man, know only the 
hymns (mantras), while I am ignorant of soul. But I have heard from 
reverend sages like thyself that ‘the man who is acquainted with soul 
overpasses grief’. Now, I venerable man, am afflicted; but do thou 
transport me over my grief. Sanatkumara answered, ‘That which thou 
hast studied is nothing but name. (4) The Rig-veda is name; and so 
are the Yajur-veda, the Sama-veda, the Atharvana, which is the fourth 
and the Itihasas and Puranas, the fifth Veda of the Vedas, etc. (all 
the other branches of knowledge are here enumerated just as above), 
all these are but names; worship name. (5) He who worships name 
(with the persuasion that it is) Brahma, ranges as it were at will 
over all which that name comprehends; — such is the prerogative of 
him who worships name (with the persuation that it is) Brahma. ‘Is 
there anything venerable man’ asked Narada, ‘Which is more than 
name?’, ‘There is,’ replied (Sanatkumara), ‘something which is more 
than name’. ‘Tell it to me’, rejoined Narada.” 

The Brahadarnyaka Upanishad says: 

“In that (condition of profound slumber) a father is no father, a 
mother is no mother, the words are no words, the gods are no gods, 
and the Vedas are no Vedas, sacrifices are no sacrifices. In that 
condition a thief is no thief, a murderer of embryos is no murderer 
of embryos, a Paulakasa no Paulakasa, a Chandala no Chandala, a 
Sramana no Sramana, a devotee no devotee; the saint has then no 
relation, either of advantage or disadvantage, to merit or to sin; for 
he then crosses over all griefs of the heart.” 

This is what the Katha Upanishad has to say: 

“This soul is not to be attained by instruction, nor by 
understanding, nor by much scripture. He is attainable by him 


z:\ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

APPENDIX II 

whom he chooses. The soul chooses that man’s body as his own abode”. 

“Although this soul is difficult to know, still it may easily be known 
by the use of proper means. This is what (the author) proceeds to 
say. This soul is not to be attained, known by instruction, by the 
acknowledgement of many Vedas; nor by understanding, by the power 
of recollecting the contents of books; nor by much scripture alone. By 
what, then, is it to be attained? This he declares”. 

How great was the repugnance to the Upanishads and the philosophy 
contained in them will be realized if one takes note of the origin of the 
words Anuloma and Pratiloma which are usually applied to the marriage 
tie among the Hindus. Speaking of their origin Mr. Kane points out that 1 : 

“These two words Anuloma and Pratiloma (as applied to marriage 
or progeny) hardly ever occur in the Vedic literature. In the Br. Up. 

(II. 1.15) and Kausitaki Br. Up. IV. 18 the word ‘Pratiloma’ is applied 
to the procedure adopted by a Brahmana of going to a Kshatriya for 
knowledge about “Brahman”. 

Anuloma means according to the heir that is in the natural order of 
things. Pratiloma means against the heir that is contrary to the natural 
order. Reading the observations of Mr. Kane in the light of the definition 
of the word Pratiloma it is obvious that the Upanishads far from being 
acknowledged as part of the Vedic literature were if not despised, held 
in low esteem by the Vedic Brahmins. It is a riddle to find that the 
Brahmins who were opponents of the Vedanta should become subsequently 
the supporters and upholders of the Vedanta. 

II 

This is one riddle of the Vedanta. There is another. The Vedantists 
were not the only opponents of the Vedas and its doctrine of ritualism 
as a means of salvations. Madhava Acharya the author of the Sarva 
Darshana Sangraha mentions two other opponents of the Vaidikas, 
Charvaka and Brahaspati. Their attack on the Vaidikas was quite 
formidable in its logic and its 

The opposition of Charvaka can be seen from the following quotation 
which reproduces his line of argument against the Vaidikas 2 : 

“If you object that, if there be no such thing as happiness in a 
future world, then how should men of experienced wisdom engage 


155 

155 


1 History of Dharmasastra Vol. II. Part I p. 52. 

2 Sarva Darshan Sangraha (Translated by Cowell) p. 64. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the agnihotra and other sacrifices, which can only be performed with 
great expenditure of money and bodily fatigue. Your objection cannot be 
accepted as any proof to the contrary, since the agnihotra, &c, are only 
useful as means of livelihood, for the Veda is tainted by three faults of 
un-truth, self-contradiction, and tautology; then again the impostors who 
call themselves Vedic pundits are mutually destructive as the authority 
of the Jnan-kanda is overthrown by those who maintain authority of the 
Jnan-kanda reject that of the Karmakanda; and lastly, the three Vedas 
themselves are only the incoherent rhapsodes of knaves, and to this effect 
runs the popular saying: 

‘The Agnihotra, the three Vedas, the ascetic’s three staves, and smearing 
oneself with ashes, Brihaspati says, these are but means of livelihood for 
those who have no manliness nor sense’. 

rahaspati was far more bold and militant in his opposition to Vaidism. 

As reported by Madhava Acharya Brihaspati argued 1 : 

“There is no heaven, no final liberation, nor any soul in another world, 

Nor do the actions of the four castes, orders &c, produce any real effect. 

The Agnihotra, the three Vedas, the ascetic’s three staves and smearing 
oneself with ashes, 

Were made by Nature as the livelihood of those destitute of knowledge 
and manliness. 

If a beast slain in the Jyotishtoma rite will itself go to heaven, Why 
then does not the sacrificer forthwith offer his own father? 

If the Sraddha produces gratification to beings who are dead, Then 
here, too, in the case of travellers when they start, it is needless to give 
provisions for the journey. 

While life remains let a man live happily, let him feed on ghee even 
though he runs in debt. 

When once the body becomes ashes, how can it ever return again? 

If he who departs from the body goes to another world, 

How is that he comes not back again, restless for love of his kindred ? 

Hence it is only as a means of livelihood that Brahmans have established 
here. 

All these ceremonies for the dead, — there is no other fruit anywhere. 

The three authors of the Vedas were buffoons, knaves and demons. 

1 Sarva Darshan Sangraha p. 10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


157 


APPENDIX II 157 

All the well-known formulas of the Pandits, jarphari, turphari, 

And all the obscene rites for the queen commanded in the Aswamedha, 

These were invented by buffoons, and so all the various kinds of presents 

to the priests, 

While the eating of flesh was similarly commended by night prowling 

demons.” 

Why did the Vedic Brahmans compromise with the Vedantists but 
did not compromise with Charvak and Brihaspati. It is a riddle that 
awaits explanation. 

Ill 

A third riddle remains to be mentioned. This is its most appropriate 
place for it has reference to the Vedas and Vedantas, not in their crude 
form but in the philosophical garb which was given to them by two 
masters of the art of systematization whose names are quite well known 
in the history of Sanskrit Literature namely Jaimini and Badarayana, 
the former as the author of Mimansa and the latter as the author of 
Brahma Sutras. To them and to their work a reference has already been 
made in the earlier pages and some idea has been given of their place 
in the formulation of the Vedik beliefs and Vedantik speculations. What 
remains to be done is to compare and contrast the attitude which one 
has towards the philosophy of the other. 

Starting on this inquiry one is struck by the parallelism between 
Jaimini and Badarayana in the presentation of the subject matter. As 
Prof. Belvalkar points out the Vedant Sutras are very closely modelled 
upon the Karma Sutras. In the matter of methodology and terminology 
Badarayana very carefully follows Jaimini. He accepts Jaimini rules of 
interpreting the text of the Shruti. He uses Jaimini’s technical terms in 
the sense in which they have been used by Jaimini. He uses the very 
illustrations which are employed by Jaimini. 

The parallelism shows that Badarayana must have felt that he was 
the exponent of a rival philosophy which was being attacked by Jaimini 
and that in replying to the attack he must follow Jaimini’s technique. 

Question is did Badarayana take the stand of an opponent of Jaimini ? 

That Jaimini was his opponent Badarayana himself admits, the attitude 
of Jaimini towards Vedanta. It is stated by Badarayana in his Sutras 
2-7 and explained by Shankaracharya in his commentary. 


Jaimini contends that: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“No one undertakes a sacrificial act unless he is conscious of the fact that 
he is different from the body and that after death he will go to heaven, where 
he will enjoy the results of his sacrifices. The Texts dealing with self-knowledge 
serve merely to enlighten the agent and so are subordinate to sacrificial acts.” 

In short Jaimini says that all that Vedanta teaches is that self is different 
from the body and outlives the body. Such a knowledge is not enough. The Self 
must have the aspiration to go to Heaven. But it can’t go to heaven unless 
it performs Vedic sacrifices which is what his Karmakand teaches. Therefore 
his Karmakand is the only way of Salvation and that the Jnankand from 
that point of view is quite useless. For this Jaimini relies on the conduct of 
men who have believed in Vedanta 1 : 

“Janaka, emperor of Videha performed a sacrifice in which gifts were freely 
distributed” (Brih. 3.1.1); “I am going to perform a sacrifice, sirs” (Ch. 5.11.5). 
Now both Janaka and Asvapati were knowers of the Self. If by this knowledge 
of the Self they had attained Liberation, there was no need for them to perform 
sacrifices. But the two texts quoted show that they did perform sacrifices. This 
proves that it is through sacrificial acts alone that one attains Liberation, and 
not through the knowledge of the Self as the Vedantins hold.” 

Jaimini makes a positive assertion that the scriptures unmistakably declare 2 
“that knowledge of the Self stands in a subordinate relation to sacrificial acts.” 

Jaimini justifies it because he says 3 : 

“the two (knowledge and work) go together (with the departing soul to 
produce the results.)” 

Jaimini refuses to give an independent position to Badarayana’s Jnana 
kanda. He takes his stands on two grounds. 

First 4 “Knowledge of the Self does not independently produce any result.” 

Second 5 according to the authority of the Vedas “Knowledge (of Self) stands 
in a subordinate relation to work.” 

This is the position of Jaimini towards Badaryana’s Jnanakanda. What 
is the position of Badarayana towards Jaimini and his Karma Kanda? This 
is explained by Badarayana in Sutras 8 to 17. 

The first position 6 taken up by Badarayana is that the Self spoken 
of by Jaimini is the limited self i.e. the soul and is to be distinguished 

1. See Badarayana Sutra 3 and Sankara’s comment. 

2. Badarayana Sutra 4. 

3. See Badarayana Sutra 5. 

4. Badarayana Sutra 6. Shankar’s commentary. 

5. See Badarayana Sutra 7. Shankar’s commentary. 

6. See Badarayana Sutra 8. Shankar’s commentary. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


159 


APPENDIX II 159 

from the supreme soul and that the supreme soul is recognized by the 
Scriptures. 

The second 1 position taken by Badarayana is that the Vedas support 
both knowledge of Self as well as Sacrifices. 

The third 2 position taken up by Badarayana is that only those who 
believe in the Vedas are required to perform Sacrifices. But those 
who follow the Upanishadas are not bound by that injunction. As 
Shankaracharya explains: 

“Those who have read the Vedas and known about the sacrifices are 
entitled to perform work (sacrifice). No work (sacrifice) is prescribed 
for those who have knowledge of the Self from the Upanishads. Such a 
knowledge is incompatible with work.” 

The fourth 3 position taken up by Badarayana is that Karmakanda is 
optional to those who have attained Bramhadnan. As Shankaracharya 
explains: 

“That some have of their own accord given up all work. The point is 
that after knowledge some may choose to work to set an example to others, 
while others may give up all work. There is no binding on the knowers 
of the Self as regards work”. 

His last and final 4 position is that: 

“Knowledge of the Self is antagonistic to all work and so cannot possibly 
be subsidiary to work.” 

And as evidence in support of it he relies 5 on the scriptures which 
recognizes Sannyasa the fourth Ashram and relieves the Sannyasi from 
performing sacrifices prescribed by the Karma Kand. 

Many such Sutras can be found in Badarayana indicating the attitude 
of the two schools of thought towards each other. But the one given 
above is enough as it is so very typical. If one stops to consider the 
matter the position wears a strange appearance. Jaimini denounces 
Vedanta as a false Shastra, a snare and a delusion, something 
superficial, unnecessary and unsubstantial. What does Badarayana 
do in the face of this attack? Does he denounce the Karmakanda 
of Jaimini as a false Shastra, a snare and a delusion, something 
superficial unnecessary and insubstantial? No. He only defends his 
own Vedanta Shastra. But one would expect him to do more. One 
would expect from Badarayana a denunciation of the Karmakanda of 
Jaimini as a false religion. Badarayana shows no such courage. On the 
contrary he is very apologetic. He concedes that Jaimini’s Karmakanda 

1. See Badarayana Sutra 9. 

2. See Badarayana Sutra 12. 

3. See Badarayana Sutra 15. 

4. See Badarayana Sutra 16. 

5. See Badarayana Sutra 17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

based on the scriptures and the scriptures have authority and sanctity 
which cannot be repudiated. All that he insists on is that his Vedanta 
doctrine is also true because it has also the support of the scriptures. 

This is not all. What Badarayana does is to use the term Vedanta to 
cover these senses. He uses it so as to emphasize that the Upanishads 
do form a part of the Vedic literature. He used it also to emphasize what 
Vedanta or the Dnyanakanda of the Upanishads is not opposed to the 
Karmakanda of the Vedas that the two are complimentary. Indeed this 
is the foundation on which Badarayana has raised the whole structure 
of his Vedanta Sutras. 

This thesis of Badarayana — which underlies his Vedanta Sutras 
and according to which the Upanishads are a part of the Veda and 
there is no antagonism between the Vedas and Upanishads — is quite 
contrary to the tenor of the Upanishads and their relation to the 
Vedas. Badarayana’s attitude is not easy to understand. But it is quite 
obvious that Badarayana’s is a queer and a pathetic case of an opponent 
who begins his battle by admitting the validity of the premises of his 
adversary.? Why did Badarayana concede to Jaimini on the question of 
infallibility of the Vedas which were opposed to the Upanishads ? Why 
did he not stand for truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. 
This is a riddle that requires explanation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


161 


APPENDIX III 

THE RIDDLE OF THE TRIMURTI 


To say that Hindu Religion is made up of sects is no less true than to 
say that Hindu Society is made up of castes. But not half the attention 
paid to the study of castes has been paid to the study of sects. This is as 
unfortunate as it is strange. Sects have played as great a part in India’s 
history as castes have done. Indeed some sects just as some castes have 
made the history of India what it is. 

The sects which make up the Hindu Religion are of course legion. It 
is impossible to explore the origin of all and compare and contrast their 
cults within the compass of a chapter. All that can be done is to take 
the most important ones and to present some of problems connected with 
them. The most important of these sects in the history of India have been 
three, one believing in the cult of God Brahma, second believing in the 
cult of Vishnu and the third believing in the cult of Shiva or Mahesha. 
The following are some of the questions, which cannot but puzzle the 
student who has studied the origin and history of these cults. 

The Chula-Niddessa a Buddhist treatize refers to various sects which 
were at one time prevalent in India. Classified on the basis of creeds 
and cults they may be listed as follows: 

I CREEDS 


Serial Name of the Sect 

Essence of the creed 

No. 


1 Ajivika Shravaka 1 

Ajivika 2 

2 Nigatta Shravakas 

Nigautha 3 

1 Shravaka means a disciple. 


2 Mendicants following special rules with regard to livelihood. 

3 Mendicants who are free from all ties and hindrances. 


This Riddle may he read along with the Riddle No. 11 which deals 
with The Rise and Fall of Gods. This title ‘The Riddle of the Trimurti’ 
however does not find place in the original Table of Contents, nor was 
it available in the MS received by the Govt. This copy has been spared 
by Shri S. S. Rege — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



I CREEDS— 

contd. 

Serial 

Name of the Sect 

Essence of the creed 

No. 



3 

Jatil Shravakas 

Jatila 1 

4 

Parivrajaka Shravakas 

Parivrajaka 2 

5 

Avarudha Shravakas 

Avarudhaka 

II CULTS 

Serial 

Name of the Sect 

The deity which is 

No. 


worshipped 

1 

Hasti Vratikas 3 

Hasti 4 

2 

Ashva Vratikas 

Ashva 5 

3 

Go Vratikas 

.. Go 6 

4 

Kukur Vratikas 

Kukku 7 

5 

Kaka Vratikas 

Kaka 8 

6 

Vasudeo Vratikas 

Vasudeo 

7 

Baldeo Vratikas 

Baldeo 

8 

Purna Bhadra Vratikas 

Purna Bhadra 

9 

Mani Bhadra Vratikas 

Mani Bhadra 

10 

Agni Vratikas 

Agni 

11 

Naga Vratikas 

Naga 

12 

Suparna Vratikas 

Suparna 

13 

Yaksha Vratikas 

Yaksha 

14 

Asura Vratikas 

Asura 

15 

Gandharva Vratikas 

Gandharva 

16 

Maharaja Vratikas 

Maharaja 

17 

Chandra Vratikas 

Chandra 

18 

Surya Vratikas 

Surya 

19 

Indra Vratikas 

Indra 

20 

Brahma Vratikas 

Brahma 

21 

Deva Vratikas 

Deva 

22 

Deesha Vratikas 

Deesha 


1 Mendicants who twist their hair on the head. 

2 Mendicants who escape from society. 

3 Vratika means a devotee. 

4 Elephant. 

B Horse. 

6 Cow. 

7 Dog. 

8 Crow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


163 


APPENDIX III 163 

Comparing the cults of the three Gods with the cults of the various 
Gods mentioned in the list, two conclusions are obvious. One conclusion is 
that the cults of Vishnu and Mahesha are new fabrications, later in origin 
than those mentioned in the Chula Niddessa. The second conclusion is 
that all the old cults have disappeared. Searching for the causes of this 
strange phenomenon it is quite clear that New Cults could not have come 
into being unless the Brahmins had taken up the cause of propagating 
these new cults. Similarly old cults could not have disappeared if the 
Brahmins had not ceased to propagate them. The question that puzzles 
the student of history is why did the Brahmins fabricate these new cults? 
Why did they give up the old cults ? The question not only puzzles but 
staggers the student when the God that has vanished in this revolution 
is no other than Indra. Indra is a Vedic God. He is the greatest of the 
Vedic Gods. The Brahmins worshipped Indra and praised him as the 
supreme God for hundreds if not thousands of years. What made the 
Brahmins give up Indra and become the devotees of Brahma, Vishnu 
and Mahesh? Were the reasons for transfer of loyalties by the Brahmins 
spiritual or commercial? 

Who is this Shiva whom the Brahmins adopted as their God in 
preference to Indra? The story of Daksha Prajapati’s Yajna and the part 
played by Shiva throws great light on Shiva. The story is that somewhere 
in the Himalayas king Daksha was performing an Yajna. This Yajna was 
attended by all Devas, Danavas, Pishachas, Nagas, Rakshasas and Rishis. 
But Shiva absented as Daksha did not give him invitations. Dadhichi 
one of the Rishis scolded Daksha for his failure to invite Shiva and to 
perform his puja. Daksha refused to call Shiva and said “ I have seen 
many of your Rudras. Go away, I don’t recognize your Shiva.” Dadhichi 
replied ‘You have all conspired against Shiva, take care, your Yajna will 
never reach a successful finis.” Mahadeo coming to know of this created 
a Rakshasas from his mouth and this Rakshasas destroyed the Yajna 
started by Daksha. This shows that there was a time when Brahmins 
refused to recognize Shiva as the God to be worshipped or it shows that 
Shiva was against the Yajna system of the Brahmanas. 

The difference between the Aryans and the Non-Aryans was cultural 
and not racial. The cultural difference centred round two points. The 
Aryans believed in Chaturvarna. The Non-Aryans were opposed to it. 
The Aryans believed in the performance of Yajna as the essence of 
their religion. The Non-Aryans were opposed Yajna. Examining the 
story of Daksha’s Yajna in the light of these facts it is quite obvious 
that Shiva was a Non- Vedic and a Non- Aryan God. The question is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

why did the Brahmins, the pillars of Vedic culture, adopt Shiva as their 
God? 

The third question that puzzles the student is the reformation and 
transformation which the Brahmins have made in the original format 
of Shiva and Vishnu. 

The Hindus are not aware that Shiva is a non-Vedic, non-Aryan God. 
They identify him with God Rudra mentioned in the Vedas. So that to 
the Hindus Rudra is the same as Shiva. Now in the Taiteriya Samhita 
of the Yajur-Veda there is a hymn in praise of Rudra. In this hymn 
Rudra i.e. Shiva is described as the lord of thieves, robbers, dacoits, as 
the King of the degraded, of potters and blacksmiths. The question is 
how did the Brahmins venture to accept this king of thieves and robbers 
as their supreme God? 

There is another reformation in the character of Rudra which the 
Brahmins have made while accepting him as their God Shiva. In the 
Ashvalayan Grihya Sutra the proper way of worshipping Rudra is 
prescribed. According to it the worship of Rudra was to be the sacrifice 
of a bull. The Sutra gives details of the season, and the Nakshatra for 
performing this sacrifice. It tells the householder to select the best bull 
from the stable. It prescribes its colour. It recommends that it should 
be fat. It should be consecrated with rice water or barley water. Then 
it should be slaughtered and offered to the Rudra addressing him by all 
his names and his tail, hide, head and feet should be thrown into the 
fire. Evidently Rudra was a ‘himsak’ God to whom animal sacrifice was 
necessary. Shiva on the other hand has been an Ahimsaka God. He is 
not offered animal sacrifice. Question is what compelled the Brahmins 
to make Shiva give up his meat diet and be a vegetarian. 

Hindus all over India accept without shame or remorse the virtue of 
Linga Puja — Phallus worship. This phallus worship is associated with 
Shiva and it is commonly held that the true way of worshipping Shiva 
is to worship the Shiva Linga. Was Linga puja always associated with 
Shiva? Some very interesting facts are brought to light by Prof. Dandekar 
in his essay on “Vishnu in the Veda”. Says Prof. Dandekar: 

“The most significant word in this connection is Sipivista, which 
is exclusively employed in the Veda with reference to Vishnu. The 
passages where the word occurs in RV (VH- 99.7; VII. 100. 5-6) 
seems to have been kept obscure with a purpose. The Vedic poets 
evidently sought to make a guarded and casual reference to that 
aspect of Vishnu’s personality which was indicated by the word, 
Sipivista. Many attempts have been made to explain the word, but 
few satisfy the requirements of philosophy and none brings out the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


165 


APPENDIX III 

true nature of Vishnu. It is not possible to separate philologically 
the word Sepa (Penis) from sipi. Other similar idg. forms are 
Sipha (a root pkt. chepa, lat. oippus, seipio (staff) etc. Even 
Nirukta (V. 7) seems to he vaguely supporting this view though 
its further explanation is not clear. Added to that word is a 
form from the root viz., thus making the whole word mean ‘the 
changing phallus; the swelling and diminishing penis’. We may 
now easily understand why the Vedic poets speak in such guarded 
and obscure way about this form of Vishnu. In this connection 
it is very significant to note what Nirukta (V. 8-9) says of this 
name of Vishnu: The word sipivista has thus unmistakably 
preserved Vishnu’s ancient phallic nature. There are also many 
other incidental references to Vishnu in the Vedic hymns and 
ritual, which clearly associate him with the notion of fertility, 
productivity and self life.” 

“One of the obscure features of the Vedic Shraddha-ritual 
is that the Angustha, without nail, is to be dipped into the 
offering intended for the pitars. This action is accompanied by 
an invocation to Vishnu. The Angustha is undoubtedly a symbol 
of the phallus. Vishnu is, in this rite, clearly connected with 
the phallic aspect of the Vedic ritual. In later literature we find 
Vishnu actually identified with the thumb. In the I.S. passage (VI. 

2.4.2) we find another piece of evidence in this regard. Vishnu’s 
entering into the mother earth is a symbolical description of a 
fertility rite. The words, Tanvardhanah, used with reference 
to Vishnu’s (VII. 99.1; VIII. 100.2) may further be understood 
to be indicative of his phallic nature. Vishnu is significantly 
identified, in later literature, with Hiranyagarbha, and Narayana. 
Vishnu’s close connection with Sinivali (AV. VII. 46.3), the ‘broad- 
hipped’ divinity protecting the feminine sex-functions, throws 
considerable light on this aspect of Visnu’s personality. According 
to the Sankhyana-grahyasutra (I. 22.13), the Mantra (X. 184.1) 
accompanies the garbha-ceremony, thus suggesting that Vishnu is 
the efficacious protector of the embryos. In AV (VII. 17.4), Vishnu 
is clearly connected with sex-functions. The two epithets of Vishnu 
Nisiktapa (VII. 36.9) ‘protector of the semen’, and Sumajjani (I. 

156.2) ‘facilitating easy birth’ speak for themselves. The word, 
Paumsya ‘manly vigour’ is significantly used with reference to 
Vishnu in RV (E. 155.3-4). In the Vrsakapi-hymn (X. 86), Indra 
is said to have been exhausted, when a bold, lascivious monkey 
administered to him some medicine, through which Indra regained 
his manly power. This Vrsakapi is identified, in later literature, 
with Vishnu, the word-being also mentioned as one of his names 
“in the Vishnusahasranama.” 


165 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On the evidence produced by Prof. Dandekar phallus worship was in its 
origin connected with Vishnu. In the Puranas we do not find the Phallus 
worship associated with Vishnu. In the Puranas it is associated with 
Shiva. This is a most astounding transformation. Vishnu who was from 
the beginning associated with the Linga worship was dissociated from 
it and Shiva who had no association with the Linga worship has come 
to be identified with it. Question is what made the Brahmins dissociate 
Vishnu from Linga worship and fasten it on to Shiva? 

There remains the last and the important question. It relates to the 
inter-relations of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha. 

Nothing probably sums up so well the inter-relations between Brahma, 
Vishnu and Mahesha as does the story of the birth of the God Dattatraya. 
Briefly the story is that one afternoon when Sarasvati, Laxmi and 
Parvati, the wives of the three Gods were sitting together chit-chatting, 
Narada, the sage on eternal tour, came to visit them. In the course of the 
conversation a question arose as who was the most chaste woman in the 
land. Narada held out that Anusuya the wife of Rishi by name Atri — as 
the purest and most chaste woman. This was violently disputed by the 
three, each one of whom claimed to have that title. Narada disproved 
their claim by recounting the many acts of adultery which one of them 
was guilty of. They were silenced but they became very angry. They 
wanted to retrieve their position vis-a-vis Anusuya. In their wisdom 
they decided that the only way by which this could be done was to have 
Anusuya seduced to illicit intercourse. Having decided upon their plan 
of action the three women told to their husbands when they returned in 
the evening what Narada said about them in the afternoon and scolded 
them by saying that they were the cause of their wives humiliation. 
For if they had committed adultery with Anusuya she and they would 
have been on the same level and Narada would not have found cause to 
humiliate them. They asked their husbands whether they cared for their 
wives and if they did were they not in duty bound to proceed forthwith 
to invade the chastity of Anusuya and to pull her down from the high 
pedestle of purity and chastity on which Narada had placed her. The 
Gods were convinced that what was suggested by their wives was their 
duty and that they could not shirk the task. 

The three Gods started on an expedition to rob Anusuya of her 
honour and marched on to the hutment of Atri. The three Gods 
disguised themselves as three Brahmin Mendicants. When they arrived 
Atri was away. But Anusuya welcomed them and prepared food for 
them. When the meal was ready she asked them to sit and partake of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


167 


APPENDIX III 167 

the meal. The three Gods replied that they would take food at her 
house only if she agreed to serve them food in a naked condition. The 
rule of hospitality in ancient India was that Brahmin guest must not 
depart dissatisfied. Everything he asked must be given to him. In 
obedience to this rule Anusuya agreed to serve them naked. While 
she was serving food to them in this naked condition Atri arrived. 
On seeing Atri the three Gods who were taking food with Anusuya 
standing naked took the form of new born babes. The three Gods in 
the form of babes were placed by Atri in a craddle. In the craddle 
their bodies having become integrated into one and their heads 
having remained separate there arose the God Dattatraya who has 
one body and three heads representing the three Gods, Brahma, 
Vishnu and Mahesha. 

The story has a stink of immorality in it and the close of it may 
have been deliberately designed so as to cover up the actual fact of 
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha having outraged Anusuya to lower 
her down to the level of their wives. Be that as it may the story 
illustrates the view once prevalent among the Hindus that three 
Gods Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha were co-equal in status and 
their functions are complimentary and not competitive. They were 
spoken of as forming Trimurti — three in one and one in three, all 
sustaining the world, Brahma by creating it, Vishnu by preserving 
it and Shiva by destroying it. 

This state of harmony did not last long. The Brahmins who were 
the propagandists of these three Gods divided themselves into three 
camps each becoming devoted to one to the exclusion of the other 
two. The result of this was a systematic campaign of villification and 
degradation by the Brahmins devoted to one God of the other Gods. 

It is interesting as well as instructive to note what the Brahmins 
have done to Brahma. There was a time when the Brahmins raised 
Brahma to the highest pinnacle of power and glory. They presented 
him as the creator of the Universe — the first Prajapati. He was their 
sole supreme God. The Brahmins had developed the theory of Avatar 
which holds that God when necessary incarnates into different forms, 
human or animal. This they use for twofold purpose, firstly to elevate 
the supremacy of a God in whom they are interested and secondly 
to reconcile the conflict between Gods as different personalities. 

The Brahmins have run riot with this theory of Avatar and different 
Puranas have given different lists of Avatars as will be seen from 
the following: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


168 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



According 
to Hari 
Vamsha 

According 
to Narayani 
Akhyan 

According 
to Varaha 
Purana 

According to 
Vayu Purana 

According 
to Bhagwat 
Purana 

1 

Varaha 

Hansa 

Kurma 

Narasinha 

Sanatkumar 

2 

Narasinha 

Kurma 

Matsya 

Vaman 

Boar 

3 

Vaman 

Matsya 

Varaha 

Varaha 


4 

Parshuram 

Varaha 

Narasinha 

Kurma 

Nara-Narayan 

5 

Rama 

Narasinha 

Vaman 

Sangram 

Kapila 

6 

Krishna 

Vaman 

Parshuram 

Adivaka 

Dattatraya 

7 


Parshuram 

Rama 

Tripur ari 

Jadna 

8 


Rama 

Krishna 

Andhakarh 

Rashabha 

9 


Krishna 

Buddha 

Dhvaja 

Prithi 

10 


Kalkin 

Kalkin 

Varta 

Matsya 

11 




Halahal 

Kurma 

12 




Kolhahal 

Dhanwantri 

13 





Mohini 

14 





Narasinha 

15 





Vaman 

16 





Parshuram 

17 





Ved Vyas 

18 





Naradeo 

19 





Rama 

20 





Krishna 

21 





Buddha 

22 





Kalkin 


These Avatars are all said by these Puranas to be the Avatars of 
Vishnu. But to begin, with when the Avatars had begun to be coined 
the story of the two Avatars — of the Boar 1 and the Fish 2 — which in later 
times given to Vishnu was given by the Brahmins to Brahma. Again even 
when the Brahmins admitted Shiva and Vishnu as co-equal with Brahma 
they maintained the supremacy of Brahma over Shiva and Vishnu. The 
Brahmins made him the progenitor of Shiva 3 and propagated the view 
that if Vishnu 4 became the preserver of the world it was because of the 
command of the Brahma. With the plurality of Gods, conflicts between 
them were always present and some God to act as Arbitrator and settler 
of disputes was necessary. 

1 Ramayana — Quoted in Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. IV p. 33. 

2 Mahabharata — Vana Parva & Linga Purana — Muir Ibid., pp. 38-39. 

3 Vishnu Purana — Muir Ibid p. 392. 

4 Ramayana — Muir Ibid p. 477. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


169 


APPENDIX III 169 

Puranas are full of such conflicts, even wars among Gods. There were 
conflicts between Rudra and Narayana 1 , between Krishna and Shiva 2 . In 
these conflicts the Brahmins have made Brahma the Arbitrator. 

The same Brahmins who elevated Brahma to such pre-eminence turned 
against him, started degrading him and mud-slinging him. They started 
propagating the view that Brahma was really inferior to Vishnu and Shiva. 
Contrary to their previous utterances the Brahmins said that Brahma 
was born from Shiva 3 and some said that he was born from Vishnu 4 . 

The Brahmins completely inverted the relation between Shiva and 
Brahma. Brahma was no longer the God who could give salvation. The 
God who could give salvation was Shiva and they reduced Brahma to 
the position of a common devotee worshipping Shiva and Linga in the 
hope of getting salvation 5 . They reduced him to the position of servant 
of Shiva by making him the charioteer of Shiva 6 . 

The Brahmins did not stop with degrading Brahma. They villified him 
in the worst manner possible. They broadcast the story of his having 
committed rape on his own daughter Sarasvati which is repeated in the 
Bhagwat Purana 7 : 

“We have heard, O Kshatriya, that Svayambhu (Brahma) had a passion 
for Vach, his slender and enchanting daughter, who had no passion for 
him. The Munis, his sons, headed by Marichi, seeing their father bent upon 
wickedness, admonished him with affection: ‘This is such a thing as has 
never been done by those before you, nor will those after you do it, — that 
you, being the lord, should sexually approach your daughter, not restraining 
your passion. This, O preceptor of the world, is not a laudable deed even 
in glorious personages, through imitation of whose actions men attain 
felicity. Glory to that divine being (Vishnu) who by his own lustre revealed 
this (universe) which abides in himself, — he must maintain righteousness’. 
Seeing his sons, the Prajapatis, thus speaking before him, the lord of the 
Prajapatis (Brahma) was ashamed, and abandoned his body. This dreadful 
body the regions received, and it is known as foggy darkness.” 

The result of this degrading and defamatory attacks on Brahma was to 
damn him completely. No wonder that his cult disappeared from the face 
of India leaving him a nominal and theoretical member of the Trimurti. 

1 Mahabharat Shanti Parva Quoted in Muir Vol. IV. p. 240. 

2 Mahabharat Shanti Parva Ibid. p. 279. 

3 Mahabharat Anushasan Parva — Muir Ibid. p. 188. 

4 Bhagwat Purana — Ibid. p. 43. 

5 Mahabharat quoted in Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. IV p. 192. 

6 Ibid, p. 193. 

7 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. IV p. 47. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


170 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

After Brahma was driven out of the field there remained two parties 
of Brahmanas, one engaged in favour of Shiva and the other engaged 
in favour of Vishnu. Let us see what they did as protagonists of their 
rival deities. Neither party succeeded in driving out the cult of its rival 
God. The cult of Shiva and the cult of Vishnu have continued to exist 
and flourish. Notwithstanding the many cults that have subsequently 
come into existence they have not been eclipsed. This is largely due 
to the propaganda and counter-propaganda carried on by the Brahmin 
protagonists of Shiva and Vishnu. How well matched the propaganda and 
counter propaganda was, can be seen from the following few illustrations. 

Vishnu is connected with the Vedic God Sun. The worshippers of 
Shiva connect him with Agni. If one has Vedic origin the other must 
have Vedic origin as well. One cannot be inferior to the other in the 
matter of nobility of origin. 

Shiva must be greater than Vishnu and Vishnu must not be less 
than Shiva. Vishnu has thousand names 1 . So Shiva must have thousand 
names and he has them 2 . Vishnu has his emblems 3 . So must have Shiva 
and he has them 4 . 

In the performance of deeds of glory the propaganda in favour of 
one is fully matched by counter-propaganda in favour of the other. One 
illustration of this is the story regarding the origin of the holy river 
Ganges 5 . The devotees of Shiva attribute its origin to Shiva. They make 
it take its origin from Shiva’s hair. But the Vaishnavas will not allow it. 
They have manufactured another legend. According to the Vaishnavite 
legend the blessed and the blessing river flowed originally out of Vaikunth 
(the abode of Vishnu) from the foot of Vishnu, and descending upon 
Kailasa fell on the head of Shiva. There is a two-fold suggestion in the 
legend. In the first place Shiva is not the source of the Ganges. In the 
second place Shiva is lower than Vishnu and receives on his head water 
which flows from the foot of Vishnu. 

Another illustration is furnished by the story which relates to the 
churning of the oceans by the Devas and the Asuras. They used the 
Mandara mountain as the churning rod and huge serpent Shesha as 
a rope to whirl the mountain. The earth began to shake and people 
became afraid that the world was coming to an end. Vishnu took 
the Avatar of Kurma (tortoise) and held the earth on his back and 
prevented the earth from shaking while the churning was going on. 

1 See Vishnu Sahasranama. 

2 They are mentioned in the Padma Purana. 

3 See above. 

4 They are (1) Flowing Ganges (2) Chandra i.e. Moon and (3) Shesh (snake) and 
(4) Matted hair. 

6 Moore; Hindu Pantheon pp. 40-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


171 


APPENDIX III 171 

This story is told in glorification of Vishnu. To this the Shaivites add 
a supplement. According to this supplement the churning brought out 
fourteen articles from the depth of the ocean which are called fourteen 
jewels. Among these fourteen a deadly poison was one. This deadly poison 
would have destroyed the earth unless somebody drank it. Shiva was 
the only person who came to drink it. The suggetion is that Vishnu’s 
act was foolish in allowing the rivals the Gods and Demons to bring out 
this deadly poison. Glory to Shiva for he drank it and saved the world 
from the evil consequences of the folly of Vishnu. 

Third illustration is an attempt to show that Vishnu is a fool and 
that it is Shiva who with his greater wisdom and greater power saves 
Vishnu from his folly. It is the story of Akrurasura 1 . Akrur was a demon 
with the face of a bear, who, nevertheless, was continuously reading the 
Vedas and performing acts of devotion. Vishnu was greatly pleased and 
promised him any boon that he would care to ask. Akrurasura requested 
that no creature, then existing in the three worlds, might have power 
to deprive him of life, and Vishnu complied with his request; but the 
demon became so insolent that the Devatas, whom he oppressed, were 
obliged to conceal themselves, and he assumed the dominion of the world; 
Vishnu was then sitting on a bank of the Kali, greatly disquieted by 
the malignant ingratitude of the demon; and his wrath being kindled, 
a shape, which never before had existed, sprang from his eyes. It was 
Mahadeva, in his destructive character, who dispelled in a moment the 
anxiety of the Vishnu. 

This is countered by the story of Bhasmasura intended to show that 
Shiva was a fool and Vishnu saved him from his folly. Bhasmasura 
having propitiated Shiva asked for a boon. The boon was to be the 
power to burn any one on whose head Bhasmasura laid his hands. Shiva 
granted the boon. Bhasmasura tried to use his boon power against Shiva 
himself. Shiva became terrified and ran to Vishnu for help. Vishnu 
promised to help him. Vishnu took the form of a beautiful woman and 
went to Bhasmasura who became completely enamoured of her. Vishnu 
asked Bhasmasura to agree to obey him in everything as a condition 
of surrender. Bhasmasura agreed. Vishnu then asked him to place his 
hands on his own head which Bhasmasura did with the result that 
Bhasmasur died and Vishnu got the credit of saving Shiva from the 
consequences of his folly. 

The rivalry and the consequent enmity among these Gods is best 
illustrated by the legend as to which of them is the first born. The 
story as related in the Skand Purana 2 says that one time Vishnu lay 

1 The story is told in Vishnu Agama and is quoted in Moore’s Hindu Pantheon pp. 19-20. 

2 Quoted in Moore’s Hindu Pantheon pp. 17-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

extended asleep on the bosom of Devi, a lotus arose from his navel, 
and its ascending flower soon reached the surface of the flood, Brahma 
sprang from that flower, and looking round without any creature on the 
boundless expanse, imagined himself to be the first born, and entitled 
to rank above all future beings; yet, resolved to investigate deep and to 
ascertain whether any being existed in its universe who could controvert 
his pre-eminence, he glided down the stock of the lotus and finding Vishnu 
asleep, asked loudly who he was ? ‘I am the first born’ answered Vishnu; 
and when Brahma denied his primogeniture, they had an obstinate 
battle, till Mahadeo pressed between them in great wrath, saying ‘It is I 
who am truly the first born. But I will resign my place to either of you, 
who shall be able to reach behind the summit of my head, or the soles 
of my foot. Brahma instantly ascended; but having fatigued himself to 
no purpose in the regions of immensity, yet loath to abandon his claim, 
returned to Mahadeo, declaring that he had attained and seen the crown 
of his head, and called as his witness the first born cow. For this union 
of pride and falsehood, the angry God ordained, that no sacred Shiva 
rites should be performed to Brahma and that the mouth of cow should 
be defiled. When Vishnu returned, he acknowledged that he had not 
been able to see the feet of Mahadeo, who then told him that he was 
the first born among the Gods, and should be raised above all. It was 
after this Mahadeo cut off the fifth head of Brahma who thus suffered 
the loss of his pride, his power and his influence. 

According to this story Brahma’s claim to be the first born was false. 
He was punished by Shiva for making it. Vishnu gets the right to call 
himself the first born. But that is allowed to him by the grace of Shiva. 
The followers of Brahma had their revenge on Vishnu for stealing what 
rightfully belonged to him with the help of Shiva. So they manufactured 
another legend 1 according to which Vishnu emanated from Brahma’s 
nostrils in the shape of a pig and grew naturally into a boar — a very 
mean explanation of Vishnu’s avatar as a boar. 

The rivalry among these Gods had taken the shape of rivalry among 
traders and results in indecent abuse of Shiva by Vishnu and of Vishnu 
by Shiva. 

Such are the facts about the Trinity and its subsequent history. 

There is nothing new in the conception of Trinity. 

The conception of Trinity is an old one, older than Yaska. To reduce 
the chaos of innumerable Gods the early Brahmins were engaged to 
select some Gods and to make them pre-eminent over the rest. The 
number of such pre-eminent Gods was fixed at three. Of these Agni 

1 Quoted by Moore, Ibid. p. 184. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


173 


APPENDIX III 173 

and Surya were two. For the third place there was rivalry between Vayu 
and Indra. Consequently one finds the Trinity of Agni, Indra and Surya or 
Agni, Vayu and Surya. The new trinity is identical in its conception with 
the old though different in its personnel. Every member of this Trinity is 
new. It seems after the first Trinity was dissolved no new Trinity existed 
for a considerable time. In the Chulla Nidessa there is mention only 
of Brahma Vratikas. There is no mention of Vishnu Vratikas or Shiva 
Vratikas. This means that at the time of the Chula Nidessa the cult of 
Vishnu and the cult of Shiva had not come into being. They were later 
on added to the cult of Brahma and constituted into a Trinity. Several 
questions rise in one’s mind when one considers the part played by the 
Brahmins in the evolution and confounding of the Trinity. 

The first that arises is the faithlessness of the Brahamins to their 
Gods, the easy manner in which they abandon one set of Gods for 
another. In this connection one is reminded of the Jewish priests and 
Nebuchad-Nez-Zar. 

“ Neb-U-Chad-Nez-Zar 1 the king made an image of gold, whose height 
was three score cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits he set it up in 
the plain of Du-ra, in the province of Bab-y-k>n. 

“ 2. Then Neb-u-chad-nez-zar the king sent to gather together the 
princes (satraps), the governors (deputies), and the captains (governors), 
the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers 
of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Neb-u-chad- 
nez-zar the king had set up. 

“3. Then the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the 
treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, 
were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Neb-u-chad- 
nez-zar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Neb-u- 
chad-nez-zar had set up. 

4. “Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, 
nations, and languages. 

5. That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, 
psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the 
golden image that Neb-u-chad-nez-zar the king hath set up; 

6. And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be 
cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. 

7. Therefore at that time, when all the people heard, the sound 
of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, 
all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and 


Old Testament — Daniel Chap. 3. verses 1-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

worshipped the golden image that Neb-u-chad-nez-zar the king had 
set up.” 

8. Wherefore at that time certain Chal-de-ans came near, and, 
accused the Jews. 

9. They spake and said to the king Neb-u-chad-nez-zar, “O King, 
live for ever.” 

10. “Thou, O King, hast made a decree, that every man that shall 
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, 
and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image.” 

11. “And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should 
be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.” 

12. “There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of 
the province of Bab-y-lon, Sha-drac/z, Me-shac/z and A-bed-ne-go; these 
men, O king, have not regarded thee; they serve not thy gods, nor 
worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” 

13. “Then Neb-u-chad-nez-zar in his rage and fury commanded to 
bring O Sha-drac/z, Me-shac/z, and A-bed-ne-go. Then they brought 
these men before the king. 

14. Neb-u-chad-nez-zar spake and said unto them, “Is it true, O 
Sha-drac/z, Me-shac/z, and A-bed-ne-go, do not ye serve my gods, nor 
worship the golden image which I have set up?” 

15. “Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of 
musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; well; 
but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst 
of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you 
out of my hands?” 

16. Sha-drach, Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go, answered and said to 
the king, “O Neb-u-chad-nez-zar, we are not careful to answer thee 
in this matter.” 

17. “If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from 
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, 
O king.” 

18. “But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not 
serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” 

19. “Then was Neb-u-chad-nez-zar full of fury, and the form of his 
visage was changed against Sha-drach, Me-shach and A-bed-ne- go; 
therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace 
one seven times more than it was wont to be heated. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


175 


APPENDIX III 175 

20. And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army 
to bind Sha-drach, Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go and to cast them into the 
burning fiery furnace. 

21. Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their 
hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning 
fiery furnace. 

22. Therefore because the king’s commandment was urgent, and the 
furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took up 
Sha-drach, Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go. 

23. And these three men, Sha-drach, Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go, fell 
bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnance.” 

Why did the Brahmins give up the first Trinity? There is no indication 
that they were compelled to foreswear those Gods. Was it love of gain 
or lucre? 

The second question is why did the Brahmins who became the votaries 
of the three Gods follow the principle of live and let live? Why was one 
sect bent on destroying the other. There was no doctrinal difference 
between these sects worth the name. Their theology, cosmology and 
philosophy were all one and the same. The riddle becomes all the great. 
Was this sectarian quarrel political? Did the Brahmins make religion a 
matter of politics? Otherwise what is the explanation of this quarrel ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


176 


APPENDIX IV 

II SMARTH DHARMA 


The Sacred literature of Smarth Dharma consists of the Smritis or 
the Law Books. These law books contain what may be called the Canon 
Law. This Canon Law as will be seen later on is vast in its compass 
and treats of such subjects as law, government, civic rights and duties 
of the different classes in society, penances for sins and punishments for 
offences. The purely secular part of this Dharma is not relevant for the 
purpose in hand. What is relevant is that part, of it which is accepted 
as belonging strictly to religion. 

The Smarth Dharma i.e. Dharma based on Smritis is based on five 
dogmas. The first dogma of Smarth Dharma is the belief in Trinity of 
Gods, composed of three Gods: Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh or Shiva. In 
this Trinity, Brahma is the creator of the world, Vishnu is the preserver 
and Shiva is the destroyer. Instead of the thirty-three Gods of the Srauta 
Dharma, Smarth Dharma limits the pantheon to only three. 

The second dogma of the Smarth Dharma is the recognition of the 
purificatory ceremonies which are called Sanskaras or sacraments. 
According to the Smarth Dharma every householder must perform certain 
ceremonies. If he does not he becomes a pat it i.e. one who is fallen from 
grace and therefore 

{The above text is on a typed Page No. 21. Further pages of this chapter 
are missing. The following text is from the loose sheets enumerated in blue 
pencil from page No. 55 to 65 only, except page No. 56. All these pages 
have corrections and instructions in the handwriting of the author .) — Ed. 

There are few loose pages on ' Smarth Dharma and Tantrik Dharma’. 
Smarth Dharma is numbered as Part II while Tantrik Dharma is numbered 
as Part III. It seems that Part I consisted of Srauta Dharma. There is 
only one page of Smarth Dharma numbered as 21. The Tantrik Dharma 
starts from page 55 and ends at page 65 except page No. 56 with three 
more handwritten pages added by the author . — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


177 


APPENDIX IV 177 

Punishments and Penances occupy very prominent place in 
Pauranik Dharma. In the Srauta Dharma Yama has nothing to 
do with the future punishment of the wicked. The idea of penal 
retribution after death for sins committed during life is unknown. 
But the Puranas have considerably enlarged the Powers of Yama 
in this respect. 

“Yama fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as sovereign of 
the damned; all that die appearing before him, and being confronted with 
Chitragupta, the recorder, by whom their actions have been registered. 
The virtuous are thence conveyed to Swarga, or Elysium, whilst the 
wicked are driven to the different regions of Naraka, or Tartarus”. 

“ The dreadful Chitragupta with a voice like that issuing from 
the clouds at the mundane dissolution, gleaming like a mountain 
of collyrium, terrible with lightning like weapons, having thirty-two 
arms, as big as three yojans, red-eyed, long-nosed, his face furnished 
with grinders and projecting teeth, his eyes resembling oblong ponds, 
bearing death and diseases.” 

Sin will be punished after death. So also there is expiation for sin 
if the- sinner wishes by performing certain penances for removing sin. 

But what is sin? According to the Pauranik Dharma it does not 
mean the commission of a moral wrong. It means the non-performance 
of the observances prescribed by the Puranas. Such is Pauranik 
Dharma. 


Ill TANTRIK DHARMA 

What is known as the Tantrik Dharma centres round the worship 
of Shakti. Shakti literally means power or energy. But in Tantrism 
it means the female partner of a male God. The literature of the 
Tantrik Dharma is quite vast and forms quite a separate branch 
of the Hindu Religious literature. It is necessary to observe that 
the Shakta form of Hinduism is equipped with a vast mythological 
personnel of its own, an immense array of female personalities, 
constituting a distinct division of the Hindu Pantheon. 

In its origin the Tantrik Dharma is only an extension of the 
Pauranik Dharma. It is the Puranas which first began with the 
recognition of the female unmarried goddesses or as objects of worship. 
This was followed by the recognition of married females who were 
the wives of the Gods. It is in support of their recognition of the 
right of the wives of the Gods to be worshipped as goddesses that the 
Puranas set out the principle of Shaktism. According to the Puranas 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a deity though single has a dual character. In one it is quiescent, in the 
other active. The active nature of the deity is called his Shakti (i.e. his 
power). This Shakti of the deity is personified by the Puranas as the 
wife of the deity. This is the foundation of what is called Shaktism or 
the worship of the wife of certain deities. 

The essence of Shaktism lies in the exclusive worship of the female 
deity in her most comprehensive character as the great power (Sakti) 
of Nature, the one mother of the Universe (Jagan-Mata, Jagad-Amba) — 
the mighty mysterious Force whose function is to direct and control 
two quite distinct operations; namely, first, the working of the natural 
appetites and passions, whether for the support of the body by eating 
and drinking, or for the propagation of living organisms through sexual 
cohabitation; secondly, the acquisition of supernatural faculties and 
magical powers (siddhi), whether for a man’s own individual exaltation 
or for the annihilation of his opponents. 

And here it is necessary to observe that the Sakta form of Hinduism 
is equipped with a vast mythological Personnel of its own — an immense 
array of female personalities, constituting a distinct division of the 
Hindu Pantheon. 

Yet the whole array of the Tantrik female Pantheon spreading out 
as it does into countless ramifications, Shaktism has its root in the 
wife of Shiva. By common consent she is held to be the source or first 
point of departure of the entire female mythological system. She also 
stands at its head; and it is remarkable that in every one of the male 
God Shiva’s characteristics, his consort is not only his counterpart, 
but a representation of all his attributes intensified. We have already 
pointed out how it came to pass that the male God gradually gathered 
under his own personality the attributes and functions of all other 
divinities, and thus became to his own special worshippers the great 
God (Mahadevah) of Hinduism. Similarly and in a much greater degree 
did his female counterpart become the one great goddess (Maha-devi) 
of the Sakta hierarchy: representing in her own person all other female 
manifestations of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, and absorbing all their 
functions. For this reason even the wives of Brahma and Vishnu were 
said to be her daughters. As to the opposite and contradictory qualities 
attributed to her, these are no source of difficulty to a Hindu mind. 
She is simply in all respects a duplicate of her husband but a duplicate 
painted in deeper or more vivid colours. 

And just as Shiva is at one time white (Sveta, Sukla) both in 
complexion and character, at another black (Kala); so his female 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


179 


APPENDIX IV 179 

nature also became one half white (whence one of her names Gauri) and 
the other half black (whence her name Kali). 

Then, again, each of these opposite characters became variously 
modified and endlessly multiplied. The white or mild nature ramified 
into the Saktis called Uma, Gauri, Lakshmi, Sarasvati, etc., the black 
or fierce nature into those called Kali, Durga, Candi, Camunda, etc. 
And just as Shiva has 1008 names or epithets, so his wife possesses a 
feminine duplicate of nearly everyone of his designations. At least one 
thousand distinct appellations are assigned to her, some expressive of 
her benignant, some of her ferocious character. Notably it is declared in 
the Tantras that if any one repeats eight of her names containing the 
letter m, kings will become his servants, all men will love him, and all 
his difficulties come to a happy termination. 

In short, all the other Saktis came to be included by the Saktas under 
the Sakti or female energy of Shiva, which eventually developed into 
innumerable separate manifestations and personifications. 

But it began in a rather modest way by starting the worship of the 
Durga along with Shiva, Laxmi along with Vishnu, Radha along with 
Krishna and Sita along with Rama. The number of Shaktis was not 
defined. 

Sometimes only eight Saktis are enumerated and sometimes nine, viz, 
Vaishnavi, Brahmani, Raudri, Mahesvari, Narasinhi, Varahi, Indrani, 
Karttiki, and Pradhana. Others reckon fifty forms of the Sakti of Vishnu, 
besides Laxmi; and fifty of Siva or Rudra, besides Durga or Gauri. 
Sarasvati is named as a Sakti of Vishnu and Rudra, as well as Brahma. 
According to the Vayu-purana, the female nature of Rudra (Siva) became 
two-fold, one half Asita or white, and the other half Sita or black, each 
of these again becoming manifold. The white or mild nature includes 
the Saktis Uma, Gauri, Laxmi, Sarasvati, &c, the black or fierce nature 
includes Durga, Kali, Candi, Camunda, &c. 

Soon however all the Shaktis were universalized under the Shakti or 
female energy which eventually developed into innumerable separate 
manifestations and personifications. 

These personifications, following the analogy of some of Vishnu’s 
incarnations, are sometimes grouped according to a supposed 
difference of participation in the divine energy, such for example as 
the full energy (puma sakti), the partial ( ansarupini ) the still more 
partial ( kala-rupini ), and the partial of the partial (kalansa-rupini), 
this last including mortal women in various degrees, from Brahman 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


180 


180 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

women downwards, who are all worshipped as forms of the divine mother 
manifesting herself upon earth; for it must not be forgotten that in the 
Sakta creed every female is a present divinity. 

The more usual classification, however, begins with the Mahavidyas. 
These are held to be ten in number, that number being probably 
selected to match the ten chief incarnations of Vishnu. They are called 
Mahavidyas as sources of the goddess’ highest knowledge; that is to 
say, of the knowledge which confers preternatural powers. They have all 
different attributes, and are thus designated: (1) Kali (sometimes called 
Syama), black in colour, fierce and irascible in character. (2) Tara, a more 
benign manifestation, worshipped especially in Kashmir. (3) Shodasi, a 
beautiful girl of sixteen (also called Tripura worshipped in Malabar). (4) 
Bhuvanesvari. (5) Bhairavi. (6) Chinna-mastaka, a naked goddess holding 
in one hand a blood-stained scimitar and in the other her own severed 
head, which drinks the warm blood gushing from her headless trunk. (7) 
Dhumavati, in the form of smoke. (8) Vagala or Bagala, having the face 
of crane. (9) Matangi, a woman of the Bhangi caste. (10) Kamalatmika. 
Of these the first two are especially Mahavidyas, the next five vidyas, 
and the last three Siddhavidyas. 

The next class of personifications or manifestations of the goddess are 
the Matris or Matrika (or Maha-matris), the great mothers of the Universe. 
These are more important than the Mahavidyas in their connexion with 
the prevalence of Mother-worship, a form of religion which, among the 
peasantry of India, often takes the place of every other creed. This will 
be more fully explained in the chapter on tutelary deities. 

The Matris or Mothers are: 1. Vaishnavi, 2. Brahmi or Brahmani, often 
represented with four faces or heads like the God Brahma, 3. Karttikeyi, 
sometimes called Mayuri, 4. Indrani, 5. Yami, 6. Varahi, connected 
with the boar incarnation of Vishnu, 7. Devi or Isani, represented with 
a trident in one hand as wife of Shiva. 8. Laxmi. Each of these divine 
Mothers is represented with a child in her lap. 

Closely related to the Mothers is a class of female personifications called 
the eight Nayikas or mistresses. These, of course, are not necessarily 
mothers. In fact no other idea is connected with them than that of 
illegitimate sexual love. They are called Balini, Kamesvari, Vimala, 
Aruna, Medini, Jayini. Sarvesvari and Kaulesi. 

Another class of manifestations is that of the Yoginis. These are 
sometimes represented as eight fairies or sorceresses created by and 
attendant on Durga, sometimes as mere forms of that goddess, sixty 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


181 


APPENDIX IV 181 

or sixty-five in number, and capable of being multiplied to the number 
of ten millions. 

Other classes not worth enumerating are the Dakinis and Sakinis. 
These are simply female friends or ogresses of most repulsive habits, 
and are not so much manifestations of the goddess as impish servants 
always attendant on her. 

But it is in the form Kali — the form under which the goddess is 
worshiped at Calcutta — that she is most terrible. 

The following is a free translation of two passages in the Tantras 
descriptive of Kali’s appearance: 

“One should adore with liquors and oblations that Kali who has a 
terrible gaping mouth and uncombed hair : who has four hands and a 
splendid garland formed of the heads of the giants she has slain and 
whose blood she has drunk; who holds a sword in her lotus-like hands; 
who is fearless and awards blessings; who is as black as the large clouds 
and has the whole sky for her clothes; who has string of skulls round her 
neck and a throat besmeared with blood; who wears ear-rings (consisting 
of two dead bodies); who carries two dead bodies in her hands; who has 
terrible teeth and smiling face; whose form is awful and who dwells in 
burning-grounds (for consuming corpses); who stands on the breast of her 
husband Maha-deva.” 

( Page Nos. 63-64 are missing. The script of Page No. 65 only is given 
below along with the concluding para written in the handwriting of 
the author.) 

The Tantrik worship is altogether different from Srauta or Pauranik 
worship. It is in keeping with its central philosophy namely the best 
form of worship is the fullest satisfaction of the carnal desires of man. 
The Tantrik worship is summed up in what are called five Makaras, 
The five Makaras are: 

(i) The drinking of Madya (i.e. wine and liquors of various kinds), 

(ii) The eating of Mansa (meat). 

(iii) The eating of Matsya (fish). 

(iv) The eating of Mudra (parched or fried grain). 

(v) The performance of Maithun (sexual intercourse with a woman). 

The Tantrik Puja consists in the performance of these acts. It is not 
necessary to draw attention to the fact that whatever is declared as 
nishidha (prohibited) is allowed in the Tantrik worship even sexual 
intercourse with a woman being prescribed as part of the Puja. Such is 
the growth of the Hindu Religion. On reading this history a student of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

true religion is forced to ask: Where is the place of morality in the 
Hindu Religion? 

Religion no doubt started its career by asking many questions: 

“What am I?” “Who made the Universe?” “If God made it what is the 
relation of Ego to God?” “What is the right way to propitiate God ?” “ What 
is the relation between I and the Non-I i.e. between man and universe?” 
“What constitutes good life or that will please God?” etc. 

Most of these questions have been taken over by theology, metaphysics, 
philosophy and ethics, into which religion has become split. But there 
is one question that remains with religion to preach and propagate 
namely what constitutes good life. A religion which does not do so is 
no religion at all. 

Why have the Brahmins made the Hindu religion so nude; so devoid 
of morality? The Hindu religion is nothing but worshipping so many 
Gods and Goddesses, worshipping so many trees, visiting so many places 
of pilgrimage and making offerings to the Brahmins. Was the religion 
formulating for enabling the Brahmins to earn their living? Did they 
ever think that morality is the foundation of society and that unless 
morality is imbedded in religion it (has no driving)* force. These are 
questions which the Brahmins must answer. 

• • 


*The words are introduced by us as this portion of the page is moth-eaten. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


183 


APPENDIX V 

THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE VEDAS 


The Hindus are enjoined to study the Vedas every day the Satapatha 
Brahmana explains the reasons for it. It says: 

“There are only five great sacrifices, which are the great ceremonies, 
viz., the offering to living creatures, 1 the offering to men, the offering to 
the fathers, the offering to the gods, and the Veda-offering ( Brahma-yajna ). 

2. Let an oblation be daily presented to living creatures. Thus the offering 
to them is fulfilled. Let (hospitality) be daily bestowed even down to the 
bowl of water; Thus is the offering to men fulfilled. Let the oblation to 
the gods be daily presented 2 as far as the faggot of wood. Thus is the 
offering to the gods fulfilled. 3. Next is the Veda-offering. This means 
private study 3 (of the sacred books). In this Veda-sacrifice speech is the 
juhu, the soul the upabhrit, the eye the dhruva, intelligence the sruva, 4 
truth the ablution, and paradise the conclusion. He who, knowing this, 
daily studies the Veda, conquers an undecaying world more than thrice as 
great as that which he acquires who bestows this whole earth filled with 
riches. Wherefore the Veda should be studied. 4. Verses of the Rig-veda 
are milk-oblations to the Gods. He who, knowing this, daily reads these 
verses satisfies the gods with milk-oblations; and they being satisfied, satisfy 
him with property, with breath, with generative power, with complete 
bodily soundness, with all excellent blessings. Streams of butter, streams 
of honey flow as svadha-oblations to the fathers. 5. Yajush-verses are 

1 This sacrifice, as I learn from Prof. Aufrecht, consists in scattering grain for the 
benefit of birds, etc. See Bohtlingk and Roth’s Lexicon, s. v. bali. In regard to the other 
sacrifices see Colebrooke’s Misc. Essays, i. pp. 150, 153, 182 ff., 203 ff. 

2 In explanation of this Prof. Aufrecht refers to Katyayana’s Srauta Sutras, iv. 1, 10 
and Manu, iii. 210, 214, 218. 

3 Svadhyayah sva-sakhadhyanam “ Reading of the Veda in one’s own sakha.” — comm. 

4 These words denote sacrificial spoons or ladles of different kinds of wood. See the 
drawings of them in Prof. Muller’s article on the funeral rites of the Brahmans, Journ. of 
the Germ. or. Sec. Vol. ix. pp. Ixxviii and Lxxx. 

This is a six-page typed copy on ‘The Infallibility of the Vedas’ having 
no corrections or instructions by the author. The latter portion of this 
chapter is not available. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


184 


184 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

offerings of butter to the gods. He who, knowing this, daily 
reads these verses, satisfies the gods with offerings of butter; 
and they, being satisfied, satisfy him, etc. (as in the preceding 
paragraph). 6. Saman-verses are soma-libations to the gods. He 
who, knowing this, daily reads these verses, satisfies the gods 
with soma-libations; and they being satisfied, satisfy him, etc. (as 
above). 7. Verses of Atharvan and Angiras (atharvangirasah 1 ) are 
oblations of fat to the gods. He who, knowing this, daily reads 
these verses, satisfies the gods with oblations of fat; and they 
etc. (as above). 8. Prescriptive and scientific treatises, dialogues, 
traditions, tales, verses and eulogistic texts are oblations of honey 
to the gods. He who, knowing this, daily reads these, satisfies the 
gods with oblations of honey; and they etc. (as above). 9. Of this 
Veda-sacrifice there are four Vashatkaras when the wind blows, 
when it lightens, when it thunders, when it crashes; wherefore 
when it blows, lightens, thunders, or crashes, let the man, who 
knows this, read, in order that these Vashatkaras may not be 
interrupted 2 . He who does so is freed from dying a second time, 
and attains to an union with Brahma. Even if he cannot read 
vigorously, let him read one text relating to the gods. Thus he is 
not deprived of his living creatures.” 

xi. 5, 7, 1 : “Now comes an encomium upon Vedic study. Study 
and teaching are loved. He (who practises them) becomes composed 
in mind. Independent of others, he daily attains his objects, sleeps 
pleasantly, becomes his own best physician. Control of his senses, 
concentration of mind, increase of intelligence, renown, capacity to 
educate mankind [are the results of study]. Increasing intelligence 
secures for the Brahman the four attributes of saintliness, suitable 
conduct, renown, and capacity for educating mankind. When so 
educated, men guarantee to the Brahman the enjoyment of the 
four prerogatives which are his due, reverence, the receipt of 
gifts, freedom from oppression, and from death by violence. 2. Of 
all the modes of exertion, which are known between heaven and 
earth, study of the Veda occupies the highest rank, (in the case 
of him) who, knowing this, studies it. Wherefore this study is to 
be practised. 3. On every occasion when a man studies the Vedic 
hymns he (in fact) performs a complete ceremonial of sacrifice, i.e. 
whosoever, knowing this, so studies. Wherefore this study, etc., etc. 
4. And even when a man perfumed with unguents adorned with 
jewels, satiated with food, and reposing on a comfortable couch, 
studies the Veda he (has all the merit of one who) performs penance 


The Atharva Samhita is so called. 

See Bothlingk and Roth’s Lexicon, s. v. chhambat. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


185 


APPENDIX V 185 

(left) to the very tips of his nails 1 : (such is the case with him) 
who, knowing this, studies. Wherefore etc. 5. Rig-veda-verses are 
honey, Sama-verses butter, Yajus-verses nectar ( amrita ). When a 
man reads dialogues ( vakovakya ) and legends these two sorts of 
composition are respectively oblations of cooked milk and cooked 
flesh. 6. He who, knowing this, daily reads Rig-veda verses, satisfies 
the gods with honey; and they, when satisfied, satisfy him with 
all objects of desire, and with all enjoyments. 7. He who, knowing 
this, daily reads Sama-verses, satisfies the gods with butter; and 
they, when satisfied, etc. (as before). 8. He who, knowing this, 
daily reads Yajus-verses, satisfies the gods with nectar; and they, 
etc. (as before). 9. He who, knowing this, daily studies dialogues 
and the different classes of ancient stories, satisfies the gods with 
milk — and flesh-oblations; and they, etc. (as before). 10. The waters 
move. The Sun moves. The Moon moves. The constellations move. 

The Brahman who on any day does not study the Veda, is on that 
day like what these moving bodies would be if they ceased to 
move or act. Wherefore such study is to be practised. Let a man 
therefore present as his offering a verse of the Rig-veda, or the 
Saman, or the Yajush, or a Gatha, or a Kumvya, in order that 
the course of his observances may not be interrupted.” 

Manu also supports the Satapatha Brahmana. He says: 

“The Veda is the eternal eye of the fathers, of Gods, and of men; 
it is beyond human power and comprehension; this is a certain 
conclusion. Whatever traditions are apart from the Veda, and 
all heretical views, are fruitless in the next world, for they are 
declared to be founded on darkness. All other (books) external to 
the Veda, which arise and pass away, are worthless and false from 
their recentness of date. The system of the four castes, the three 
worlds, the four states of life, all that has been, now is, or shall 
be, is made manifest by the Veda. The objects of touch and taste, 
sound, form, and odour, as the fifth, are made known by the Veda, 
together with their products, qualities, and the character of their 
action. The eternal Veda supports all beings; hence I regard it as the 
principle instrument of well-being to this creature, man. Command 
of armies, royal authority, the administration of criminal justice, 
and the sovereignty of all worlds, he alone deserves who knows the 

1 This sentence is differently rendered by Professor Weber, Ind. Stud. x. p. 112, as 
follows: “He burns (with sacred fire) to the very tips of his nails.” In a later page of the 
same Essay we are told that according to the doctrine of a teacher called Naka Maudgaly 
as stated in the Taittiriya Aranyaka, the study and teaching of the Veda are the real 
tapas svadhyaya-pravachane eva tad hi tapah). In the text of the Aranyaka itself, vii. 8, 
it is declared that study and teaching should always accompany such spiritual or ritual 
acts as satyam, tapas, dama, sama the agnihotra sacrifice, etc. See Indische Studien, ii. 
214, and x. 113. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


186 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Veda. As fire, when it has acquired force, burns up even green trees, so 
he who knows the Veda consumes the taint of his soul which has been 
contracted from works. He who comprehends the essential meaning of the 
Veda, in whatever order of life he may be, is prepared for absorption into 
Brahma, even while abiding in this lower world.” 

Manu however is not satisfied with this. He goes much beyond and 
enunciates the following new doctrine — 

“By Sruti is meant the Veda, and by Smriti the institutes of law: the 
contents of these are not to be questioned by reason, since from them 
(a knowledge of) duty has shone forth. The Brahman who, relying on 
rationalistic treatises 1 , shall contemn these two primary sources of knowledge, 
must be excommunicated by the virtuous as a sceptic and reviler of the 

Vedas 13. To those who are seeking a knowledge of duty, the sruti 

is the supreme authority.” 


• • 


1 This, however, must be read in conjunction with the precept in xii. 106, which declares 
arsham dharmopadesam cha veda-sastravirodhina yas tarkenanusandhatte sa dharman 
veda naparah “He, and he only is acquainted with duty, who investigates the injunctions of 
the rishis, and the precepts of the smriti, by reasonings which do not contradict the Veda.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


187 


PART II 
Social 


According to the original Table of Contents by the 
author Part I and Part III are classified as Religious 
and Political respectively while Part II is not given 
any classification. However, this part is classified 
as ‘Social’ on one of the pages from Riddle No. 21. 
This Part contained six riddles including ‘The Riddle 
of Women’ entitled ‘Why did the Brahmins degrade 
the Indian Women ?\ This chapter has already been 
included in Vol. No. 3 of this series under the title 
‘Revolution and Counter-Revolution’ vide Ch. 17. Hence 
it is excluded from this volume. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\voI4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


189 


RIDDLE NO. 16 

THE FOUR VARNAS— ARE THE 
BRAHMINS SURE OF THEIR ORIGIN? 


It is the cardinal faith of every Hindu that the Hindu Social Order is 
a Divine Order. The prescriptions of this Divine Order are three. First 
Society is permanently divided into four classes namely (1) Brahmins, 
(2) Kshatriyas, (3) Vaishyas and (4) Shudras. Second the four classes in 
point of their mutual status are linked together in an order of graded 
inequality. The Brahmins are at the head and above all others. The 
Kshatriyas below the Brahmins but above the Vaishyas and the Shudras. 
The Vaishyas below the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas but above the 
Shudras and the Shudras below all. Third the occupations of the four 
classes are fixed. The occupation of the Brahmins is to acquire learning 
and to teach. The occupation of the Kshatriyas is to fight, that of the 
Vaishyas to trade and that of the Shudras to serve as menials to the 
other three classes above him. This is called by the Hindus the Varna 
Vevastha. It is the very soul of Hinduism. Without Varna Vevastha 
there is nothing else in Hinduism to distinguish it from other religions. 
That being so it is only proper that an enquiry should be made into the 
origin of this Varna system. 

For an explanation of its origin we must have recourse to what the 
ancient Hindu literature has to say on the subject. 

I 

It would be better to collect together in the first place the views 
expressed in the Vedas. 

This is a 33-page typed script having all necessary corrections and additions 
incorporated by the author. There are two concluding pages written by 
the author himself. All the pages of the chapter are loose sheets tagged 
together with a title page in the handwriting of the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The subject is referred to in the Rig- Veda in the 90th Hymn of 
the 10th Book. It runs as follows: 

“1 Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand 
feet. On every side enveloping the earth, he overpassed (it) by a 
space of ten fingers. 2. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), 
whatever has been and whatever shall be. He is also the lord of 
immortality since (or, when) by food he expands. 3. Such is his 
‘greatness, and Purusha is superior to this. All existences are a 
quarter of him; and three-fourths of him are that which is immortal 
in the sky. 4. With three quarters Purusha mounted upwards. A 
quarter of him was again produced here. He was then diffused 
everywhere over things which eat and things which do not eat. 

5. From him was born Viraj, and from Viraj, Purusha. When born, 
he extended beyond the earth, both behind and before. 6. When 
the Gods performed a sacrifice with Purusha as the oblation, 
the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the autumn 
its (accompanying) offering. 7. This victim Purusha, born in the 
beginning, they immolated on the sacrificial grass. With him the 
gods, the Sadhyas, and the rishis sacrificed. 8. From that universal 
sacrifice were provided curds and butter. It formed those aerial 
(creatures) and animals both wild and tame. 9. From the universal 
sacrifice sprang the rich and saman verses, the metres and the 
yajush. 10. From it sprang horses, and all animals with two rows 
of teeth; kine sprang from it; from it goats and sheep. 11. When 
(the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut him 
up? What was his mouth? What arms (had he)? What (two objects) 
are said (to have been) his thighs and feet? 12. The Brahman was 
his mouth; the Rajanya was made his arms; the being (called) the 
Vaisya, he was his thighs; the Sudra sprang from his feet. 13. 

The moon sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from his eye, 
Indra and Agni from his mouth, and Vayu from his breath. 14. 

From his navel arose the air, from his head the sky, from his feet 
the earth, from his ear the (four) quarters; in this manner (the 
gods) formed the worlds. 15. When the gods, performing sacrifice, 
bound Purusha as a victim, there were seven sticks (struck up) 
for it (around the fire), and thrice seven pieces of fuel were made. 

16. With sacrifice the gods performed the sacrifice. These were the 
earliest rites. These great powers have sought the sky, where are 
the former Sadhyas, gods.” 

This hymn is known by its general name Purusha Sukta and is 
supposed to embody the official doctrine of Varna. 

How far do the other Vedas support this theory? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


191 


RIDDLE NO. 16 191 

The Sama-Veda has not incorporated the Purusha Sukta among its 
hymns. Nor does it give any other explanation of the Varna. 

The Yajur-Veda has two branches — the White Yajur-Veda and the 
Black Yajur-Veda. 

The Black Yajur-Veda is known to have three Sanhitas or collection of 
Mantras, the Kathaka Sanhita, the Maitriyani Sanhita and Taitterriya 
Sanhita. 

The White Yajur-Veda has only one Sanhita which is known as 
Vajasaneya Sanhita. 

The Maitriyani Sanhita and the Kathak Sanhita of the Black Yajur- 
Veda do not make any reference to the Purusha Sukta of the Rig-Veda; 
nor do they attempt to give any other explanation of the origin of the 
Varna system. 

It is only Taitterriya Sanhita of the Black Yajur-Veda and the 
Vajasaneya Sanhita of the White Yajur-Veda that have spoken something 
relating to the Varna system. 

The Vajasaneya Sanhita contains one explanation of the origin of 
the Varna System. The Taitterriya Sanhita on the other hand contains 
two explanations. There are two things to be noted about these two 
explanations contained in the Taitterriya Sanhita. The first is that these 
two do not agree with each other in the least; they are quite different. 
The second is that one of them agrees completely with that contained in 
the Vajasaneya Sanhita of the White Yajur-Veda. The following is the 
text of the Taitterriya Sanhita which may be taken as an independent 
explanation : 

“He (the Vratya) became filled with passions thence sprang the 
Rajanya”. 

“ Let the king to whose house the Vratya who knows this, comes 
as a guest, cause him to be respected as superior to himself. So doing 
he does no injury to his royal rank, or to his realm. From him arose 
the Brahman (Brahman) and the Kshattra (Kshatriya). They said, 

‘Into whom shall we enter, etc.” 

The explanation contained in the Vajasaneya Sanhita which tallies 
with the second 1 explanation given by the Taitterriya Sanhita reads as 
follows: 

“He lauded with one. Living beings were formed. Prajapati 
was the ruler. He lauded with three: the Brahman was created: 
Brahmanaspati was the ruler. He lauded with five; existing things 
were created : Brahmanaspati was the ruler. He lauded with seven; 
the seven rishis were created; Dhatri was the ruler. He lauded 

1 Khanda IV. Prapathaka III Verses X following- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with nine; the Fathers were created: Aditi was the ruler. He lauded 
with eleven: the seasons were created: the Artavas were the rulers. 

He lauded with thirteen: the months were created: the year was 
the ruler. He lauded with fifteen: the Kshattra (the Kshattriya) was 
created: Indra was the ruler. He lauded with seventeen: animals 
were created: Brihaspati was the ruler. He lauded with nineteen; the 
Sudra and the Arya (Vaisya) were created: day and night were the 
rulers. He lauded with twenty-one : animals with undivided hoofs were 
created: Varuna was the ruler. He lauded with twenty-three: small 
animals were created: Pushan was the ruler. He lauded with twenty- 
five; wild animals were created: Vayu was the ruler (compare R.V.x. 

90, 8). He lauded with twenty-seven: heaven and earth separated: 
Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas separated after them: they were the 
rulers. He lauded with twenty-nine: trees were created: Soma was 
the ruler. He lauded with thirty-one: living beings were created: The 
first and second halves of the month were the rulers. He lauded with 
thirty-one; existing things were tranquilized; Prajapati Parameshthin 
was the ruler.” 

Here it should be noted that not only there is no unanimity between 
the Rig-Veda and the Yajur-Veda but there is no agreement between 
the two Samhitas of the Yajur-Veda on so important a subject as the 
origin of the Varnas. 

Let us turn to the Atharva-Veda. The Atharva-Veda has also two 
explanations to give. It incorporates the Purusha Sukta though the 
order of the verses varies from the order in which they stand in the 
Rig-Veda. What is however important to note is that the Atharva-Veda 
is not content with the Purusha Sukta. It offers other explanations also. 
One such explanation reads as follows 1 : 

“The Brahman was born the first, with ten heads and ten faces. 

He first drank the soma ; he made poison powerless”. 

“The Gods were afraid of the Rajanya when he was in the womb. 

They bound him with bonds when he was in the womb. Consequently 
this Rajanya is born bound. If he were unborn unbound he would 
go on slaying his enemies. In regard to whatever Rajanya any one 
desires that he should born unbound, and should go on slaying his 
enemies, let him offer for him this Aindra-Birhaspatya oblation. A 
Rajanya has the character of Indra, and a Brahman is Brihaspati. 

It is through the Brahman that any one releases the Rajanya from 
his bond. The golden bond, a gift, manifestly releases from the bond 
that fetters him.” 


Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 21-22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


193 


RIDDLE NO. 16 193 

The other explanation speaks of people being descended from Manu 
and is to be found referred to in the following passages 1 : 

“ Prayers and hymns were formerly congregated in the Indra, in the 
ceremony which Atharvan, father Manu, and Dadhyanch celebrated”. 

“ Whatever prosperity or succour father Manu obtained by sacrifices, 
may we gain all that under thy guidance, O Rudra.” 

“Those pure remedies of yours, O Maruts, those which are most 
auspicious, ye vigorous gods, those which are beneficient, those which 
our father Manu chose, those, and the blessing and succour of Rudra, 

I desire.” 

“That ancient friend hath been equipped with the powers of the 
mighty (gods). Father Manu has prepared hymns to him, as portals 
of success to the gods.” 

“Sacrifice is Manu, our protecting father.” 

“Do ye (gods) deliver, protect and intercede for us; do not lead us 
far away from the paternal path of Manu.” 

“He (Agni) who abides among the offspring of Manu as the invoker 
(of the gods), is even the lord of these riches.” 

“Agni, together with the gods, and the children of Manush, 
celebrating a multiform sacrifice with hymns, etc.” “Ye gods, Vajas, 
and Ribhukshans, come to our sacrifice by the path travelled hy the 
gods, that ye, pleasing deities, may institute a sacrifice among these 
people of Manush on auspicious days”. 

“ The people of Manush praise in the sacrifices Agni, the invoker.” 

“Whenever Agni, lord of the people, kindled, abides gratified among 
the people of Manush, he repels all Rakshasas.” 

Stopping for a moment to take stock so to say of the position it is 
quite clear that there is no unanimity among the Vedas on the origin 
of the four Varnas. None of the other Vedas agree with the Rig-Veda 
that the Brahamin was created from the mouth of the Prajapati, the 
Kshatriyas from his arms, the Vaishyas from his thighs and the Shudras 
from his feet. 

II 

Let us now turn to the writings called the Brahmanas and see what 
they have to say on this question. 

The explanation given by the Sathpatha Brahmana is as follows 2 : 

“(Uttering) ‘bhuh’ Prajapati generated this earth. (Uttering) 

‘bhuvah’ he generated the air, and (uttering) ‘svah’, he generated 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 162-165. 

2 Muir Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the sky. This Universe is co-extensive with these worlds. (The fire) is 
placed with the whole. Saying ‘bhuh\ Prajapati generated the Brahman; 
(saying) ‘bhuvah’ he generated the Kshattra; (and saying) ‘svah’ he 
generated the Vis. The fire is placed with the whole, (saying) ‘bhuh’, 
Prajapati generated himself; (saying) ‘bhuvah’ he generated offspring; 
(saying) ‘svah’, he generated animals. This world is so much as self, 
offspring, and animals. (The fire) is placed with the whole.” 

The Sathpatha Brahmana also gives another explanation. It reads 
as follows 1 : 

“Brahma (here, according to the commentator, existing in 
the form of Agni, and representing the Brahman caste) was 
formerly this (universe), one only. Being one, it did not develop. 

It energetically created an excellent form, the Kshattra, viz., 
those among the gods who are powers (kshattrani), Indra, 
Varuna, Soma Rudra, Parjanya, Yama, Mrityu, Isana. Hence 
nothing is superior to the Kshattra. Therefore the Brahman 
sits below the Kshattriya at the Rajasuya-sacrifice; he confers 
that glory on the Kshattra (the royal power). This, the Brahma, 
is the source of the Kshattra; hence, although the king attains 
supremacy, he at the end resorts to the Brahma as his source. 
Whoever destroys him (the Brahman) destroys his own source. 

He becomes most miserable, as one who has injured a superior. 

24. He did not develop. He created the Vis, those classes of 
gods who are designated by troops, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, 
Visvadevas, Maruts, 25. He did not develop. He created the 
Sudra class, Pushan. This earth is Pushan; for she nourishes 
all that exists. 26. He did not develop. He energetically created 
an excellent form, Justice (Dharma). This is the ruler (kshattra) 
of the ruler (kshattra), namely justice. Hence nothing is 
superior to justice. Therefore the weaker seeks (to overcome) 
the stronger by justice, as by a king. This justice is truth. In 
consequence they say of a man who speaks truth, ‘ he speaks 
justice;’ or of a man who is uttering justice, ‘he speaks truth.’ 

For this is both of these. 27. This is the Brahma, Kshattra, 

Vis and Sudra. Through Agni it became Brahma among the 
gods, the Brahman among men, through the (divine) Kshatriya 
a (human) Kshattriya, through the (divine) Vaisya a (human) 
Vaisya, through the (divine) Sudra a (human) Sudra. Wherefore 
it is in Agni among the gods and in a Brahman among men, 
that they seek after an abode.” 

The Taittiriya Brahmana offers three explanations. First is in the 
following terms 2 : 

1 Muir Sanskrit Text Vol. I p. 20. 

2 Muir I p. 17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


195 


RIDDLE NO. 16 


195 


“This entire (universe) has been created by Brahma. Men say that 
the Vaisya class was produced from Rick-verses. They say that the 
Yajur-Veda is the womb from which the Kshattriya was born. The 
Sama-Veda is the source from which the Brahmans sprang. This word 
the ancients declared to the ancients.” 

The second says 1 : 

“The Brahman caste is sprung from the gods; the Sudra from the 
Asuras”. 

The third is as follows 2 : 

“Let him at his will milk out with a wooden dish. But let not a 
Sudra milk it out. For this Sudra has sprung from non-existence. They 
say that which a Sudra milks out is no oblation. Let not a Sudra milk 
out the Agnihotra. For they do not purify that. When that passes 
beyond the filter, then it is an oblation”. 

Again looking at the testimony of the Brahmanas how far do they 
support the Purusha Sukta? Not one of them do. 

Ill 

The next thing would be to see what the Smritis have to offer some 
explanation of the origin of the Varna system. It is worthwhile taking 
note of them. This is what Manu has to say on the subject 3 . 

“He (the self-existent) having felt desire, and willing to 
create various living beings from his own body, first created 
the waters, and threw into them a seed. 9. That seed became 
a golden egg, of lustre equal to the Sun; in it he himself was 
born as a Brahma, the parent of all the worlds. 10. The waters 
are called narah, for they are sprung from Nara; and as they 
were his first sphere of motion he is therefore called Narayana. 

11. Produced from the imperceptible eternal, existent and non- 
existent, cause, the male (Purusha) is celebrated in the world as 
Brahma. 12. After dwelling for a year in the egg, the glorious 
being, himself, by his own contemplation, split it in twain.” 

“That the worlds might be peopled, he caused the 
Brahman, the Kshattriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra to 
issue from his mouth, his arms, his thighs, and his feet. 

32. Having divided his own body into two parts, the lord 
(Brahma became), with the half of male (purusha), and with 
the half, a female; and in her he created Viraj. 33. Know, 

O most excellent twice-born men, that I, whom that male, 
(Purusha) Viraj, himself am the creator of all this world. 


1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 21. 

2 Ibid p. 21. 

3 Ibid pp. 36-37. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

34. Desiring to produce living creatures, I performed very arduous 
devotion and first created ten Maharshis, Great rishis, lords of living 
beings, 35. viz., Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Prachetas, Vasishtha, Bhrigu, and Narada. 36. They, endowed with 
great energy, created other seven Manus, gods, and abodes of gods, 
and Maharshis of boundless might; 37. Yakshas. Rakshases, Pisachas, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras, Asuras, Nagas, Serpents, great birds, and 
the different classes of pitris; 38. Lightnings, thunderbolts, clouds, 
portentous atmospheric sounds, comets, and various luminaries; 
39. Kinnars, apes, fishes, different sorts of birds, cattle, deer, men, 
beasts with two rows of teeth; 40. small and large reptiles mouths; lice, 
flies, fleas, all gadflies, and gnats, and motionless things of different 
sorts. 41. Thus by my appointment, and by the force of devotion, was 
all this World both motionless and moving, created by those great 
beings, according to the (previous) actions of each creature.” 

There is also another view expressed by Manu in his Smriti as to 
the basic reasons for dividing men into four classes 1 : 

“I shall now declare succinctly in order the states which the soul 
reaches by means of each of these qualities. 40. Souls endowed 
with the Satlva quality attain to godhead: those having the 
rajas quality become men; whilst those characterized by tamas 

always become beasts — such is the threefold destination 

43. Elephants, horses, Sudras and contemptible Mlenchhas, lions, 

tigers, and boars form the middle dark condition 46. Kings, 

Kshattriyas, a King’s priests (purohitah), and men whose chief 
occupation is the war of words, compose the middle condition of 
passion.... 48. Devotees, ascetics, Brahmans, the deities borne 
on aerial cars, constellations, and Daityas, constitute the lowest 
condition of goodness. 49. Sacrificing priests, rishis, Gods, the 
Vedas, the celestial luminaries, years, the fathers, the Sadhyas, 
form the second condition of goodness. 50. Brahma, the creators, 
righteousness, the Great one ( mahat ) the Unapparent One ( avyakta ) 
compose the highest condition of goodness.” 

Manu of course agrees with the Rig-Veda. But his view is of no use 
for comparison. It is not original. He is merely repeating the Rig-Veda. 

IV 

It will be interesting to compare with these views those contained 
in the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. 


1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. Ip. 41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


197 


RIDDLE NO. 16 197 

The Ramayana says that the four Varnas are the offspring of Manu, 
the daughter of Daksha and the wife of Kasyapa 1 . 

“Listen while I declare to you from the commencement all the 
Prajapatis (lord of creatures) who came into existence in the earliest 
time. Kardama was the first, then Vokrita, Sesha, Samsraya, the 
energetic Bahuputra, Sthanu, Marichi, Atri, the strong Kratu, 
Pulastya, Angiras, Prachetas, Pulaha, Daksha, then Vivasvat, 
Arishtanemi, and the glorious Kasyapa, who was the last. The 
Prajapati Daksha is famed to have had sixty daughters. Of these 
Kasyapa took in marriage eight elegant maidens, Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Kalaka, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu and Anala. Kasyapa pleased, then 
said to these maids, ‘ye shall bring forth sons like me, preservers 
of the three worlds. Aditi, Diti, Danu and Kalaka assented; but the 
others did not agree. Thirty-three gods were born by Aditi, the Adityas, 
Vasus, Rudras, and the two Asvins. Manu (wife) of Kasyapa, produced 
men — Brahmans, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. ‘Brahmans were 
born from the mouth, Kshattriyas from the breast, Vaisyas from the 
thighs, and Sudras from the feet,’ So says the Veda. Anala gave 
birth to all trees with pure fruits.” 

Strange, very strange that Valmiki should have credited the creation 
of the four Varnas to Kassyapa instead of to Prajapati. His knowledge 
was evidently based only on hearsay. It is clear he did not know what 
the Vedas had said. 

Now the Mahabharata gives four different explanations in four 
different places. The first runs as follows: 

“Born all with splendour, like that of great rishis, the ten sons 
of Prachetas, reputed to have been virtuous and holy; and by them 
the glorious beings were formerly burnt up by fire springing from 
their mouths. From them was born Daksha Prachetas, and from 
Daksha, the parent, of the world (were produced), these creatures. 
Cohabiting with Virini, the Muni Daksha begot a thousand sons 
like himself, famous for their religious observances, to whom 
Narada taught the doctrine of final liberation, the unequalled 
knowledge of the Sankhya. Desirous of creating offspring, the 
Prajapati Daksha next formed fifty daughters of whom he gave ten 
to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, and twenty-seven, devoted to the 

regulation of time, to Indu (Soma) on Dakshayani, the most 

excellent of his thirteen wives, Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, begot 
the Adityas, headed by Indra and distinguished by their energy, 
and also Vivasvat. To Vivasvat was born a son, the mighty Yama 
Vaivasvata. To Martanda (i.e. Vivasvat, the Sun) was born the wise 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 116-117. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and mighty Manu, and also the renowned Yama, his (Manu’s) 
younger brother. Righteous was this wise Manu, on whom a race 
was founded. Hence this (family) of men became known as the 
race of Manu. Brahmans, Kshattriyas, and other men sprang from 
this Manu. From him O King, came the Brahman conjoined with 
the Kshatriya.” 

The theory propounded here is very much the same as that 
contained in the Ramayana with this difference, namely, the 
Mahabharata makes Manu, the progenitor of the four Varnas and 
secondly it does not say that the four Varnas were born from the 
different parts of Manu. 

The second explanation 1 given by the Mahabharata follows what 
is given in the Purusha Sukta of the Rig-Veda. It reads thus: 

“The King should appoint to be his royal priest a man who 
will protect the good, and restrain the wicked. On this subject 
they relate this following ancient story of a conversation between 
Pururavas the son of Ila and Matarisvan (Vayu, the windgod). 
Pururavas said: “ You must explain to me whence the Brahman, 
and whence the (other) three castes were produced, and whence 
the superiority (of the first) arises.” Matarisvan answered: “The 
Brahman was created from Brahma’s mouth, the Kshatriya from 
his arms, the Vaisya from his thighs, while for the purpose of 
serving these three castes was produced the fourth class, the 
Sudra, fashioned from his feet. The Brahman, as soon as born, 
becomes the lord of all beings upon the earth, for the purpose 
of protecting the treasure of righteousness. Then (the creator) 
constituted the Kshattriya the controller of the earth, a second 
Yama to bear the rod, for the satisfaction of the people. And it was 
Brahma’s ordinance that the Vaisya should sustain these three 
classes with money and grain, and that the Sudra should serve 
them.” The son of Ila then enquired: “Tell me, Vayu to whom the 
earth, with its wealth rightfully belongs, to the Brahman or the 
Kshattriya?” Vayu replied: “All this, whatever exists in the world 
is the Brahman’s property by right of primogeniture; this is known 
to those who are skilled in the laws of duty. It is his own which 
the Brahman eats, puts on, and bestows. He is the chief of all 
the castes, the first-born and the most excellent. Just as a woman 
when she has lost her (first) husband, takes her brother in law 
for a second; so the Brahman is thy first resource in calamity; 
afterwards another may arise”. 

The third view is expounded in the Shantiparva of the Mahabharata 2 : 

1 Muir’s Vol. I p. 

2 Ibid pp. 139-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


199 


RIDDLE NO. 16 199 

Bhrigu replied: ‘Brahma thus formerly created the Prajapatis, 
penetrated by his own energy, and in splendour equalling the sun 
and fire. The lord then formed truth, righteousness austere fervour, 
and the eternal Veda (or sacred science), virtuous practice, and 
purity for (the attainment of) heaven. He also formed the Gods, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Daityas, Asuras, Maharagas, Yakshas, 
Rakshasas, Nagas, Pisachas, and men, Brahmans, Kshatriyas, 
Vaisyas, and Sudras, as well as all other classes (varna) of 
beings. The colour (varna) of the Brahmans was white; that of the 
Kshattriyas red; that of the Vaishyas yellow, and that of the Sudras 
black.’ Bharadvaja here rejoins: ‘If the caste (varna) of the four 
classes is distinguished by their colour (varna), then a confusion 
of all the castes is observable. Desire, anger, fear, cupidity, grief, 
apprehension, hunger, fatigue, prevail over us all, by what then, 
is caste discriminated? Sweat, urine, excrement, phlegm, bile and 
blood (are common to all) the bodies of all decay; by what then is 
caste discriminated ? There are innumerable kinds of things moving 
and stationary how is the class (varna) of these various objects to 
be determined?’ Bhrigu replies: “There is no difference of castes”:” 

The fourth explanation is also contained in the same Shantiparva. 

It says: 

“Bharadvaja again enquires: ‘What is that in virtue of which 
a man is a Brahman, a Kshattriya, a Vaisya, or a Sudra; tell 
me, O most eloquent Brahman rishi’. Bhrigu replies: ‘He who 
is pure, consecrated by the natal and other ceremonies, who 
has completely studied the Veda, lives in the practice of the six 
ceremonies, performs perfectly the rites of purification, who eats 
the remains of oblations, is attached to his religious teacher, is 
constant in religious observances, and devoted to truth. — is called 
a Brahman. He in whom are seen truth, liberality inoffensiveness, 
harmlessness, modesty, compassion, and austere fervour — is 
declared to be a Brahman. He who practises the duty arising out 
of the kingly office, who is addicted to the study of the Veda, and 
who delights in giving and receiving, is called a Kshattriya. He who 
readily occupies himself with cattle, who is devoted to agriculture 
and acquisition, who is pure, and is perfect in the study of the 
Veda, — is denominated a Vaisya. He who is habitually addicted to 
all kinds of food, performs all kinds of work, who is unclean, who 
has abandoned the Veda, and does not practise pure observances, — 
is traditionally called a Sudra. And this (which I have stated) is 
the mark of a Sudra, and it is not found in a Brahman: (such) a 
Sudra will remain a Sudra, while the Brahman (who so acts) will 
be no Brahman.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


200 


200 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Except in one place the Mahabharata gives no support to the Rig- 
Vedic origin of the Varna System. 


V 

Let us inquire what the Puranas have to say on the origin of the 
Varna System. 

To begin with the Vishnu Purana. There are three theories propounded 
in the Vishnu Purana on the origin of the Chaturvarna. 

According to one the origin is to be ascribed to Manu. Says the Vishnu 
Purana 1 : 

“Before the mundane egg existed the divine Brahma Hiranyagarbha, 
the eternal originator of all worlds, who was the form of essence of 
Brahma, who consists of the divine Vishnu, who again is identical 
with Rik, Yajush, Saman and Atharva Vedas. From Brahma’s right 
thumb was born the Prajapati Daksha; Daksha had a daughter Aditi; 
from her was born Vivasvat; and from him sprang Manu. Manu 
had sons called Ikshvaku, Nriga, Dhrishta, Saryati, Narishanta, 
Pramsu, Nabhagandishta, Karusha and Prishadhra. From Karusha 
the Karushas, Kshattriyas of great power, were descended. Nabhaga, 
the son of Nedishta, became a Vaisya.” 

This explanation is incomplete. It only explains the origin of Kshatriyas 
and Vaishyas. It does not explain the origin of Brahmanas and Sudras. 
There is also another and a different version in the Vishnu Purana. It 
says: 

“Desirous of a son, Manu sacrificed to Mitra and Varuna; but in 
consequence of a wrong invocation through an irregularity of the hotri 
(priest) a daughter called Ilia was born. Then through the favour 
of Mitra and Varuna she bore to Manu a son called Sudyumna. 

But being again changed into a female through the wrath of Isvara 
(Mahadeva) she wandered near the hermitage of Budha the son of 
Soma (the Moon); who becoming enamoured of her had by her a son 
called Pururavas. After his birth, the God who is formed of sacrifice of 
the Rik, Yajush, Saman, and Atharva Vedas, of all things, of mind, of 
nothing, he who is in the form of the sacrificial Male, was worshipped 
by the rishis of infinite splendour who desired that Sudyumna should 
recover his manhood. Through the fervour of this God Ila became 
again Sudhumna.” 

“According to the Vishnu Purana, Atri was the son of Brahma, 
and the father of Soma (the Moon), whom Brahma installed as the 


Muir I pp. 220-221. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


201 


RIDDLE NO. 16 201 

sovereign of plants, Brahmans and stars. After celebrating the 
Rajasuya sacrifice. Soma became intoxicated with pride, and carried up 
Tara (Star), the wife of Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, whom, 
although admonished and entreated by Brahma, the gods, and rishis, 
he refused to restore. Soma’s part was taken by Usanas; and Rudra, 
who had studied under Angiras, aided Brihaspati. A fiery conflict 
ensued between the two sides, supported respectively by the gods and 
the Daityas, etc. Brahma interposed, and compelled Soma to restore 
Tara to her husband. She had, however, in the meantime become 
pregnant and bore a son Budha (the planet Mercury), of whom, when 
strongly urged, she acknowledged Soma to be the father. Pururavas, 
as has been already mentioned, was the son of this Budha by Ilia, 
the daughter of Manu. 

“Pururavas had six sons, of whom the eldest was Ayus. Ayus had 
five sons: Nahusha, Kshattra-vriddha, Rambha, Raji, and Anenas.” 

“Kshattravriddha had a son Sunahotra, who had three sons, Kasa, 

Lesa, and Gritsamada. From the last sprang Saunaka, who originated 
the system of four castes. Kasa had a son Kasiraja, of whom again 
Dirghatamas was the son as Dhanvantari was Dirghatamas.” 

The third version ascribes 1 the origin to Brahma. It says: 

“Maitreya 2 says: ‘You have described to me the Arvaksrotas, or 
human creation; declare to me, O Brahman, in detail the manner 
in which Brahma formed it. Tell me how and with what qualities, 
he created the castes, and what are traditionally reputed to be the 
functions of the Brahmans and others’. Parasara replies: 3. When, true 
to his design, Brahma became desirous to create the world, creatures 
in whom goodness ( sattva ) prevailed sprang from his mouth: 4. Others 
in whom passion (rajas) predominated came from his breast; other in 
whom both passion and darkness (tamas) were strong, proceeded from 
his thigh; 5. Others he created from his feet, whose chief characteristic 
was darkness. Of these was composed the system of four castes, 
Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, who had respectively 
issued from his mouth, breast, thighs, and feet.” 

Herein the Vishnu Purana has given the Rig-Vedic theory supported 
by the Sankhya Philosophy. 

In the Harivamsa are to be found two theories. One 3 upholds the 
theory of the origin of the Varnas as being born from one of the 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 61-62. 

2 The Vishnu Purana is cast in the form of a dialogue between Maitreya the student 
who asks questions and Rishi Parashara who answers his questions. 

3 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 227. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

descendents of Manu as the stock of descent than the one mentioned 
by the Vishnu Purana: 

“The son of Gritsamada was Sunaka, from whom sprang the 
Saunakas, Brahmanas, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras.” 

“Vitatha was the father of five sons, Suhotra, Suhotri, Gaya, 
Garga, and the great Kapila. Suhotra had two sons, the exalted 
Kasaka, and King Gritsamati. The sons of the latter were 
Brahmans, Kshattriyas and Vaisyas.” 

The other version speaks of their being formed by Vishnu who 
sprang from Brahma and had become Prajapati Daksha and is as 
follows 1 : 

“Janmejaya 2 says: ‘ I have heard, O Brahman the (description 
of the) Brahma Yuga, the first of the ages. I desire also to be 
accurately informed both summarily, and in detail, about the age 
of the Kshattriyas, with its numerous observances, illustrated as 
it was by sacrifice, and described, as it has been by men skilled 
in the art of narration.’ Vaisamapayana replied. ‘I shall describe 
to you that age revered for its sacrifices and distinguished 
for its various works of liberality, as well as for its people. 
Emancipation, practising unobstructed ceremonies, both in action 
and in abstinence from action constantly intent upon Brahma, 
united to Brahman as the highest object, — Brahmans glorious 
and sanctified in their conduct, leading a life of continence, 
disciplined by the knowledge of Brahman, — Brahmans complete 
in their observances, perfect in knowledge, and contemplative, — 
when at the end of a thousand yugas, their majesty was full, 
these Munis became involved in the dissolution of the world. 

Then Vishnu, sprung from Brahma, removed beyond the sphere of 
sense, absorbed in contemplation, became the Prajapati Daksha, 
and formed numerous creatures. The Brahmans, beautiful (or, 
dear to Soma), were formed from an imperishable ( akshara ), the 
Kshattriyas from a perishable ( kshara ), element, the Vaisyas 
from alteration, the Sudras from a modification of smoke. While 
Vishnu was thinking upon the castes ( varnan ) Brahmans were 
formed with white, red, yellow, and blue colour (varnaih). Hence 
in the world men have become divided into castes, being of four 
descriptions, Brahmans, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, one 
in form, distinct in their duties, two-footed, very wonderful, 
full of energy(?), skilled in expedients in all their occupations. 

Rites are declared to be prescribed by the Vedas for the three 
(highest) castes. By that contemplation practised by the being 


1 Muir’s Vol. I pp. 152-153. 

2 The Harivamsa is a dialogue between Janmejaya and Vaishampayan. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK SJ+DK+YS23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

RIDDLE NO. 16 

sprung from Brahma — by that practised in his character as Vishnu — the 
Lord Prachetasa (Daksha), i.e. Vishnu the great contemplator (Yogin), 
passed through his wisdom and energy from that state of meditation 
into the sphere of works. Next the Sudras, produced from extinction, 
are destitute of rites. Hence they are not entitled to be admitted to 
the purificatory ceremonies, nor does sacred science belong to them. 

Just as the cloud of smoke which rises from the fire on the friction 
of the fuel, and is dissipated, is of no service in the sacrificial rite, so 
too the Sudras wandering over the earth, are altogether (useless for 
purposes of sacrifice) owing to their birth, their mode of life devoid 
of purity and their want of the observances prescribed in the Veda.” 

The Bhagwat 1 Purana has also an explanation as to the origin of the 
Varnas, It says: 

“At the end of many thousand years the living soul which resides in 
time, action, and natural quality gave life to that lifeless egg floating 
on the water. Purusha then having burst the egg, issued from it was a 
thousand thighs, feet, arms, eyes, faces and heads. With his members 
the sages fashion the worlds, the seven lower worlds with his loins 
etc., and the seven upper worlds with his groin, etc. The Brahman 
was the mouth of Purusha, the Kshattriya his arms, the Vaishya was 
born from the thighs, the Sudra from the feet of the divine being. The 
earth was formed from his feet, the air from his navel; the heaven 
by the heart, and the mahaloka by the breast of the mighty one.” 

Lastly the Vayu Purana. What does it say? It takes up the theory of 
Manu as the originator of the Varna System. 

“The son of Gritsamada was Sunaka, from whom sprang Saunaka. 

In his family were born Brahmanas, Kshattriyas, Vaisya, and Sudras, 
twice-born men with various functions.” 


203 

203 


VI 

What a chaos? Why could the Brahmins not give a uniform, and 
consistent explanation of the origin of the four Varnas? 

On the issue of who created them, there is no uniformity. The Rig- 
Veda says the four Varnas were created by Prajapati. It does not 
mention which Prajapati. One would like to know which Prajapati it 
was who created the four Varnas. For there are so many Prajapatis. 
But even on the point of creation by Prajapati there is no agreement. 
One says they were created by Brahman. Another says they were 
created by Kassyapa. The third says they were created by Manu. 


Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 156. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


204 


204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On the issue how many Varnas, the creator — whoever he was — created, 
again there is no uniformity. The Rig-Veda says four Varnas were 
created. But other authorities say only two Varnas were created, some 
say Brahmans and Kshatriyas and some say Brahmana and Shudras. 

On the issue the relations intended by the creator for binding together 
the four Varnas the Rig-Veda lays down the rule of graded inequality 
based on the importance of the part of the creation from which the 
particular Varna was born. But the white Yajur-Veda denies this theory 
of the Rig-Veda. So also the Upanishad, Ramayana, Mahabharata, and 
Puranas. Indeed the Hari Vansha goes to the length of saying that the 
Shudras are twice born. 

This chaos seems to be the result of concoction of the theory of 
Chaturvarna which the Brahmins quietly singled into the Rig-Veda 
contrary to established traditions? 

What was the purpose, what was the motive of the Brahmins who 
concocted this theory? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


205 


RIDDLE NO. 17 

THE FOUR ASHRAMAS— THE WHY 
AND HOW ABOUT THEM 


The division of society into four orders called Varnas is not the only 
peculiar feature of Hindu Society. What is called Ashram Dharma is 
another. There is however one point of difference between the two. The 
Varna Dharma is a theory of the organization of society. The Ashram 
Dharma on the other hand is a theory of regulating the life of an 
individual. 

The Ashram Dharma divides the life of an individual into four stages 
(1) Brahmacharya, (2) Grahasthashram, (3) Vanaprastha and (4) Sannyas. 
The state of Brahmacharya has both de jure and de facto connotation in 
that it means an unmarried state of life. Its de jure connotation means 
the stage of study under a teacher. Grahasthashram is the stage of a 
householder, a stage of a married family life. The stage of Sannyas is 
a stage of renunciation of civic rights and responsibilities. It is a stage 
of civic death. The stage of Vanaprastha is in between Grahasthashram 
and Sannyas. It is a stage in which one belongs to society but is bound 
to live away from society. As the name implies it prescribes dwelling 
in forest. 

The Hindus believe that this institution of Ashram Dharma is as vital 
as that of the Varna Dharma for the well-being society. They call the 
two by a joint name of Varnashram Dharma as though they were one 
and integral. The two together form the steel-frame of the Hindu Society. 

To begin with it would be better to have a full understanding of the 
Ashram Dharma before inquiring into its origin and its purpose and its 
peculiarities. The best source for an exposition of the Ashram system is the 
Manu Smriti from which the following relevant extracts are reproduced: 

This is an 18-page Manuscript. This is the typed first copy with a title 
written in the author’s handwriting. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“In the eighth year after conception, one should perform the initiation 
( upanayana ) of a Brahmana, in the eleventh after conception (that) of a 
Kshatriya, but in the twelfth that of a Vaisya 1 .” 

“A twice-born man who, not having studied the Veda, applies himself 
to other (and worldly study), soon falls, even while living, to the condition 
of a Sudra and his descendants (after him).” 2 

“The vow of the three Vedas under a teacher must be kept for thirty- 
six years or for half that time, or for a quarter, or until the (student) has 
perfectly learnt them.” 

“Who has studied in due order the three Vedas, or two, or even one 
only, without breaking the (rule of) studentship, shall enter the order of 
householder.” 3 

“The student, the householder, the hermit, and the ascetic, these 
(constitute) four separate orders, which all spring from (the order of) 
householders.” 

“But all (or) even (any of) these orders, assumed successively in accordance 
with the Institutes (of the sacred law), lead the Brahmana who acts by the 
preceding (rules) to the highest state.” 

“And in accordance with the precepts of the Veda and of the Smriti, 
the housekeeper is declared to be superior to all of them; for he supports 
the other three 4 .” 

“A Twice-born Snataka, who has thus lived according to the law in the 
order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and keeping his organs 
in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing the rules given below): 

“When a householder sees his (skin) wrinkled and (his hair) white, and 
the sons of his sons, then he may resort to the forest 5 .” 

“But having thus passed the third part of (a man’s natural term of) 
life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth part of his 
existence, after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects.” 

“He who after passing from order to order, after offering sacrifices and 
subduing his senses, becomes tired with (giving alms and offerings of food), 
as ascetic, gains bliss after death.” 

“When he has paid the three debts, let him apply his mind to (the 
attainment of) final liberation; he who seeks it without having paid (his 
debts) sinks downwards.” 

1 Manu Smriti Chapter II 36. 

2 Ibid., II 168. 

3 Ibid. Ill 1-2. 

4 Ibid., VI 87-89. 

5 Ibid, VI 1-2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


207 


RIDDLE NO. 17 207 

“Having studied the Vedas in accordance with the rule, having begot 
sons according to the sacred law, and having offered sacrifices according to 
his ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment of) final liberation.” 

“A twice-born man who seeks final liberation, without having studied the 
Vedas, without having begotten sons, and without having offered sacrifices, 
sinks downwards 1 .” 

From these rules it is clear that according to Manu there are three 
features of the Ashram Dharma. First is that it is not open to Shudras 
and women. The second is Brahmacharya which is compulsory, so is 
Grahasthashram. Vanaprastha and Sannyas are not compulsory. The 
third is that one must pass from one stage to another in the order in 
which they stand namely first Brahmacharya, then Grahasthashram, 
then Vanaprastha and lastly Sannyas. No one can omit one and enter 
the next stage. 

A cursory reflection on this system of stages which may well be called 
a system of planned economy of the life of the individual raises many 
questions. First is what forced Manu to have such a system of planned 
economy. Referring to the Vedas, the theory of stages in life is quite 
unknown. The Vedas speak of Brahmachari. But there is nothing to show 
that Brahmacharya was regarded as the first and inescapable stage in 
life. Why did the Brahmins make Brahmacharya as the compulsory stage 
in the life of an individual? This is the first riddle about the Ashram 
Dharma. 

The second question is why Manu made it obligatory to observe the 
order of sequence in the following of the different stages of life by the 
individual. Now there is no doubt that there was a time when it was open 
to a Brahmachari to enter any of the three Ashrams! He may become a 
Grahasthashrami or he may at once become a Sannyasi without becoming 
a Grahasthashrami. Compare what the authors of the Dharma Sutras 
have to say on the point. 

Vasistha Dharma Sutra 2 says: 

“There are four orders viz. (that of) the student, (that of) the householder, 
(that of) the hermit, and (that of) the ascetic”. 

“A man who has studied one, two or three Vedas without violating the 
rules of studentship, may enter any of these (orders) whichsoever he pleases.” 

Gautama Dharma Sutra 3 says: 

“Some (declare, that) he (who has studied the Veda) may make his choice 
(which) among the orders (he is going to enter.)” 

1 Manu Smriti. Chapter VI. 33-37. 

2 Ibid Chapter VII verses 1, 2, 3. 

3 Ibid Chapter III verses 1 and 2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


208 


208 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“The four orders are, (that of) the student (that of) the householder, (that) 

of the ascetic ( bhikshu ) (and that of) the hermit in the woods ( Vaikhanasa ).” 

It is obvious from the views expressed by the Dharma Shastras that 
there was a time when the married state was an optional state. After 
Brahmacharya one would straight enter the stage of Vanaprastha or 
Sannyasa. Why did Manu remove the option and make the married 
state an obligatory state, why did he make the married state a condition 
precedent to the stage of hermit and the stage of hermit a condition 
precedent to the stage of a Sannyas? 

After Grahasthashram there remain two stages to complete the round 
of life — Vanaprastha and Sannyas. The question is why Manu felt the 
necessity of life of the individual after Grahasthashram into two stages. 
Why was one stage of Sannyas not enough? The rules of regulating the 
life of the Vanaprastha and the Sannyasi as laid down in Manu are so 
alike that they give some point to the question. 

In the following table a comparative study is made of the Codes for 
the Vanaprastha and the Sannyasa as prescribed by Manu: 

The Code for Vanaprastha The Code for Sannyasi 


“Abandoning all food raised by 
cultivation and all his belongings, 
he may depart into the forest, either 
committing his wife to his sons, or 
accompanied by her.” Ch. VI-3. 


“Taking with him the sacred fire 
and the implements required for 
domestic (sacrifices) he may go forth 
from the village into the forest and 
reside there, duly controlling his 
senses.” Ch. VI-4 


“Let him offer those five great 
sacrifices according to the rule, with 
various kinds of pure food fit for 
ascetics, or with herbs, roots and 
fruit.” VI-5. 


“Having performed the Ishti, 
sacred to the Lord of creatures 
(Pragapati) where (he gives) all 
his property as the sacrificial 
fee, having reposited the sacred 
fires in himself, a Brahmana 
may depart from his house, (as 
an ascetic).” Ch. VI-38. 

“Worlds, radiant in brilliancy, 
become (the portion) of him who 
recites (the texts) regarding 
Brahman and departs from his 
house (as an ascetic), after giving 
a promise of safety to all created 
beings.” Ch. VI-39. 

“For that twice-born man, by 
whom not the smallest danger 
even is caused to created beings, 
there will be no danger from any 
(quarter) after he is freed from his 
body.” Ch. VI-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


209 


RIDDLE NO. 17 


209 


The Code for Vanaprastha 

“Let him wear a skin or a tattered 
garment; let him bathe in the evening 
or in the morning and let him always 
wear (his hair in) braids the hair on 
his body, his beard, and his nails 
(being unipped).” VI-6. 

“Let him perform the Bali-offering 
with such food as he eats and give 
alms according to his ability; let 
him honour those who come to his 
hermitage with alms consisting of 
water roots and fruit.” VI-7. 

“Let him be always industrious in 
privately reciting the Veda; let him 
be patient of hardships, friendly 
(towards all), of collected mind, ever 
liberal and never a receiver of gifts, 
and compassionate towards all living 
creatures.” VI-8. 

“Let him offer, according to the law, 
the Agnihotra with three sacred fires, 
never omitting the new-moon and 
full-moon sacrifices at the proper 
time.” VI-9. 


“Let him also offer the Nakshatreshti, 
the Agrayana; and the Katurmasya 
(sacrifices), as well as the Turayana 
and likewise the Dakshayana, in due 
order.” VI- 10. 

“With pure grains, fit for ascetics, 
which grow in spring and in autumn, 
and which he himself has collected, 
let him severally prepare the 
sacrificial cakes (purodasa ) and the 
boilded messes (karu), as the law 
directs.” VI-11. 


The Code for Sannyasi 

“Departing from his house fully 
provided with the means of 
purification (Pavitra), let him 
wander about absolutely silent, 
and caring nothing for enjoyments 
that may be offered (to him).” Ch. 
VI-41. 

“Let him always wander alone, 
without any companion, in order 
to attain (final liberation) fully 
understanding that the solitary 
(man, who) neither forsakes nor is 
forsaken, gains his end.” Ch. VI-42 

“He shall neither possess a fire, nor 
a dwelling, is may go to a village 
for his food, (he shall be) indifferent 
to everything, firm of purpose, 
meditating (and) concentrating 
his mind on Brahman.” Ch. VI-43. 

“A potsherd (instead of an alms- 
bowl) the roots of trees (for 
a dwelling), coarse worn-out 
garments, life in solitude and 
indifference towards everything, 
are the marks of one who has 
attained liberation. Ch. VI-44. 

“ Let him not desire to die, let him 
not desire to live, let him wait for 
(his appointed) time, as a servant 
(waits) for the payment of his 
wages.” Ch. VI-45. 

“Delighting in what refers to 
the Soul, sitting (in the postures 
prescribed by the Yoga), 
independent (of external help) 
entirely abstaining from sensual 
enjoyments, with himself for his 
only companion, he shall live in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


210 


210 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Code for Vanaprastha 


“Having offered those most pure 
sacrificial viands, consisting of the 
produce of the forest, he may use the 
remainder for himself (mixed with) 
salt prepared by himself.” VI- 12. 

“Let him eat vegetables that grow on 
dry land or in water, flowers, roots 
and fruits, the productions of pure 
trees, and oils extracted from forest- 
fruits.” VI- 13. 

“Let him avoid honey, flesh and 
mushrooms growing on the ground 
(or elsewhere, the vegetables called) 
Bhustrina, and Sigruka, and the 
Sleshmantaka fruit.” VI- 14. 

“Let him throw away in the month 
of Asvina the food of ascetics, which 
he formerly collected, likewise his 
worn-out clothes and his vegetables, 
roots and fruit.” VI-15. 

“Let him not eat anything (grown on) 
ploughed (land), though it may have 
been thrown away by somebody, nor 
roots and fruit grown in a village, 
though (he may be) tormented (by 
hunger).” VI- 16. 

“He may eat either what has been 
cooked with fire, or what has been 
ripened by time; he either may use 
a stone for grinding or his teeth be 
his mortar.” VI- 17. 


The Code for Sannyasi 

this world, desiring the bliss (of 
final liberation.” Ch. VI-49. 

“Neither by (explaining) prodigies 
and omens, nor by skill in astrology 
and palmistry nor by giving advice 
and by the exposition (of the 
Sastras) let him, ever seek to obtain 
alms.” Ch. VI-50. 

“Let him not (in order to beg) go 
near a house filled with hermits, 
Brahmanas, birds, dogs or other 
mendicants.” Ch. VI-51. 

“His hair, nails and beards being 
clipped carrying an alms-bowl, 
a staff, and a water-pot, let 
him continually wander about 
controlling himself and not hurting 
any creature.” Ch. VI-52. 

“His vessels shall not be made 
of metal, they shall be free from 
fractures, it is ordained that they 
shall be cleansed with water, like 
(the cups, called) Kamasa, at a 
sacrifice.” Ch. VI-53. 

“A gourd, a wooden bowl, an 
earthen (dish), or one made 
of split cane, Manu the son of 
Svayambhu, has declared (to be) 
vessels (suitable) for an ascetic.” 
Ch. VI-54. 

“Let him go to beg once (a day), 
let him not be eager to obtain a 
large quantity (of alms); for an 
ascetic who eagerly seeks, alms, 
attaches himself also to sensual 
enjoyments.” Ch. VI-55. 


1 Manu Smriti, Chapter VI verses 38-45. 

2 Ibid, Chapter VI 207. 

3 Ibid, Chapter VI 208. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


211 


RIDDLE NO. 17 


211 


The Code for Vanaprastha 

“He may either at once (after his 
daily meal) cleanse (his vessel for 
collecting food), or lay up a store 
sufficient for a month, or gather 
what suffices for six months or for 
a year.” VI- 18. 


“Having collected food according 
to his ability he may either eat at 
night (only) or in the daytime (only), 
or at every fourth mealtime, or at 
every eighth.” VI-19. 


“Or, he may live according to 
the rule of the lunar penance 
(Kandrayana), daily diminishing 
the quality of his food in the bright 
(half of the month) and (increasing 
it in the dark (half); or he may eat 
on the last days of each fortnight 
once (a day only), boiled barley- 
gruel.” VI-20. 

“Or, he may constantly subsist on 
flowers, roots, and fruit alone, which 
have been ripened by time and have 
fallen spontaneously following the 
rule of the (Institutes) of Vikhanas.” 
VI-21. 

“Let him either roll about on the 
ground, or stand during the day 
on tiptoe, (or) let him alternately 
stand and sit down; going at the 
Savanas (at sunrise, at midday, and 
at sunset) to water in the forest (in 
order to bathe).” VI-22. 


The Code for Sannyasi 

“When no smoke ascends from 
(the kitchen), when the pestle lies 
motionless, when the members 
have been extinguished, when the 
people have finished their meal, 
when the remnants in the dishes 
have been removed, let the ascetic 
always go to beg.” Ch. VI-56. 

“Let him not be sorry when he 
obtains nothing, nor rejoice when 
he obtains (something), let him 
(accept) so much only as will 
sustain life, let him not care about 
the (quality of his) utensils.” Ch. 
VI-57. 

“Let him disdain all (food) 
obtained in consequence of humble 
salutations, (for) even an ascetic 
who has attained final liberation, 
is bound (with the fetters of the 
Samsara) by accepting (food 
given) in consequence of humble 
salutations.” Ch. VI-58. 


“By eating little, and by standing 
and sitting in solitude, let him 
restrain his senses, if they are 
attracted by sensual objects.” 
Ch. VI-59. 


“By the restraint of his senses, 
by the destruction of love and 
hatred, and by the abstention 
from injuring the creatures, he 
becomes fit for immortality.” Ch. 
VI-60. 


Manu Smriti Chap. VI 209. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Code for Vanaprastha 

“In summer let him expose himself 
to the heat of five fires, during the 
rainy season live under the open 
sky, and in winter be dressed in wet 
clothes, (thus) gradually increasing 
(the rigour of) his austerities.” VI-23. 

“When he bathes at the three 
Savanas (Sunrise, midday and 
Sunset), let him offer libations of 
water to the manes and the gods, 
and practising harsher and harsher 
austerities, let him dry up his bodily 
frame.” VI-24. 

“Having reposited the three sacred 
fires in himself, according to the 
prescribed rule, let him live without 
a fire, without a house wholly silent, 
subsisting on roots and fruit.” VI-25. 

“Making no effort (to procure) things 
that give pleasure, chaste, sleeping 
on the bare ground, not caring for 
any shelter, dwelling at the roots of 
trees. VI-26. 


“From Brahmanas (who live as) 
ascetics let him receive alms, (barely 
sufficient) to support life, or from 
other householders of the twice-born 
(castes) who reside in the forest.” 
VI-27. 

“Or (the hermit who dwells in the 
forest) may bring food from a village, 
receiving it either in a hollow dish 
(of leaves), in (his naked) hand, or 
in a broken earthen dish, and may 
eat eight mouthfuls.” VI-28 


The Code for Sannyasi 

“When by the disposition (of his 
heart) he becomes indifferent to 
all objects, he obtains eternal 
happiness both in this world and 
after death.” Ch. VI-80. 

“ He who has in this manner 
gradually given up all attachments 
and is freed from all the pairs (of 
opposites), reposes in Brahman 
alone.” Ch. VI-81. 


“All that has been declared (above) 
depends on meditation; for he who 
is not proficient in the knowledge 
of that which refers to the Soul 
reaps not the full reward of the 
performance of rites.” Ch. VI-82. 

“Let him constantly recite (those 
texts) of the Veda which refer 
to the sacrifice, (those) referring 
to the deities, and (those) which 
treat of the Soul and are contained 
in the concluding portions of the 
Veda (Vedanta).” Ch. VI-83. 

“That is the refuge of the ignorant, 
and even that (the refuge) of those 
who know (the meaning of the 
Veda); that is (the protection) of 
those who seek (bliss in) heaven 
and of those who seek endless 
(beatitude).” Ch. VI-84. 

“A twice-born man who becomes 
an ascetic, after the successive 
performance of the above- 
mentioned acts, shakes off sin 
here below and reaches the highest 
Brahman.” Ch. VI-85. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


213 


RIDDLE NO. 17 


213 


The Code for Vanaprastha 


The Code for Sannyasi 


“These and other observances must a 
Brahmana who dwells in the forest 
diligently practise, and in order to 
attain complete (union with) the 
(supreme) Soul, (he must study) the 
various sacred texts contained in the 
Upanishads.” VI-29. 

Comparing the Vanaprastha with Sannyas and Grahasthashram with 
Vanaprastha one sees some very striking resemblances between them. 
Comparing Vanaprastha with Sannyas there are only a few differences 
in the modes of life prescribed for them. Firstly a Vanaprastha does 
not abandon his wife or his rights over his property. But a Sannyasi 
must abandon both. Secondly, a Vanaprastha can have a fixed dwelling 
although it must be in a forest. But a Sannyasi cannot have a fixed 
dwelling not even in a forest. He must keep on wandering from place 
to place. Thirdly, a Sannyasi is debarred from expounding the Shastras 
while the Vanaprastha is not expressly placed under such a disability. 
As for the rest their mode of life is identical. 

The resemblance between Grahasthashram and Vanaprastha is also 
very close. The Vanaprasthi is a Grahasthashrami for all essential 
purposes. Like the Grahasthashrami be continues to be a married man. 
Like, the Grahasthashrami he continues to be the owner of his property. 
Like the Grahasthashrami he does not renounce the world and like 
the Grahasthashrami he follows the Vedic religion. The only points of 
difference between the Vanaprasthi and the Grahasthashrami are three. 
(1) the Grahasthashrami is not bound to observe abstinence in his food 
and clothing to which a Vanaprasti is subject. (2) The Grahasthashrami 
dwells in the midst of society while the Vanaprasthi is required to live 
in a forest. (3) The Vanaprasti is free to study the Vedanta while the 
Grahasthashrami is confined to the study of the Vedas. As for the rest 
their modes of life are identical. 

Having regard to these close resemblances between Grahasthashram 
and Vanaprastha and between Vanaprastha and Sannyas it is difficult 
to understand why Manu recognized this third ashram of Vanaprastha 
in between Grahasthashram and Sannyas as an ashram distinct and 
separate from both. As a matter of fact, there could be only three 
ashrams: (1) Brahmacharya, (2) Grahasthashram and (3) Sannyas. This 
seems to be also the view of Shankaracharya who in his Brahma Sutra 
in defending the validity of Sannyas against the Purva Mimansa School 
speaks only of three ashramas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Where did Manu get this idea of Vanaprastha Ashram? What is his 
source? As has been pointed out above, Grahasthashram was not the 
next compulsory stage of life after Brahmacharya. A Brahmachari may 
at once become Sannyasi without entering the stage of Grahasthashram. 
But there was also another line of life which a Brahmachari who did 
not wish to marry immediately could adopt namely to become Aranas or 
Aranamanas 1 . They were Brahmacharies who wish to continue the life 
of Study without marrying. These Aranas lived in hermitages in forests 
outside the villages or centres of population. The forests where these Arana 
ascetics lived were called Aranyas and the philosophical works of these 
aranas were called Aranyakas. It is obvious that Manu’s Vanaprastha 
is the original Arana with two differences (1) he has compelled Arana 
to enter the marital state and (2) the arana stage instead of being the 
second stage is prescribed as the third stage. The whole scheme of Manu 
rest in the principle that marriage is compulsory. A Brahmachari if he 
wishes to become a Sannyasi he must become a Vanaprastha and if he 
wishes to become a Vanaprastha he must become a Grasthashrami i.e., 
he must marry. Manu made escape from marriage impossible. Why? 

• • 


Radha Kumud mookerjee — Ancient India Education p-6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


215 


RIDDLE NO. 18 

MANU’S MADNESS OR THE 
BRAHMANIC EXPLANATION OF THE 
ORIGIN OF THE MIXED CASTES 


A reader of the Manu Smriti will find that Manu for the purposes 
of his discussion groups the various castes under certain specific heads 
namely (1) Aryan Castes, (2) Non-Aryan Castes, (3) Vratya Castes, 
(4) Fallen Castes and (5) Sankara Castes. 

By Aryan Castes he means the four varnas namely Brahmana, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. In other words, Manu regards the system 
of Chaturvarna to be the essence of Aryanism. By Non-Aryan Castes he 
means those communities who do not accept the creed of Chaturvarna 
and he, cites the community called Dasyu as an illustration of those 
whom he regards as a Non-Aryan community 1 . By Vratyas he means 
those castes who were once believers in the Chaturvarna but who had 
rebelled against it. 

The list of Vratyas given by Manu includes the following castes: 


Vratya Brahmanas Vratya Kshatriyas Vratya Vaishyas 


1 . 

Bhrigga Kantaka 

1 . 

Jhalla 

1 . 

Sudhanvana 

2. 

Avantya 

2. 

Malla 

2. 

Acharya 

3. 

Vatadhana 

3. 

Lacchavi 

3. 

Karusha 

4. 

Phushpada 

4. 

Nata 

4. 

Vijanman 

5. 

Saikha 

5. 

Karana 

5. 

Maitra 



6. 

Khasa 

6. 

Satvata 



7. 

Dravida. 




1 Manu X. 45. This verse is of great significance for two reasons. In the first place, it 
shows Shudra as different from Dasyu. In the second place, it shows that a Shudra is 
an Arya. 

This is about 20-page MS on ‘ the origin of the mixed castes’. Through 
the original typed MS several handwritten pages are inserted by the 
author and the text has been modified with several amendments pasted 
on the pages. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


In the list of Fallen Castes Manu includes those Kshatriyas who have 
become Shudras by reason of the disuse of Aryan rites and ceremonies 
and loss of services of the Brahmin priests. They are enumerated by 


Manu as under: 



1. 

Paundrakas 

7. 

Paradas 

2. 

Cholas 

8. 

Pahlvas 

3 . 

Dravidas 

9. 

Chinas 

4 . 

Kambhojas 

10. 

Kiratas 

5 . 

Yavanas 

11. 

Daradas 

6. 

Sakas 




By Sankara Castes Manu means Castes the members of which are 
born of parents who do not belong to the same caste. 

These mixed castes he divides into various categories (1) Progeny of 
different Aryan Castes which he subdivides into two classes (a) Anuloma 
and (b) Pratiloma, (2) Progeny of Anuloma and Pratiloma Castes and (3) 
Progeny of Non-Aryan and the Aryan Anuloma and Pratiloma Castes. 
Those included by Manu under the head of mixed castes are shown 
below under different categories: 



1. PROGENY OF MIXED ARYAN CASTES 

F ather 

Mother 

Progeny known as 

Anuloma or Pratiloma 

Brahman 

Kshatriya 

? 


Brahman 

Vaishya 

Ambashta 

Anuloma 

Brahman 

Shudra 

Nishad (Parasava) 

Anuloma 

Kshatriya 

Brahman 

Suta 

Pratiloma 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

? 


Kshatriya 

Shudra 

Ugra 

Anuloma 

Vaishya 

Brahman 

Vaidehaka 

Pratiloma 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

Magadha 

Pratiloma 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

Karana 

Anuloma 

Shudra 

Brahman 

Chandala 

Pratiloma 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

Ksattri 

Pratiloma 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

Ayogava 

Pratiloma 

2. PROGENY OF ARYAN CASTES WITH ANULOMA-PRATILOMA 

CASTES 

Father 


Mother 

Progeny known as 

1. Brahman 


Ugra 

Avrita 

2. Brahman 


Ambashta 

Abhira 

3. Brahman 


Abhira 

Dhigvana 

4. Shudra 


Nishada 

Kukutaka 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


217 




RIDDLE NO. 18 

217 

3. 

PROGENY OF MIXED MARRIAGES BETWEEN ANULOMA AND 
PRATILOMA CASTES 

Father 

Mother 

Progeny known as 

1 . 

Vaideha 

Ayogava 

Maitreyaka 

2. 

Nishada 

Ayogava 

Margava (Das) 




Kaivarta 

3. 

Nishada 

Vaideha 

Karavara 

4. 

Vaidehaka 

Ambashta 

Vena 

5. 

Vaidehaka 

Karavara 

Andhra 

6. 

Vaidehaka 

Nishada 

Meda 

7. 

Chandala 

Vaideha 

Pandusopaka 

8. 

Nishada 

Vaideha 

Ahindaka 

9. 

Chandala 

Pukkassa 

Sopaka 

10 

. Chandala 

Nishada 

Antyavasin 

11 

Kshattari 

Ugra 

Swapaka 


To Manu’s list of Sankar (mixed) Castes additions have been made 
by his successors. Among these are the authors of Aushanas Smriti, 
Baudhayana Smriti, Vashistha Smriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti and the Suta 
Sanhita. 


Of these additions four have been made by the Aushanas Smriti. They 
are noted below: 


Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1. Pulaksa 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

2. Yekaj 

Pulaksa 

Vaishya 

3. Charmakarka 

Ayogava 

Brahmin 

4. Venuka 

Suta 

Brahmin 

The following four are 

added by the Baudhayana Smriti: 

Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1. Kshatriya 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

2. Brahmana 

Brahmana 

Kshatriya 

3. Vaina 

Vaidehaka 

Ambashta 

4. Shvapaka 

Ugra 

Kshatriya 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Vashishta Smriti adds one to the list of Manu, namely: 

Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

Vaina 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

The Yajnavalkya Smriti adds two new 
castes. 

castes to Manu’s list of mixed 

Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1. Murdhavasika 

Brahmin 

Kshatriya 

2. Mahisya 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 


The Additions made by the author of the Suta Sanhita are on a vast 
scale. They number sixty-three castes. 


Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1 . 

Ambashteya 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

2. 

Urdhvanapita 

Brahman 

Vaishya 

3. 

Katkar 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

4. 

Kumbhkar 

Brahman 

Vaishya 

5. 

Kunda 

Brahman 

Married Brahmin 

6. 

Golaka 

Brahman 

Brahmin Widow 

7. 

Chakri 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

8. 

Daushantya 

Kshatriya 

Shudra 

9. 

Daushantee 

Kshatriya 

Shudra 

10. 

Pattanshali 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

11. 

Pulinda 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

12. 

Bahyadas 

Shudra 

Brahmin 

13. 

Bhoja 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

14. 

Mahikar 

Vaishya 

Vaishya 

15. 

Manavika 

Shudra 

Shudra 

16. 

Mleccha 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

17. 

Shalika 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

18. 

Shundika 

Brahmin 

Shudra 

19. 

Shulikha 

Kshatriya 

Shudra 

20. 

Saparna 

Brahman 

Kshatriya 

21. 

Agneyanartaka 

Ambashta 

Ambashta 

22. 

Apitar 

Brahman 

Daushanti 

23. 

Ashramaka 

Dantakevala 

Shudra 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


219 


RIDDLE NO. 18 


219 


Name of the mixed caste 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

24. 

Udabandha 

Sanaka 

Kshatriya 

25. 

Karana 

Nata 

Kshatriya 

26. 

Karma 

Karana 

Kshatriya 

27. 

Karmakar 

Renuka 

Kshatriya 

28. 

Karmar 

Mahishya 

Karana 

29. 

Kukkunda 

Magadha 

Shudra 

30. 

Guhaka 

Swapach 

Brahman 

31. 

Charmopajivan 

Vaidehika 

Brahman 

32. 

Chamakar 

Ayogava 

Brahmani 

33. 

Charmajivi 

Nishad 

Karushi 

34. 

Taksha 

Mahishya 

Karana 

35. 

Takshavriti 

Ugra 

Brahman 

36. 

Dantakavelaka 

Chandala 

Vaishya 

37. 

Dasyu 

Nishad 

Ayogava 

38. 

Drumila 

Nishad 

Kshatriya 

39. 

Nata 

Picchalla 

Kshatriya 

40. 

Napita 

Nishada 

Brahmin 

41. 

Niladivarnavikreta 

Ayogava 

Chirkari 

42. 

Piccahalla 

Malta 

Kshatriya 

43. 

Pingala 

Brahmin 

Ayogava 

44. 

Bhaglabdha 

Daushanta 

Brahmani 

45. 

Bharusha 

Sudhanva 

Vaishya 

46. 

Bhairava 

Nishada 

Shudra 

47. 

Matanga 

Vijanma 

Vaishya 

48. 

Madhuka 

Vaidehika 

Ayogava 

49. 

Matakar 

Dasyu 

Vaishya 

50. 

Maitra 

Vijanma 

Vaishya 

51. 

Raj aka 

Vaideha 

Brahman 

52. 

Rathakar 

Mahishya 

Karana 

53. 

Renuka 

Napita 

Brahman 

54. 

Lohakar 

Mahishya 

Brahmani 

55. 

Vardhaki 

Mahishya 

Brahmani 

56. 

Varya 

Sudhanva 

Vaishya 

57. 

Vijanma 

Bharusha 

Vaishya 

58. 

Shilp 

Mahishya 

Karana 

59. 

Shvapach 

Chandala 

Brahmani 

60. 

Sanaka 

Magadha 

Kshatriya 

61. 

Samudra 

Takashavrati 

Vaishya 

62. 

Satvata 

Vijanma 

Vaishya 

63. 

Sunishada 

Nishad 

Vaishya 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


220 


220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Of the five categories of castes it is easy to understand the explanation 
given by Manu as regards the first four. But the same cannot be said 
in respect of his treatment of the fifth category namely the Sankar 
(mixed) caste. There are various questions that begin to trouble the 
mind. In the first place Manu’s list of mixed castes is a perfunctory 
list. It is not an exhaustive list, stating all the possibilities of Sankar. 

In discussing the mixed castes born out of the mixture of the Aryan 
castes with the Anuloma-Pratiloma castes, Manu should have specified 
the names of castes which are the progeny of each of the four Aryan 
castes with each of the 12 Anuloma-Pratiloma castes. If he had done so 
we should have had a list of forty-eight resulting castes. As a matter 
of fact he states only the names of four castes of mixed marriages of 
this category. 

In discussing the progeny of mixed marriages between Anuloma- 
Pratiloma castes given the fact that we have 12 of them, Manu should 
have given the names of 144 resulting castes. As a matter of fact, 
Manu only gives a list of 11 castes. In the formation of these 11 castes, 
Manu gives five possible combinations of 5 castes only. Of these one 
(Vaideha) is outside the Anuloma-Pratiloma list. The case of the 8 are 
not considered at all. 

His account of the Sankar castes born out of the Non-Aryan and the 
Aryan castes is equally discrepant. We ought to have had first a list 
of castes resulting from a combination between the Non-Aryans with 
each of the four Aryan castes. We have none of them. Assuming that 
there was only one Non-Aryan caste — Dasyu — we ought to have had a 
list of 12 castes resulting from a conjugation of Dasyus with each of 
the Anuloma-Pratiloma castes. As a matter of fact we have in Manu 
only one conjugation. 

In the discussion of this subject of mixed castes Manu does not 
consider the conjugation between the Vratyas and the Aryan castes, 
the Vratyas and the Anuloma-Pratiloma castes, the Vratyas and the 
Non-Aryan castes. 

Among these omissions by Manu there are some that are glaring as 
well as significant. Take the case of Sankar between Brahmins and 
Kshatriyas. He does not mention the caste born out of the Sankar 
between these two. Nor does he mention whether the Sankar caste 
begotten of these two was a Pratiloma or Anuloma. Why did Manu fail 
to deal with this question. Is it to be supposed that such a Sankar did 
not occur in his time? Or was he afraid to mention it? If so, of whom 
was he afraid ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


221 


RIDDLE NO. 18 221 

Some of the names of the mixed castes mentioned by Manu and the 
other Smritikaras appear to be quite fictitious. 

For some of the communities mentioned as being of bastard origin 
have never been heard of before Manu. Nor does any one know what 
has happened to them since. They are today non-existent without leaving 
any trace behind. Caste is an insoluble substance and once a caste is 
formed it maintains its separate existence, unless for any special reason 
it dies out. This can happen but to a few. 

Who are the Ayogava, Dhigvana, Ugra, Pukkasa, Svapaka, Svapacha, 
Pandusopaka, Ahindaka, Bandika, Matta, Mahikar, Shalika, Shundika, 
Shulika, Yekaj, Kukunda to mention only a few. Where are they? What 
has happened to them? 


Let us now proceed to compare Manu with the rest of Smritikars. Are 
they unanimous on the origin of the various mixed castes referred to by 
them? Far from it compare the following cases. 



Smriti 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1. 

Manu 

I AYOGAVA 
Shudra 

Vaishya 

2. 

Aushanas 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

3. 

Yajnavalkya 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

4. 

Baudhayana 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

5. 

Agni Purana 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

1. 

Manu 

II UGRA 
Kshatriya 

Shudra 

2. 

Aushanas 

Brahman 

Shudra 

3. 

Yajnavalkya 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

4. 

Vashishtha 

Kshatriya 

Vaishya 

5. 

Suta 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

1. 

Manu 

III NISHADA 
Brahmana 

Shudra 

2. 

Aushanas 

Brahmana 

Shudra 

3. 

Baudhayana 

Brahmana 

Shudra 

4. 

Yajnavalkya 

Brahmana 

Shudra 

5. 

Suta Sanhita 

Brahmana 

Vaishya 

6. 

Suta Sanhita 

Brahmana 

Shudra 

7. 

Vashishta 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

1. 

Manu 

IV PUKKASA 
Nishada 

Shudra 

2. 

Brihad- Vishnu 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

3. 

Brihad-Vishnu 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Smriti 

Father’s caste 

Mother’s caste 

1 . 

Manu 

V MAGADHA 
Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

2. 

Suta 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

3. 

Baudhayana 

Shudra 

Vaishya 

4. 

Yajnavalkya 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

5. 

Brihad Vishnu 

Vaishya 

Kshatriya 

6. 

Brihad Vishnu 

Shudra 

Kshatriya 

7. 

Brihad Vishnu 

Vaishya 

Brahmana 

1 . 

Aushanas 

VI RATHAKAR 
Kshatriya 

Brahmana 

2. 

Baudhayana 

Vaishya 

Shudra 

3. 

Suta 

Kshatriya 

Brahmana 

1 . 

Manu 

VII VAIDEHAKA 
Shudra 

Vaishya 

2. 

Manu 

Vaishya 

Brahmana 

3. 

Yajnavalkya 

Vaishya 

Brahmana 


If these different Smritikaras are dealing with facts about the origin 
and genesis of the mixed castes mentioned above how can such a wide 
difference of opinion exist among them? The conjugation of two castes 
can logically produce a third mixed caste. But how the conjugation of 
the same two castes produce a number of different castes ? But this is 
exactly what Manu and his followers seem to be asserting. Consider the 
following cases: 

I. Conjugation of Kshatriya father and Vaishya mother. 

1. Baudhyayana says that the caste of the progeny is Kshatriya. 

2. Yajnavalkya says it is Mahishya. 

3. Suta says it is Ambashta. 

II. Conjugation of Shudra father and Kshatriya mother — 

1. Manu says the Progeny is Ksattri. 

2. Aushanas says it is Pullaksa. 

3. Vashishta says it is Vaina. 

III. Conjugation of Brahmana father and Vaishya mother. 

1. Manu says that the progeny is called Ambashta. 

2. Suta once says it is called Urdhava Napita but again says 
it is called Kumbhakar. 

IV. Conjugation of Vaishya father and Kshatriya mother — 

1. Manu says that the progeny is called Magadha. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


223 


RIDDLE NO. 18 223 

2. Suta states that (1) Bhoja, (2) Mleccha, (3) Shalik and (4) 
Pulinda are the Progenies of this single conjugation. 

V. Conjugation of Kshatriya father and Shudra mother — 

1. Manu says that the progeny is called Ugra. 

2. Suta says that (1) Daushantya, (2) Daushantee and (3) 
Shulika are the progenies of this single conjugation. 

VI. Conjugation of Shudra father and Vaishya mother — 

1. Manu says the progeny is called Ayogava. 

2. Suta says the progeny is (1) Pattanshali and (2) Chakri. 

Let us take up another question. Is Manu’s explanation of the genesis 
of the mixed castes historically true? 

To begin with the Abhira. According to Manu the Abhiras are the 
bastards born of Brahmin males and Ambashta females. What does 
history say about them? History says that the Abhiras (the corrupt form 
of which is Ahira) were pastoral tribes which inhabited the lower districts 
of the North-West as far as Sindh. They were a ruling independent Tribe 
and according to the Vishnu Purana 1 the Abhiras conquered Magadha 
and reigned there for several years. 

The Ambashta 2 says Manu are the bastards born of Brahmana male 
and Vaishya female. Patanjali speaks of Ambashtyas as those who are 
the natives of a country called Ambashta. That the Ambashtas were 
an independent tribe is beyond dispute. The Ambashtas are mentioned 
by Megasthenes the Greek Ambassador at the Court of Chandragupta 
Maurya as one of the tribes living in the Punjab who fought against 
Alexander when he invaded India. The Ambashtas are mentioned in 
the Mahabharata. They were reputed for their political system and for 
their bravery. 

The Andhras 3 says Manu are bastards of second degree in so far as 
they are the progeny of Vaidehaka male and Karavara female both of 
which belong to bastard castes. The testimony of history is quite different. 
The Andhras are a people who inhabited that part of the country which 
forms the eastern part of the Deccan Plateau. The Andhras are mentioned 
by Megasthenes. Pliny the Elder (77 A.D.) refers to them as a powerful 
tribe enjoying paramount sway over their land in the Deccan, possessed 
numerous villages, thirty walled towns defended by moats and lowers 
and supplies their king with an immense army consisting of 1,00,000 
infantry, 2,000 cavalry and 1,000 elephants. 

1 Book IV Chapter 24. 

2 For Ambashtas see Jaiswal’s Hindu Polity — Part-I, pp. 73-74. 

3 For the Andhras see — Early Dynasties of Andhradesa — by Bhavaraju Venkata 
Krishnarao. They are also called Satavahanas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

According to Manu the Magadhas 1 are bastards born of Vaishya male 
and Kshatriya female. Panini the Grammarian gives quite a different 
derivation of ‘Magadha’. According to him “Magadha” means a person 
who comes from the country known as Magadha. Magadha corresponds 
roughly to the present Patna and Gaya districts of Bihar. The Magadhas 
have been mentioned as independent sovereign people right from the 
earliest times. They are first mentioned in the Atharva-Veda. The famous 
Jarasandha was the king of Magadha who was a contemporary of the 
Pandavas. 

According to Manu the Nishadas are the bastards born caste from 
Brahmin males and Shudra females. History has quite a different tale to 
tell. The Nishadas were a native tribe with its own independent territory 
and its own kings. They are a very ancient tribe. The Ramayana mentions 
Guha as the King of Nishadas whose capital was Sringaverapura and 
who showed hospitality to Rama when he was undergoing excile in the 
forest. 

As to the Vaidehaka Manu says that they are the bastards born of 
Vaishya Male and Brahmin female. Etymologically Vaidehaka means a 
person who is a native of the country called Videha 2 . Ancient Videha 
corresponds to the modern districts of Champaran and Darbhanga in 
Bihar. The country and its people have been known to history from a 
very remote antiquity. The Yajur-Veda mentions them. Ramayana refers 
to them. Sita the wife of Rama is the daughter of Janak who was the 
king of Videha and whose capital was Mithila. 

Many more cases could be examined. Those that have been are quite 
sufficient to show how Manu has perverted history and defamed the 
most respectable and powerful tribes into bastards. This wholesale 
bastardization of huge communities Manu did not apply to the Vratyas. 
But his successors carried the scheme further and bastardized the Vratyas 
also. Karma in Manu is Vratya. But the Brahma Vaivarta Purana 
makes them Bastards and says that they are the progeny of Vaishya 
father and Shudra mother. Paundraka in Manu is Vratya. But in the 
Brahmavaivarta Purana he is a bastard born of Vaishya father and 
Chundi mother. Malla in Manu is Vratya. But in the Brahma Vaivarta 
Purana he is a bastard born of Letta father and Tibara mother. The 
Vharjjakautakas are Vratya Brahmanas according to Manu. But in 
the Gautama Sanhita they are bastards born from a Brahman father 
and Vaishya mother. The Yavanas were declared by Manu as Vratya 
Kshatriya. But in Gautama Sanhita they are shown as bastards born 
of a Kshatriya father and Shudra mother. 

1 For the History of Magadha see Chapter IV of Ancient Indian Tribes by B.C. Law. 

2 For the History of the Videhas see part II Chapter I of Kshatriya clans in Buddhist 
India by B.C. Law. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


225 


RIDDLE NO. 18 225 

The Kiratas are according to Manu Vratya Kshatriyas. But the 
Ballalacharitta makes them bastards born from Vaishya father and 
Brahmin mother. 

It is quite clear that some of the communities mentioned by Manu as 
being bastard in origin far from being bastard were independent in origin 
and yet Manu and the rest of the Smratikara’s call them Bastards. Why 
this madness on their part ? Is there a method in their madness? 

Having regard to all these considerations it is a riddle why Manu at all 
raised the question of mixed castes and what he wanted to say about them? 

It is possible that Manu had realized that the Chaturvarna had failed 
and that the existence of a large number of castes which should neither 
be described as Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras was the 
best proof of the break down of the Chaturvarna and that he was therefore 
called upon to explain how these castes who were outside the Chaturvarna 
came into existence notwithstanding the rule of Chaturvarnas. 

But did Manu realize how terrible is the Explanation which he has 
given? What does his explanation amount to? 

What a reflection on the character of men and particularly of women. It 
is obvious that the unions of men and women must have been clandestine 
because prohibited by the rule of Chaturvarna. Such clandestine unions 
could take place only here and there. They could not have taken place on 
a wholesale scale. But unless one assumes a wholesale state of promiscuity 
how can one justify the origin of the Chandals or untouchables as given 
by Manu. 

The caste of Chandala is said by Manu to be the progeny of illegitimate 
intercourse between a Shudra male and a Brahman female. Can this be 
true? It means that Brahmin women must have been very lax in their 
morality and must have had special sexual attraction for the Shudra 1 . 
This is unbelievable. 

So vast is the Chandala population that even if every Brahmin female 
was a mistress of a Shudra it could not account of the vast number of 
Chandalas in the country. 

Did Manu realize by propounding his theory of the origin of the mixed 
castes he was assigning an ignoble origin to a vast number of the people 
of this country leading to their social and moral degradation. Why did he 
say that the castes were mixed in origin, when as a matter of fact they 
were independent in their existence? 

• • 

1 Megasthenes records that the ancient Brahmins were distrustful of their wives and 
did not communicate their metaphysical doctrine to women on the ground that being 
talkative they would communicate their knowledge to those who had no right to it which 
probably means the Shudras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


226 


RIDDLE No. 19 

THE CHANGE FROM PATERNITY 
TO MATERNITY. WHAT DID THE 
BRAHMINS WISH TO GAIN BY IT? 


Mr. Mayne in his treatise on Hindu law has pointed out some anomalous 
features of the rules of Kinships. He says: 

“No part of the Hindu Law is more anomalous than that which governs 
the family relations. Not only does there appear to be a complete break 
of continuity between the ancient system and that which now prevails, 
but the different parts of the ancient system appear in this respect to 
be in direct conflict with each other. We find a law of inheritance, which 
assumes the possibility of tracing male ancestors in an unbroken pedigre 
extending to fourteen generations; while coupled with it is a family law, 
in which several admitted forms of marriage are only euphemisms for 
seduction and rape, and in which twelve sorts of sons are recognized, 
the majority of whom have no blood relationship to their own father.” 

The existence of this anomaly is a fact and will be quite clear to those 
who care to study the Hindu Law of marriage and paternity. 

The Hindu Law recognizes eight different forms of marriage, namely 
(1) Brahma, (2) Daiva, (3) Arsha, (4) Prajapatya, (5) Asura, (6) Gandharva, 
(7) Rakshasa and (8) Paisacha. 

The Brahma marriage is the gift of a daughter, clothed and decked 
to a man learned in the Veda, whom her father voluntarily invites and 
respectfully receives. 

The Daiva marriage consists of the giving of the daughter by father 
to the family priest attending a sacrifice at the time of the payment of 
the sacrificial fee and in lieu of it. 

Arsha marriage is characterized by the fact that the bridegroom has 
to pay a price for the bride to the father of the bride. 

Prajapatya form of marriage is marked by the application of a man 
for a girl to be his wife and the granting of the application by the 

This is an eleven-page typed chapter. Except the title of the chapter no 
other additions are found in the handwriting of the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


227 


RIDDLE NO. 19 227 

father of the girl. The difference between Prajapatya and Brahma marriage 
lies in the fact that in the latter the gift of the daughter is made by 
the father voluntarily but has to be applied for. The fifth or the Asura 
form of marriage is that in which the bridegroom having given as much 
wealth as he can afford to the father and paternal kinsmen and to the 
girl herself takes her as his wife. There is not much difference between 
Arsha and Asura forms of marriage. Both involve sale of the bride. The 
difference lies in this that in the Arsha form the price is fixed while in 
the Asura form it is not. 

Gandharva marriage is a marriage by consent contracted from non- 
religious and sensual motives. Marriage by seizure of a maiden by 
force from her house while she weeps and calls for assistance after her 
kinsmen and friends have been slain in battle or wounded and their 
houses broken open, is the marriage styled Rakshasa. 

Paisacha marriage is marriage by rape on a girl either when she is 
asleep or flushed with strong liquor or disordered in her intellect. 

Hindu Law recognized thirteen kinds of sons. (1) Aurasa, (2) Kshetraja, 
(3) Pautrikaputra, (4) Kanina, (5) Gudhaja, (6) Punarbhava, (7) Sahodhaja, 
(8) Dattaka, (9) Kritrima, (10) Kritaka, (11) Apaviddha, (12) Svayamdatta 
and (13) Nishada. 

The Aurasa is a son begotten by a man himself upon his lawfully 
wedded wife. 

Putrikaputra means a son born to a daughter. Its significance lies in 
the system under which a man who had a daughter but no son could 
also have his daughter to cohabit with a man selected or appointed by 
him. If a daughter gave birth to a son by such sexual intercourse the son 
became the son of the girl’s father. It was because of this that the son 
was called Putrikaputra. Man’s right to compel his daughter to submit 
to sexual intercourse with a man of his choice in order to get a son for 
himself continued to exist even after the daughter was married. That 
is why a man was warned not to marry a girl who had no brothers. 

Kshetraja literally means son of the field i.e., of the wife. In Hindu 
ideology the wife is likened to the field and the husband being likened 
to the master of the field. Where the husband was dead, or alive but 
impotent or incurably diseased the brother or any other sapinda of the 
deceased was appointed by the family to procreate a son on the wife. The 
practice was called Niyoga and the son so begotten was called Kshetraja. 

If an unmarried daughter living in the house of her father has through 
illicit intercourse given birth to a son and if she subsequently was married 
the son before marriage was claimed by her husband as his son. Such 
a son was called Kanina. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


228 


228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Gudhaja was apparently a son born to a woman while the husband 
had access to her but it is suspected that he is born of an adulterous 
connection. As there is no proof by an irrebutable presumption so to say 
the husband is entitled to claim the son as his own. He is called Gudhaja 
because his birth is clouded in suspicious, Gudha meaning suspicion. 

Sahodhaja is a son born to a woman who was pregnant at the time 
of her marriage. It is not certain whether he is the son of the husband 
who had access to the mother before marriage or whether it is the case 
of a son begotten by a person other than the husband. But it is certain 
that the Sahodhaja, is a son born to a pregnant maiden and claimed 
as his son by the man who marries her. 

Punarbhava is the son of a woman who abandoned by her husband 
and having lived with others, re-enters his family. It is also used to 
denote the son of a woman who leaves an impotent, outcaste, or a mad 
or diceased husband and takes another husband. 

Parasava 1 is the son of a Brahmin by his Shudra wife. 

The rest of the sons are adopted sons as distinguished for those who 
were claimed as sons. 

Dattaka is the son whom his father and mother give in adoption to 
another whose son he then becomes. 

Kratrima is a son adopted with the adoptee’s consent only. 

Krita is a son purchased from his parents. 

Apaviddha is a boy abandoned by his parents and is then taken in 
adopted and reckoned as a son. 

Svayamdatta is a boy bereft of parents or abandoned by them seeks a 
man shelter and presents himself saying ‘Let me become thy son’ when 
accepted he becomes his son. 

It will be noticed how true it is to say that many forms of marriage are 
only euphemisms for seduction and rape and how many of the sons have 
no blood relationship to their father. These different forms of marriage 
and different kinds of sons were recognized as lawful even up to the 
time of Mana and even the changes made by Manu are very minor. 
With regard to the forms of marriage Manu 2 does not declare them to 
be illegal. All that he says that of the eight forms, six, namely, Brahma, 
Daiva, Arsha, Prajapatya, Asura, Gandharva, Rakshasa and Paisachya 
are lawful for a Kshatriya, and that three namely Asura, Gandharva 
and Paisachya are lawful for a Vaishya and a Shudra. 

1 He was also called Nishad. Jimutvahana seems to make a difference between Parasava 
and Nishad. Parasava he says is the son of a Brahmin by an unmarried Shudra woman 
while Nishad is the son of a Brahmin by his Shudra wife. 

2 Manu III. 23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


229 


RIDDLE NO. 19 229 

Similarly he does not disaffiliate any of the 12 sons. On the contrary he 
recognises their kinship. The only change he makes is to alter the rules 
of inheritance by putting them into two classes (1) heirs and kinsmen 
and (2) kinsmen but not heirs. He says 1 : 

159. “The legitimate son of the body, the son begotten on a wife, the son 
adopted, the son made, the son secretly born, and the son cast off (are) 
the six heirs and kinsmen.” 

160. “The son of an unmarried damsel, the son received with the wife, the 
son bought, the son begotten on a remarried woman; the son self-given and 
the son of a Sudra female (are) the six (who are) not heirs, (but) kinsmen.” 

162. “If the two heirs of one man be a legitimate son of his body and 
a son begotten on his wife, each (of the two sons), to the exclusion of the 
other, shall take the estate of his (natural) father.” 

163. “The legitimate son of the body alone (shall be) the owner of the 
paternal estate; but, in order to avoid harshness, let him allow a maintenance 
to the rest.” 

There is another part of the law of consanguinity which has undergone 
a profound change but which has hardly been noticed by anybody. It 
relates to the determination of the Varna of the child. What is to be 
the Varna of the child? Is it to be the father’s Varna or the mother’s 
Varna? According to the law as it prevailed in the days before Manu 
the Varna of the child was determined by the Varna of the father. The 
Varna of the mother was of no account. A few illustrations will suffice 
to prove the thesis. 


F ather 


Mother 


Child 


Name 

Varna 

Name 

Varna 

Name 

Varna 

1. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Ganga 

Unknown 

Bhishma 

Kshatriya 

2. Parashara 

Brahmana 

Matsyagandha 

Fisherman 

Krishna 

Dwaya 

Brahman 

3. Vashishtha 

Brahmana 

Akshamala 


Payan 


4. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Matsyagandha 

Fisherman 

Vichitravirya 

Kshatriya 

5. Vishwamitra 

Kshatriya 

Menaka 

Apsara 

Shakuntala 

Kshatriya 

6. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Devayani 

Brahmin 

Yadu 

Kshatriya 

7. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Sharmishtha 

Asuri 

Druhya 

Kshatriya 

8. Jaratkaru 

Brahman 

Jaratkari 

Naga 

Astika 

Brahmin 


Manu IX. 159-160: 162-163: pp. 359-60. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


230 


230 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What does Manu do? The changes made by Manu in the law of the 
child’s Varna are of a most revolutionary character. Manu 1 lays down 
the following rules: 

5. “In all castes (varna) those (children) only which are begotten in the 
direct order on wedded wives, equal (in caste) and married as (virgins) are 
to be considered as belonging to the same caste (as their fathers).” 

6. “ Sons, begotten by twice-born men on wives of the next lower castes, 
they declare to be similar (to their fathers, but) blamed on account of the 
fault (inherent) in their mothers.” 

14. “Those sons of the twice-born, begotten on wives of the next lower 
castes, who have been enumerated in due order, they call by the name 
Anantaras (belonging to the next lower caste) on account of the blemish 
(inherent) in their mothers” 

41. “Six sons, begotten (by Aryans) on women of equal and the next 
lower castes (Anantara), have the duties of twice-born men; but all those 
born in consequence of a violation of the law are, as regards their duties, 
equal to Sudras.” 

Manu distinguishes the following cases: 

(1) Where the father and mother belong to the same Varna. 

(2) Where the mother belongs to a Varna next lower to that of the 
father e.g., Brahman father and Kshatriya mother, Kshatriya 
father and Vaishya mother, Vaishya father and Shudra mother. 

(3) Where the mother belongs to a Varna more than one degree 
lower to that of the father, e.g., Brahmin father and Vaishya or 
Shudra mother, Kshatriya father and Shudra mother. 

In the first case the Varna of the child is to be the Varna of the 
father. In the second case also the Varna of the child is to be the Varna 
of the father. But in the third case the child is not to have the father’s 
Varna. Manu does not expressly say what is to be the Varna of the child 
if it is not to be that of the father. But all the commentators of Manu 
Medhatithi, Kalluka Bhatt, Narada and Nandapandit — agree 

saying what of the course is obvious that in such cases the Varna of 
the child shall be the Varna of the mother. In short Manu altered the 
law of the child’s Varna from that of Pitrasavarna — according to father’s 
Varna to Matrasavarna — according to mother’s Varna. 

This is most revolutionary change. It is a pity few have realized 
that given the forms of marriage, kinds of sons, the permissibility of 
Anuloma marriages and the theory of Pitrasavarnya, the Varna system 
notwithstanding the desire of the Brahmins to make it a closed system 
remained an open system. There were so many holes so to say in the 

1 Manu Chap. X verses 5, 6, 14 and 41, pp. 402, 403, 404 and 412. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


231 


RIDDLE NO. 19 231 

Varna system. Some of the forms of marriage had no relation to the 
theory of the Varna. Indeed they could not have. The Rakshas and 
the Paisachya marriages were in all probability marriages in which 
the males belonged to the lower varnas and the females to the higher 
varnas. The law of sonship probably left many loopholes for the sons 
of Shudra to pass as children of the Brahmin. Take for instances sons 
such as Gudhajas, Sahodhajas, Kanina. Who can say that they were 
not begotten by Shudra or Brahmin, Kshatriya or Vaishya. Whatever 
doubts there may be about these the Anuloma system of marriage which 
was sanctioned by law combined with the law of Pitrasavarnya had 
the positive effect of keeping the Varna system of allowing the lower 
Varnas to pass into the higher Varna. A Shudra could not become a 
Brahmin, a Kshatriya or a Vaishya. But the child of a Shudra woman 
could become a Vaishya if she was married to a Vaishya, a Kshatriya 
if she was married to a Kshatriya and even a Brahmin if she was 
married to a Brahmin. The elevation and the incorporation of the lower 
orders into the higher orders was positive and certain though the way 
of doing it was indirect. This was one result of the old system. The 
other result was that a community of a Varna was always a mixed 
and a composite community. A Brahmin community might conceivably 
consist of children born of Brahmin women, Kshatriya women, Vaishya 
women, and Shudra women all entitled to the rights and privileges 
belonging to the Brahmin community. A Kshatriya community may 
conceivably consist of children born of Kshatriya women, Vaishya 
women and Shudra women all recognized as Kshatriya and entitled 
to the rights and privileges of the Kshatriya community. Similarly 
the Vaishya community may conceivably consist of children born of 
Vaishya women and Shudra women all recognized as Vaishyas and 
entitled to the rights and privileges of the Vaishya community. 

The change made by Manu is opposed to some of the most 
fundamental notions of Hindu Law. In the first place, it is opposed 
to the Kshetra-Kshetraja rule of Hindu Law. According to this rule, 
which deals with the question of property in a child says that the 
owner of the child is the de jure husband of the mother and not the 
de facto father of the child. Manu is aware of this theory. He puts it 
in the following terms 1 : 

“Thus men who have no marital property in women, but sow in 
the fields owned by others, may raise up fruit to the husbands, but 
the procreator can have no advantage from it. Unless there be a 
special agreement between the owners of the land and of the seed 


Mayne Hindu Law p. 83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the fruit belongs clearly to the landowner, for the receptacle is more 
important than the seed.” 

It is on this that the right to the 12 kinds of sons is founded. 

This change was also opposed to the rule of Patna Potestas. Hindu 
family is a Patriarchal family same as the Roman family. In both the 
father possessed certain authority over members of the family. Manu 
is aware of this and recognized it in most ample terms. Defining the 
authority of the Hindu father, Manu says: 

“Three persons, a wife, a son, and a slave, are declared by law to have 
in general no wealth exclusively their own; the wealth which they may 
earn is regularly acquired for the man to whom they belong.” 

They belong to the head of the family — namely the father. Under the 
Patna Potestas the sons earnings are the property of the father. The 
change in the law of paternity mean a definite loss to the father. 

Why did Manu change the law from Pitra-savarnya to Matra-savarnya ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


233 


RIDDLE No. 20 

KALI VARJYA OR THE BRAHMANIC 
ART OF SUSPENDING THE 
OPERATION OF SIN WITHOUT 
CALLING IT SIN 


Few have heard of the Brahmanic dogma called Kali Varjya. It must 
not be confused with another Brahmanic Dogma of Kali Yuga. The 
dogma of Kali Varja prescribes that customs and usages which are valid 
and good in other yugas are not to be observed in the Kali Age. The 
references to these instructions are scattered in the different Puranas. 
But the Adityapurana has codified them and brought them together * 1 . 
The practices which are Kali Varjya are given below : 

(1) To appoint the husband’s brother for procreating a son on a 
widow. 

(2) The remarriage of a (married) girl (whose marriage is not 
consummated) and of one (whose marriage was consummated) 
to another husband (after the death of the first. 

(3) The marriage with girls of different Varna among persons of the 
three twice-born classes. 

(4) The killing even in a straight fight of Brahmanas that have 
become desperadoes. 

(5) The acceptance (for all ordinary intercourse such as eating with 
him) of a twice-born person who is in the habit of voyaging over 
the sea in a ship even after he has undergone a prayascitta. 

(6) The initiation for a sattra. 

(7) The taking of a Kamandali (a jar for water). 

(8) Starting on the Great Journey. 

(9) The killing of a cow in the sacrifice called Gomedha. 

(10) The partaking of wine even in the Srautmani sacrifice. 

1 I have taken them from Mahamahopadhya Kane’s Paper on the subject. 

This is a nine-page typed copy with several corrections by the author 
himself. For Notes on all 43 Kali Varjyas, please see Notes to Appendix 

I of this part. — Ed: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(11-12) Licking the ladle (sruc) after the Agnihotra Hoama in order to 
take off the remains of the offerings and using the ladle in the 
Agnihotra afterwards when it has been so licked. 

(13) Entering into the stage of forest hermit as laid down in sastras 
about it. 

(14) Lessening the periods of impurity (due to death and birth) in 
accordance with the conduct and Vedic learning of a man. 

(15) Prescribing death as the penance (prayascitta) for Brahmans. 

(16) Expiation (by secretly performed prayascittas) of the mortal sins 
other than theft (of gold) and the sin of contact (with those guilty 
of Mahapatakas). 

(17) The act of offering with Mantras animal flesh to the bridegroom, 
the guest and the pitras. 

(18) The acceptance as sons of those other than the aurasa (natural) 
and adopted sons. 

(19) Ordinary intercourse with those who incurred the sin of (having 
intercourse with) women of higher castes, even after they had 
undergone the prayascitta for such sin. 

(20) The abandonment of the wife of an elderly person or of one who 
is entitled to respect) when she has had intercourse with one with 
whom it is severely condemned. 

(21) Killing oneself for the sake of another. 

(22) Giving up food left after one has partaken of it. 

(23) Resolve to worship a particular idol for life (in return for payment). 

(24) Touching the bodies of persons who are in impurity due to death 
after the charred bones are collected. 

(25) The actual slaughter by Brahmanas of the sacrificial animal. 

(26) Sale of the Soma plant by Brahmanas. 

(27) Securing food even from a Sudra when a Brahmana had no food 
for six times of meals (i.e., for three days). 

(28) Permission to (a Brahmana) householder to take cooked food from 
Sudras if they are his dasas, cowherds, hereditary friends, persons 
cultivating his land on an agreement to pay part of the produce. 

(29) Going on a very distant pilgrimage. 

(30) Behaviour of a pupil towards his teacher’s wife as towards a teacher 
that is declared (in Smritis). 

(31) The maintenance by Brahmanas in adversity (by following unworthy 
avocations) and the mode of livelihood in which a Brahmana does 
not care to accumulate for tomorrow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


235 


RIDDLE NO. 20 235 

(32) The acceptance of aranis (two wooden blocks for producing fire) by 
Brahmanas in the Homa at the time of Jatakarma in order that 
all the ceremonies for the child from Jatakarma to his marriage 
may be performed therein. 

(33) Constant journeys by Brahmanas. 

(34) Blowing of fire with the mouth (i.e., without employing a bamboo 
dhamani). 

(35) Allowing women who have become polluted by rape, etc., to 
freely mix in the caste (when they have performed prayascitta) 
as declared in the sastric texts. 

(36) Begging of food by a sannyasin from persons of all Varnas 
(including Sudra). 

(37) To wait (i.e., not to use) for ten days water that has recently 
been dug in the grounds. 

(38) Giving fee to the teacher as demanded by him (at the end of 
study) according to the rules laid down in the sastra. 

(39) The employment of Sudras as cooks for Brahmanas and the rest. 

(40) suicide of old people by falling from a precipice of into fire. 

(41) Performing acamana by respectable people in water that would 
remain even after a cow has drunk it to its heart’s content. 

(42) Fining witnesses who depose to a dispute between father and 
son. 

(43) Sannyasin should stay where he happens to be in the evening. 

The strange thing about this code of Kali-Varjya is that its significance 
has not been fully appreciated. It is simply referred to as a list of things 
forbidden in Kali Yug. But there is more than this behind this list of 
don’ts. People are no doubt forbidden to follow the practice listed in the 
Kali Varjya Code. The question however, is: Are these practices condemned 
as being immoral, sinful or otherwise harmful to society? The answer 
is no. One likes to know why these practices if they are forbidden are 
not condemned? Herein lies the riddle of the Kali Varjya Code. This 
technique of forbidding a practice without condemning it stands in 
utter contrast with the procedure followed in earlier ages. To take only 
one illustration. The Apastambha Dharma Sutra forbids the practice of 
giving all property to the eldest son. But he condemns it. Why did the 
Brahmins invent this new technique, forbid but not condemn? There 
must be some special reason for this departure. What is that reason? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


236 


APPENDIX I 

THE RIDDLE OF THE VARNASHRAM 
DHARMA 


Reference has already been made to the two dogmas of Varna Dharma 
and Asharm Dharma, which are called by the collective names of 
Varnashram Dharma and which form so fundamental a part of Hinduism. 
It cannot but be instructive to know the views expressed by the ancient 
writers on these strange dogmas. 

I 

To begin with Varna Dharma. It would be better to collect together 
in the first place the views expressed in the Vedas. 

The subject is referred to in the Rig- Veda in the 90th Hymn of the 
10th Book. It runs as follows: — 

“1. Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, 
on every side enveloping the earth he overpassed (if) by a space of ten 
fingers. 2. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever has been 
and whatever shall be. He is also the lord of immortality since (or, when) 
by food he expands. 3. Such is his greatness, and Purusha is superior to 
this. All existences are a quarter of him; and three-fourths of him are that 
which is immortal in the sky. 4. With three quarters Purusha mounted 
upwards. A quarter of him was again produced here. He was then diffused 
everywhere over-things which eat and things which do not eat. 5. From him 
was born Viraj, and from Viraj, Purusha. When born, he extended beyond 
the earth, both behind and before. 6. When the Gods performed a sacrifice 


This is a consolidated version of Riddle No. 16 & 17 entitled “Varnashram 
Dharma’. This title does not find place in the original Table of Contents. 
Hence this is placed as Appendix. It is difficult to identify which of the 
two versions is later. Quotations have been retained in both the texts 
while the interpretation seems to be modified at various places. This is 
a 55-page typed copy without having any corrections by the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


237 


APPENDIX I 237 

with Purush as the oblation, the spring was its butter, the summer 
its fuel, and the autumn its (accompanying) offering. 7. This victim, 
Purush, born in the beginning, they immolated on the sacrificial grass. 

With him the gods, the Sadhyas, and the rishis sacrificed. 8. From 
that universal sacrifice were provided curds and butter. It formed 
those aerial (creatures) and animals both wild and tame. 9. From 
the universal sacrifice sprang the rich and saman verses, the metres 
and the yajush. 10. From it sprang horses, and all animals with two 
rows of teeth; kine sprang from it; from it goats and sheep. 11. When 
(the Gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut him 
up ? What was his mouth ? What arms (had he) ? What (two objects) 
are said (to have been) the thighs and feet ? 12. The Brahmana was 
his mouth; the Rajanya was made his arms; the being (called) the 
Vaisya, he was his thighs; the Sudra sprang from his feet. 13. The 
moon sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from his eye, Indra and 
Agni from his mouth, and Vayu from his breath. 14. From his navel 
arose the air, from his head the sky, from his feet the earth, from his 
ear the (four) quarters; in this manner (the Gods) formed the worlds. 

15. When the Gods, performing sacrifice, bound Purusha as a victim, 
there were seven sticks (struck up) for it (around the fire), and thrice 
seven pieces of fuel were made. 16. With sacrifice the Gods performed 
the sacrifice. These were the earliest rites. These great powers have 
sought the sky, where are the former Sadhyas, gods”. 

This hymn is known by its general name Purusha Sukta and is 
supposed to embody the official doctrine of Varna and Caste. 

The first thing to do is to inquire which of the other Vedas accept the 
theory of the origin of the Varna system as propounded in the Purusha 
Sukta of the Rig- Veda. Examining the different Vedas from this point 
of view the result appears to be very striking. 

The Sama-Veda has not incorporated the Purusha Sukta among its 
hymns. Nor does it give any other explanation of the Varna Dharma. 

The Yajur-Veda discloses a very great degree of diversity of opinion 
on this issue. Taking up the case of the White Yajur-Veda separately 
from that of the Black Yajur-Veda the position as it emerges from 
a comparison of its three available Sanhitas stands thus. Of the 
three Sanhitas the Kathaka Sanhita and Maitreyani Sanhita do not 
make any reference to the Purusha Sukta of the Rig-Veda nor do 
they make any attempt to give any other explanation of the Varna 
system. The Vajaseniya Sanhita is the only Sanhita of the Yajur-Veda 
which incorporates the Purusha Sukta but not without transposition 
of the verses. But the Vajasaneya Sanhita gives a new and original 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

explanation of the Varna system quite different from what is given in 
the Purusha Sukta 1 : 

“ He lauded with one Living beings were formed; Prajapati was the 
ruler. He lauded with three: the Brahman (Brahman) was created: 
Brahmanaspati was the ruler. He lauded with five; existing things 
were created: Bhutanampati was the ruler. He lauded with seven; 
the seven rishis were created: Dhatri was the ruler. He lauded with 
nine; the Fathers were created: Aditi was the ruler. He lauded with 
eleven: the seasons were created: The Artavas were the rulers. He 
lauded with thirteen: the months were created : the year was the ruler. 

He lauded with fifteen: the Kshattra (the Kshattriya) was created: 

Indra was the ruler. He lauded with seventeen: animals were created: 
Brihaspati was the ruler. He lauded with nineteen: the Sudra and 
the Arya (Vaisya) were created: day and night were the rulers. He 
lauded with twenty-one: animals with undivided hoofs were created: 
Varuna was the ruler. He lauded with twenty-three; small animals 
were created: Pushan was the ruler. He lauded with twenty-five: wild 
animals were created: Vayu was the ruler (compare R.V. x. 90, 8). He 
lauded with twentyseven: heaven and earth separated: Vasus, Rudras, 
and Adityas separated after them: they were the rulers. He lauded with 
twentynine; trees were created: Soma was the ruler. He lauded with 
thirty-one: living beings were created: The first and second halves of 
the month were the rulers. He lauded with thirty one: existing things 
were tranquillized; Prajapati Parameshthin was the ruler.” 

Turning to the Black Yajur-Veda there is only one Sanhita of it 
which is available. It is called Taitterriya Sanhita. This Sanhita offers 
two explanations. The first explanation 2 is the same which is given in 
the Vajaseniya Sanhita as its own original explanation. The second 
explanation is its own particular explanation and is not to be found in 
the Vajaseniya Sanhita. It reads as follows 3 : 

“He (the Vratya) became filled with passions thence sprang the 
Rajanya”. 

“Let the king to whose house the Vratya who knows this, comes as 
a guest, cause him to be respected as superior to himself. So doing 
he does no injury to his royal rank, or to his realm. From him arose 
the Brahman (Brahman) and the Kshattra ( Kshatriya ). They said, 

‘Into whom shall we enter’, etc.” 

The important point is that while the Vajaseniya Sanhita incorporates 
the Purusha Sukta from the Rig-Veda the Taiterriya Sanhita altogether 
omits to take any notice of it whatsoever. 

1 Muir Sanskrit Texts. Vol. I. P. 18. 

2 See Khanda IV. Prapathaka III verses X following. 

3 Ibid I p. 22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


239 


APPENDIX I 239 

The Atharva-Veda incorporates the Purusha Sukta. But the order of 
the verses varies from the order in which they stand in the Rig-Veda. 
But like the Vajaseniya Sanhita and the Taitterriya Sanhita of the 
Yajur-Veda the Atharva is not content with the Purusha Sukta. It offers 
other explanations. They are not as complete and as universal as the 
Purusha Sukta but they are special to it 1 : 

“The Brahman was born the first, with ten heads and ten faces. 

He first drank the soma; he made poison powerless”. 

“The Gods were afraid of the Rajanya when he was in the womb. 

They bound him with bonds when he was in the womb. Consequently 
this Rajanya is born bound. If he were unborn unbound he would 
go on slaying his enemies. In regard to whatever Rajanya any one 
desires that he should be born unbound, and should go on slaying 
his enemies, let him offer for him this Aindra-Birhaspatya oblation. 

A Rajanya has the character of Indra, and a Brahman is Brihaspati. 

It is through the Brahman that any one releases the Rajanya from 
his bond. The golden bond, a gift, manifestly releases from the bond 
that fetters him.” 

Purusha as the origin of the four Varnas is not the only explanation 
of the origin of the Varna system that is to be found in the Vedas. There 
is another explanation. It speaks of people being descended from Manu 
and is to be found referred to in the following passages 2 : 

“Prayers and hymns were formerly congregated in the Indra, in the 
ceremony which Atharvan, father Manu, and Dadhyanch celebrated”. 

Whatever prosperity or succour father Manu obtained by sacrifices, 
may we gain all that under thy guidance, o Rudra.” 

“Those pure remedies of yours, O Maruts, those which are-most 
auspicious, ye vigorous gods, those which are beneficient, those which 
our father Manu chose, those, and the blessing and succour of Rudra, 

I desire.” 

“That ancient friend hath been equipped with the powers of the 
mighty (gods). Father Manu has prepared hymns to him, as portals 
of success to the gods.” 

“Sacrifice is Manu, our protecting father.” 

“Do ye (gods) deliver, protect, and intercede for us; do not lead us 
far away from the paternal path of Manu.” 

“He (Agni) who abides among the offspring of Manu as the invoker 
(of the gods), is even the lord of these riches.” 

“Agni, together with the gods, and the children of Manush, 
celebrating a multiform sacrifice with hymns etc.” 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I. p. 21-22. 

2 Ibid,., pp. 162-165. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


240 


240 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Ye gods, Vajas, and Ribhukshans, come to our sacrifice by the 
path travelled by the gods, that ye, pleasing deities, may institute 
a sacrifice among these people of Manush on auspicious days.” 

“The people of Manush praise in the sacrifices Agni the invoker.” 

“Whenever Agni, lord of the people, kindled, abides gratified among 
the people of Manush, he repels all Rakshasas.” 

Let us now turn to the writing called the Brahmanas and take note 
of what they have to say on this question. 

The explanation given by the Sathapatha Brahmana is as follows 1 : 

“(Uttering) ‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated this earth. (Uttering) 
‘bhuvah’ he generated the air, and (uttering) ‘svah’, he generated 
the sky. This universe is co-extensive with these worlds. (The fire) 
is placed with the whole. Saying ‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated the 
Brahman (saying) ‘bhuvah’ he generated the Kshattra; (and saying) 
‘svah’, he generated the Vis. The fire is placed with the whole. (Saying) 
‘bhuh’, Prajapati generated himself; (saying ‘bhuvah’ he generated 
offspring; (saying) ‘svah’ he generated animals. This world is so much 
as self, offspring, and animals. (The fire) is placed with the whole.” 

Besides this there is another explanation to be found in this 
Brahmans 2 : 

“Brahma (here, according to the commentator, existing in the form 
of Agni, and representing the Brahman caste) was formerly this 
(universe), one only. Being one, it did not develope. It energetically 
created an excellent form, the Kshattra, viz, those among the 
gods who are powers (kshattrani), Indra, Varuna, Soma, Rudra, 
Parjanya, Yama, Mrityu, Issana. Hence nothing is superior to the 
Kshattra. Therefore the Brahman sits below the Kshattriya at the 
rajasuya-sacrifice; he confers that glory on the kshattra (the royal 
power). This, the Brahma, is the source of the Kshattra; Hence, 
although the king attains, supremacy, he at the end resorts to 
the Brahma as his source. Whoever destroys him (the Brahman) 
destroys his own source. He becomes most miserable, as one who 
has injured a superior. 24. He did not develope. he created the 
Viz-Viz, those classes of gods who are designated by troops, Vasus, 
Rudras, Adityas, Visvedevas, Maruts; 25. He did not develope. He 
created the Sudra class, Pushan. This earth is Pushan; for she 
nourishes all that exists. 26. He did not develope. He energetically 
created an excellent form, Justice (Dharma). This is the ruler 
(kshattra) of the ruler (kshattra), namely Justice, hence nothing is 

1 Quoted by Muir Sanskrit Texts Vol. I. p. 17. 

2 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts. Vol. I p. 20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


241 


APPENDIX I 


241 


superior to justice. Therefore the weaker seeks (to overcome) the 
stronger by justice, as by a king. This justice is truth. In consequence 
they say of a man who speaks truth, ‘he speaks justice;’ or of a man 
who is uttering justice, ‘he speaks truth.’ For this is both of these. 

27. This is the Brahma, Kshattra, Viz. and Sudra. 

“Through Agni it became Brahma among the gods, the Brahman 
among men, through the (divine) Kshattriya a (human) Kshattriya, 
through the (divine) Vaisya a (human) Vaisya, through the (divine) 
Sudra a (human) Sudra. Wherefore it is in Agni among the gods and 
in a Brahman among men, that they seek after an abode.” 

The Taittiriya Brahmana has the following explanations to offer. First 
is in the following terms 1 : 

“This entire (universe) has been created by Brahma. Men say that 
the Vaisya class was produced from rich-verses. They say that the 
Yajur-Veda is the womb from which the Kshattriya was born. The 
Sama-Veda is the source from which the Brahmans sprang. This 
word the ancients declared to the ancients.” 

The second refers only two varnas — only Brahman and Sudra and 
says 2 : 

“The Brahman caste is sprung from the gods; the Sudra from 
the Asuras” 

The third explains the origin of the Sudras in the following terms 3 : 

“Let him at his will milk out with a wooden dish. But let not a 
Sudra milk it out. For this Sudra has sprung from non-existence. 

They say that that which a Sudra milks out is no oblation. Let not 
a Sudra milk out the Agnihotra. For they do not purify that. When 
that passes beyond the filter, then it is an oblation” 

The next thing would be to see what explanation the Smritis have 
to offer for the origin of the Varna system. This is what Manu has to 
say in his Smriti 4 : — 

“He (the self-existent) having felt desire, and willing to create 
various living beings from his own body, first created the waters, 
and threw into them a seed. 9. That seed became a golden egg, of 
lustre equal to the sun; in it he himself was born as a Brahma, the 
parent of all the worlds. 10. The waters are called narah, for they 
are sprung from Nara: and as they were his first sphere of motion 
he is therefore called Narayana. 11. Produced from the imperceptible 
eternal, existent and non-existent, cause, they male (purusha) is 
celebrated in the world as Brahma. 12. After dwelling for a year in 
the egg, the glorious being, himself, by his own contemplation, split 

1 Muir I. p. 17 

2 & 3 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 21. 

4 Muir’s Vol. I pp. 36 and 37. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it in twain. That the worlds might be peopled, he caused the 
Brahman, the Kshattriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra to issue 
from his mouth, his arms, his thighs, and his feet. 32. Having 
divided his own body into two parts, the lord (Brahma) became, 
with the half a male (purusha) and with the half, a female; and 
in her he created Viraj. 33. Know, o most excellent twice-born 
men, that I, whom that male, (purusha) Viraj, himself created, 
am the creator of all this world. 34. Desiring to produce living 
creatures, I performed very arduous devotion, and first created 
ten Maharshis (great rishis), lords of living beings, (35) viz. 
Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Prachetas, 
Vasistha, Bhrigu, and Narada. 36. They, endowed with great 
energy, created other seven Manus, gods, and abodes of gods, and 
Maharshis of boundless might; (37) Yakshas, Rakshases, Pishchas, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras, Asuras, Nagas, Serpents, great Birds, and 
the different classes of Pitris; (38) lightnings, thunderbolts, clouds, 
portentous atmospheric sounds, comets, and various luminaries; 

(39) Kinnars, apes, fishes, different sorts of birds, cattle, deer, 
men. beasts with two rows of teeth; (40) small and large reptiles, 
mouths, lice, flies, fleas, all gadflies, and gnats, and motionless 
things of different sorts. 41. Thus by my appointment, and by 
the force of devotion, was all. This world Both Motionless and 
Moving, created by those great beings, according to the (previous) 
actions of each creature.” 

There is also another view expressed by Manu in his Smriti as 
to the basic reasons for dividing men into four classes 1 : 

“I shall now declare succinctly in order the states which 
the soul reaches by means of each of these qualities. 40. Souls 
endowed with the Sattva quality attain to godhead; those having 
the rajas quality become men; whilst those characterized by 
tamas always become beasts — such is the threefold destination. 

43. Elephants, horses, Sudras and contemptible Mlechhas, lions, 

tigers, and boars form the middle dark condition 46. Kings, 

Kshattriyas, a King’s priests (purohitah), and men whose chief 
occupation is the war of words, compose the middle condition of 
passion.... 48. Devotees, ascetics, Brahmans, the deities borne 
on aerial cars, constellations, and Daityas, constitute the lowest 
condition of goodness. 49. Sacrificing priests, rishis, gods, the 
vedas, the celestial luminaries, years, the fathers the Sadhyas, 
form the second condition of goodness. 50. Brahma, the creators, 
righteousness, the Great one (mahat) the Unapparent One 
(avyakta) compose the highest condition of goodness.” 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. pp. 41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


243 


APPENDIX I 243 

It is interesting to compare with these views: those contained in the 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata. 

The Ramayana says that the four Varnas are the offspring of Manu, 
the daughter of Daksha and the wife of Kasyappa 1 . 

“Listen while I declare to you from the commencement all the 
Prajapatis (lord of creatures) who came into existence in the earliest 
time. Kardama was the first, then Vokrita, Sesha, Samsraya, the 
energetic Bahuputra, Sthanu, Marichi, Atri, the strong Kratu, 
Pulastya, Angiras, Prachetas, Pulaha, Daksha, then Vivasvat, 
Arishtanemi, and the glorious Kasyapa, who was the last. The 
Prajapati Daksha is famed to have had sixty daughters. Of these 
Kasyapa took in marriage eight elegant maidens, Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Kalaka, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu and Anala. Kasyapa pleased, then 
to these maids, ‘ ye shall bring forth sons like to me, preserves of the 
three worlds’. Aditi, Diti, Danu and Kalaka assented; but the others 
did not agree. Thirty-three gods were born by Aditi, the Adityas, 
Vasus, Rudras, and the two Asvins. Manu (wife) of Kasyapa, produced 
men, Brahmans, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. ‘ Brahmans were 
born from the mouth, Kshattriyas from the breast, Vaisyas from the 
thighs, and Sudras from the feet,’ so says the Veda. Anala gave birth 
to all trees with pure fruits.” 

The Mahabharata gives the following explanation 2 : 

“Born all with splendour, like that of great rishis, the ten sons of 
Prachetas are reputed to have been virtuous and holy; and by them 
the glorious beings were formerly burnt up by fire springing from 
their mouths. From them was born Daksha Prachetas, and from 
Daksha, the Parent of the world (were produced), these creatures. 
Cohabiting with Virini, the Muni Daksha begot a thousand sons 
like himself, famous for their religious observances, to whom 
Narada taught the doctrine of final liberation, the unequalled 
knowledge of the Sankhya. Desirous of creating offspring, the 
Prajapati Daksha next formed fifty daughters of whom he gave ten 
to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, and twenty-seven, devoted to the 

regulation of time, to Indu (Soma) On Dakshayani, the most 

excellent of his thirteen wives, Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, begot 
the Adityas, headed by Indra and distinguished by their energy, 
and also Vivasvat. To Vivasvat was born a son, the mighty Yama 
Vaivasvata. To Martanda (i.e. Vivasvat, the sun) was born the 
wise and mighty Manu, and also the renowned Yama, his (Manu’s) 
younger brother. Righteous was this wise Manu, on whom a race 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 116-117. 

2 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I. pp. 125. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was founded. Hence this (family) of men became known as the 
race of Manu. Brahmans, Kshattriyas, and other men sprang from 
this Manu. From him o king, came the Brahman conjoined with 
the Kshatriya.” 

In another place the Mahabharata gives the origin as it is given 
in the Purusha Sukta: 

“The king should appoint to be his royal priest a man who 
will protect the good, and restrain the wicked. On this subject 
they relate this following ancient story of a conversation between 
Pururavas the son of Ilia, and Matarisvan (Vayu, the Windgod). 
Pururavas said: You must explain to me whence the Brahman, 
and whence the (other) three castes were produced, and whence 
the superiority (of the first) arises. Matarisvan answered: the 
Brahman was created from Brahman’s mouth, the Kshatriya 
from his arms, the Vaisya from his thighs, while for the purpose 
of serving these three castes was produced the fourth class, the 
Sudra, fashioned from his feet. The Brahman, as soon as born, 
becomes the lord of all beings upon the earth, for the purpose 
of protecting the treasure of righteousness. Then (the creator) 
constituted Kshatriya the controller of the earth, a second Yama 
to bear the rod, for the satisfaction of the people. And it was 
Brahma’s ordinance that the Vaisya should sustain these three 
classes with money and grain, and that the Sudra should serve 
them. The son of Ilia then enquired : Tell me, Vayu, to whom the 
earth, with its wealth, rightfully belongs, to the Brahman or the 
Kshatriyya ? Vayu replied: All this, whatever exists in the world, 
is the Brahman’s property by right of primogeniture; this is known 
to those who are skilled in the laws of duty. It is his own which 
the Brahman eats, puts on, and bestows. He is the chief of all 
the castes, the first-born and the most excellent. Just as a woman 
when she has lost her (first) husband, takes her brother in law 
for a second; so the Brahman is the first resource in calamity; 
afterwards another may arise”. 

There is a third view maintained in the Shantiparva of Mahabharata 1 : — 

“Bhrigu replied: ‘Brahma thus formerly created the Prajapatis, 
Brahmanic, penetrated by his own energy, and in splendour 
equalling the sun and fire. The lord then formed truth, righteousness 
austere fervour, and the eternal veda (or sacred science), Virtuous 
practice, and purity for (the attainment of) heaven. He also formed 
the gods, Danavas, Gandharvas, Daityas, Asuras, Mahoragas, 
Yakshas, Rakshasas, Nagas, Pisachas, and men, Brahmans, 


Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 139-140. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK SJ+DK+YS23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

APPENDIX I 

Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, as well as all other classes 
(varnah) of beings. The colour (varna) of the Brahmans was white; 
that of the Kshatriyas red; that of the Vaishyas yellow; and that 
of the Sudra black.’ Bharadvaja here rejoins: ‘ If the caste (varna) 
of the four classes is distinguished by their colour (varna), then 
a confusion of all the castes is observable. Desire, anger, fear, 
cupidity, grief, apprehension, hunger, fatigue, prevail over us all, 
by what then, is caste discriminated ? Sweat, urine, excrement, 
phlegm, bile and blood (are common to all) the bodies of all decay; 
by what then is caste discriminated? There are innumerable kinds 
of things moving and stationary, how is the class (varna) of these 
various objects to be determined ?” 

Bhrigu replies: There is no difference of castes : 

In the same Shantiparva there is a fourth theory 1 : 

“Bharadvaja again enquires: ‘What is that in virtue of which a 
man is a Brahman, a Kshattriya, a Vaisya, or a Sudra; tell me, 
o, most eloquent Brahman rishi’. Bhrigu replies: ‘He who is pure, 
consecrated by the natal and other ceremonies, who has completely 
studied the Veda, lives in the practice of the six ceremonies, 
performs perfectly the rites of purification, who eats the remains of 
oblations, is attached to his religious teacher, is constant in religious 
observances, and devoted to truth is called a Brahman. He in whom 
are seen truth, liberality, inoffensiveness, harmlessness, modesty 
compassion, and austere fervour, — is declared to be a Brahman. 

He who practises the duty arising out of the kingly office, who is 
addicted to the study of the Veda, and who delights in giving and 
receiving, is called a Kshattriya. He who readily occupies himself 
with cattle, who is devoted to agriculture, and acquisition, who is 
pure, and is perfect in the study of the Veda, — is denominated a 
Vaisya. He who is habitually addicted to all kinds of food, performs 
all kinds of work, who is unclean, who has abandoned the Veda, 
and does not practise pure observances, — is traditionally called 
a Sudra. And this (which I have stated) is the mark of a Sudra, 
and it is not found in a Brahman: (such) a Sudra will remain a 
Sudra, while the Brahman (who so acts) will be no Brahman”. 

Let us inquire what the Puranas have to say on the origin of the 
Varna System. 

To begin with the Vishnu Purana. There are two theories propounded 
in the Vishnu Purana on the origin of the Chaturvarna. 

According to one ascribes the origin to Manu 2 : 


245 

245 


Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 141-142. 
Muir’s Sanskrit Text Vol. I pp. 220-221. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Before the mundane egg existed the divine Brahma Hiranyagarbha, 
the eternal originator of all worlds, who was the form of essence of 
Brahma, who consists of the divine Vishnu, who again is identical 
with Rik, Yajush, Saman and Atharva Vedas. From Brahma’s right 
thumb was born the Prajapati Daksha; Daksha had a daughter Aditi; 
from her was born Vivasvat; and from him sprang Manu. Manu had 
sons called Ikshvaku, Nriga, Dhrishta, Saryati, Narishanta, Puramsu, 
Nabhagandishta, Karusha, and Prishadhra.” 

“From Karusha the Karushas, Kshattriyas of great power, were 
descended.” 

“Nabhaga, the son of Nedishta, became a Vaisya”. 

Of this explanation ascribing the origin to Manu there is another 
and a different version in the Vishnu Purana: 

“Desirous of a son, Manu sacrificed to Mitra and Varuna; but in 
consequence of a wrong invocation through an irregularity of the 
hotri-priest, a daughter called Ilia was born. Then through the favour 
of Mitra and Varuna she became to Manu a son called Sudyumna. 

But being again changed into a female through the wrath of Isvara 
(Mahadeva) she wandered near the hermitage of Budha the son of 
Soma (the Moon); who becoming enamoured of her had by her a son 
called Pururavas. After his birth, the god who is formed of sacrifice, of 
the Rik, Yajush, Saman, and Atharva-Vedas, of all things, of mind, of 
nothing, he who is in the form of the sacrificial Male, was worshipped 
by the rishis of infinite splendour who desired that Sudyumn should 
recover his manhood. Through the favour of this god Ila became again 
Sudhumna.” 

“According to the Vishnu Purana, Atri was the son of Brahma, 
and the father of Soma (the moon), whom Brahma installed as 
the sovereign of plants, Brahmans and stars. After celebrating the 
rajasuya sacrifice, Soma became intoxicated with pride, and carried 
off Tara (Star) the wife of Brihaspati the preceptor of the gods, 
whom, although admonished and entreated by Brahma, the gods, 
and rishis, he refused to restore, Soma’s part was taken by Usanas; 
and Rudra, who had studied under Angiras, aided Brihaspati. A 
fierce conflict ensued between the two sides, supported respectively 
by the gods and the Daityas, etc. Brahma interposed, and compelled 
Soma to restore Tara to her husband. She had, however, in the 
meantime become pregnant, and borne a son Budha (the planet 
Mercury), of whom, when strongly urged, she acknowledged Soma to 
be the father. Pururavas, as has been already mentioned, was the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


247 


APPENDIX I 


247 


son of this Budha by Ilia, the daughter of Manu. The loves of 
Pururavas and the Apsara Urvasi are related in the Satapatha 
Brahmana, xi. 5, 1, 1 in the Vishnu Purana, iv. 6, 19 ff; in the 
Bhagavata Purana, ix, 14; and in the Harivamsa, section 26. The 
Mahabharata, Adip. sect. 75, alludes to Pururavas as having been 
engaged in a contest with the Brahmanas. This passage will be 
quoted hereafter. According to the Vishnu Purana, iv, 7, 1, Pururavas 
had six sons, of whom the eldest was Ayus. Ayus had five sons: 
Nahusha, Kshatra-vriddha, Rambha, Raji, and Anenas.” 

“Kshattravriddha had a son Sunahotra, who had three sons, 
Kasa, Lesa, and Gritsamada. From the last sprang Saunaka, who 
progenited the system of four castes. Kasa had a son Kasiraja, 
of whom again Dirghatamas was the son as Dhanvantri was 
Dirghatamas.” 

The second ascribes the origin to Brahma as the following extract 
from the Vishnu Purana shows 1 : 

“Maitreya 2 says: You have described to me the Arvaksrotas, or 
human creation; declare to me, o Brahman, in detail the manner 
in which Brahma formed it. Tell me how and with what qualities, 
he created the castes, and what are traditionally reputed to be 
the functions of the Brahmans and others. Parasara replies: 3. 
When, true to his design, Brahma became desirous to create the 
world, creatures in whom goodness (sattva) prevailed sprang from 
his mouth; 4. Others in whom passion (rajas) predominated came 
from his breast; others in whom both passion and darkness (tamas) 
were strong, proceeded from his thigh; (5) others he created from 
his feet, whose chief characteristic was darkness. Of these was 
composed the system of four castes, Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and Sudras, who had respectively issued from his mouth, breast, 
thighs, and feet. 6. Brahma formed this entire fourfold institution of 
classes for the performance of sacrifices, the gods nourish mankind 
by discharging rain. Sacrifices, the causes of prosperity, (8) are 
constantly celebrated by virtuous men, devoted to their duties, who 
avoid wrong observances, and walk in the right path. 9. Men, in 
consequence of their humanity, obtain heaven and final liberation; 
and they proceed to the world which they desire”. 

In the Harivamsa are to be found two theories. It upholds the 
theory of the origin of the Varnas as being born from one of the 
descendents of Manu as the stock of descent than the one mentioned 
by the Vishnu Purana 3 : 

1 Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I pp. 61-62. 

2 The Vishnu Purana is cast in the form of a dialogue between Maitreya the student 
who asks questions and Rishi Parashara who answers his questions. 

3 Muir’s Sanskrit Text Vol. I p. 227. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“The son of Gritsamada was Sunaka, from whom sprang the 
Saunakas, Brahmanas, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras.” 

“Vitatha was the father of five sons, Suhotra, Suhotri, Gaya, 
Garga, and the great Kapila. Suhotra had two sons, the exalted 
Kasaka, and King Gritsamati. The sons of the latter were 
Brahmans, Kshattriyas, and Vaisyas.” 

The other version speaks of their being formed by Vishnu who 
sprang from Brahma and had become Prajapati Daksha and is as 
follows 1 ; 

“Janmejaya 2 says: I have heard, o Brahman the (description 
of the) Brahma Yuga, the first of the ages. I desire also to be 
accurately informed both summarily, and in detail, about the age 
of the Kshattriyas, with its numerous observances, illustrated as 
it was by sacrifice, and described, as it has been by men skilled in 
the art of narration. Vaisamapayana replied: I shall describe to you 
that age revered for its sacrifices and distinguished for its various 
works -of liberality, as well as for its people. Those Munis of the 
size of a thumb had been absorbed by the Sun’s rays. Following a 
rule of life leading to final emancipation, practising unobstructed 
cremonies, both in action and in abstinence from action constantly 
intent upon Brahma, united to Brahman as the highest object, — 
Brahmans glorious and sanctified in their conduct, leading a 
life of continence, disciplined by the knowledge of Brahman, — 
Brahmans complete in their observances, perfect in knowledge, 
and contemplative, when at the end of a thousand yugas, their 
majesty was full, these Munis became involved in the dissolution of 
the world. Then Vishnu sprung from Brahma, removed beyond the 
sphere of sense, absorbed in contemplation, became the Prajapati 
Daksha, and formed numerous creatures. The Brahmans, beautiful 
(or, dear to Soma), were formed from an imperishable (akshara); 
the Kshattriyas from a perishable (kshara), element; the Vaisyas 
from alteration; the Sudras from a modification of smoke. While 
Vishnu was thinking upon the castes (varna) Brahmans were 
formed with white, red, yellow, and blue colours (varanaih). Hence 
in the world men have become divided into castes, being of four 
descriptions, Brahmans, Kshattriyas Vaisyas, and Sudras, one 
in form, distinct in their duties, “two-footed, very wonderful, full 
of energy(?), skilled in expedients in all their occupations. Rites 
are declared to be prescribed by the Vedas for the three (highest) 
castes. By that contemplation practised by the being sprung from 

1 Muir’s Vol. I pp. 152-153 

2 The Harivamsa is a dialogue between Janmejaya and Vaishampayan. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK SJ+DK+YS23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 

APPENDIX I 

Brahma — by that practised in his character as Vishnu — , the Lord 
Prachetasa (Daksha), i.e. Vishnu the great contemplator (yogin), 
passed through his wisdom and energy from that state of meditation 
into the sphere of works. Next the Sudras, produced from extinction, 
are destitute of rites. Hence they are not entitled to be admitted to 
the purificatory ceremonies, nor does sacred science belong to them. 

Just as the cloud of smoke which rises from the fire on the friction 
of the fuel, and is dissipated, is of no service in the sacrificial rite, so 
too the Sudras wandering over the earth, are altogether (useless for 
purposes of sacrifice) owing to their birth, their mode of life devoid 
of purity and their want of the observances prescribed in the Veda.” 

Lastly the Bhagwat Purana 1 : 

“At the end of many thousand years the living soul which resides 
in time, action, and natural quality gave life to that lifeless egg 
floating on the water. Purusha then having burst the egg, issued from 
it was a thousand thighs, feet, arms, eyes, faces and heads. With 
his members the sages fashion the worlds, the seven lower worlds 
with his loins etc., and the seven upper worlds with his groin, etc. 

The Brahman (was) the mouth of Purusha, the Kshattriya his arms, 
the Vaishya was born from the thighs, the Sudra from the feet of 
the divine being. The earth was formed from his feet, the air from 
his navel; the heaven by the heart, and the mahaloka by the breast 
of the mighty one”. 

The Vayu Purana takes up the theory of Manu but says: 

“The son of Gritsamada was Sunaka, from whom sprang Saunaka. 

In his family were born Brahamanas, Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and 
Sudras, twice-born men with various functions”. 

What does this survey show ? If it shows anything it shows what a 
chaotic state has been created by the Brahmans in trying to explain 
the origin of the Varna system. There is no uniformity or consistency 
in the explanations they have offered. One and the same authority 
gives a variety of explanations. One and the same authority gives 
explanations some of which are mythical, some of which are mystical 
and rationalistic all intended to serve the same purpose namely to 
explain the origin of the Varna system. 

The Vedas attempt to explain the Varnas as having arisen from 
Purusha, from Manu, from Prajapati, from Vratya and from Soma. 

The Brahmanas show a marked divergence from the Vedas. They do 
not acknowledge Purusha, Manu, Vratya or Soma as the originators 
of the four varnas. They vacilliate between Prajapati and Brahma 


249 

249 


Muir’s Sanskrit Texts Vol. I p. 156. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


250 


250 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which is a new importation. The Taitteriya Brahmana sports with 
an altogether new theory. It speaks of Brahmins born of Gods and 
Sudras from Asuras. 

The Manu Smriti offers two explanation mythological and rational. 
The mythological explanations ascribes the origin to Brahma and the 
rational ascribes it to the constitutional make up of the individual. The 
Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas seem to be in support 
of the theory of Manu as the progenitor of the four Varnas. In the 
handling of the theme of Manu they have made a complete mess of 
him. In the Ramayana this Manu is a female a daughter of Daksha 
and wife of Kasyappa. In the Mahabharata Manu is a male and not a 
female. He is the son of Vivasvat who is the son of Kasyappa. In the 
Mahabharata the wife of Kasyappa is not Manu but is Dakshayani 
who is also said to be the daughter of Daksha. The Puranas while 
expounding the theory of Manu as the originator of the four varnas 
have introduced into it many divergent elements. The Vishnu Purana 
instead of ascribing the origin to Manu proceeds to ascribe it to his 
sons. But in hurry explains the origin of the two Varnas only, namely, 
Brahmins and Sudras from two of Manu’s eight sons and forgets to 
give an explanation of the two other varnas. In another place the 
same Vishnu Purana expounds another theory by which origin of 
the four Varnas through Manu in the female line of his daughter 
Ila. According to the second theory Ila married Pururavas who had 
six sons the eldest of whom was Ayus. From Ayus to Kshatravridha, 
from him Sunahotra, from him Gritsamada. The four varnas were 
originated from Gritsamada. The Vayu Purana does not admit this. 
It says that the four varnas were born from Saunaka the grandson 
of Gritsamada. The Harivamsa in one place agrees with the Vishnu 
Purana that the progenitor was Gritsamada with this difference that 
the Sudras did not spring but from whom gives no explanation. In 
another place it says that the four varnas sprang from Sunaka the 
son of Gritsamada thus differing from itself, from the Vishnu Purana 
and from the Vayu Purana. 

These explanations are like effusions of the imbeciles. They show how 
hard the Brahmins were put to for the defence of the Varna system. 
The question is why were the Brahmins not able to give a consistent 
and uniform unimpeachable, convincing and rational explanation of 
the Varna system of which they have been such strong protagonists ? 

Of these numerous explanations there are two on which the Varna 
system is defended by the Brahmins of today. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


251 


APPENDIX I 251 

The first is the origin of the four Varnas from Purusha the theory that 
is propounded in the Purusha Sukta of the Rig-Veda. It is not a historical 
explanation. It would be something if it were mythological for mythology 
is history even if it is history in hyperbole. But it is not. The explanation 
is purely mystic. It is a fantastic dream of a troubled mind. That is why 
it was never regarded as the explanation and that is why there were so 
many other rival explanations. That it was treated with scant courtesy 
even by the Vedic writers is obvious from two circumstances. In the first 
place it occurs in the miscellaneous portion of the Rig-Veda. In the second 
place it does not occur in the Kathak and Maitreyani Sanhita of the 
White Yajur-Veda and the Taitteriya Sanhitas of the Black Yajur-Veda do 
not adopt it. The Sam-Veda incorporates only 5 Mantras of the Purusha 
Sukta from the Rig-Veda and what is important is that in adopting these 
five Mantras omit those which speak of the four Varnas springing from 
the four parts of the body of the Purusha. It is of course a very late 
composition and has been interpolated after all the four Vedas had taken 
their present shape. But apart from that it has all the marks showing 
its authors were not very sure of their explanation carrying conviction. 
It is probably an allegory, figurative narration which the Brahmins 
attempted to convert into a literal statement of hard fact. It does not 
solve the riddle. On the contrary it creates a riddle — which is, why 
were the Brahmins interested in supporting the theory of Chaturvarna. 

The rational explanation has behind it the authority of the Bhagwat 
Geeta. Krishna, the God of the Hindus, explains that he created the system 
of Chaturvarna and propounds the theory that it is a system of difference 
of Guna: innate virtue. This theory of difference of Guna is derived from 
the Sankhya Philosophy of Kapila. Krishna offers this explanation of 
Chaturvarna in a commanding spirit as though it was incontrovertible. 
The Sankhya Philosophy no doubt asserts as a fundamental proposition 
that matter has got three Gunas-Raj, Tama and Satva. Matter is not 
inert. It is instable equilibrium when all the three Gunas are coequal in 
their power. Matter becomes dynamic when the equilibrium is disturbed 
when one Guna becomes masterful over others. Krishna was of course very 
clever in seeking to give scientific explanation of the Varna system by 
applying the Sankhya Theory of Guna dharma. But in doing so Krishna 
has really made a fool of himself. He did not realize that there are four 
Varnas and three Gunas and whatever ingenuity he might claim to have 
he could not account for the four Varnas with a theory which did not 
require more than three Gunas. Here again what appears to be a rational 
explanation is an absurd explanation. It does not solve the riddle. It 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

creates one. Why were the Brahmins fighting so hard to justify the 
Chaturvarna ? 


II 

The Ashram Dharma divides the life of an individual into four 
stages (1) Brahmcharya, (2) Grahasthashram, (3) Vanaprastha and (4) 
Sannyas. The state of Brahmacharya has both a de jure and de facto 
connotation. Its de facto connotation is that it means an unmarried 
state of life. Its de jure connotation means the stage of study under 
a teacher. Grahasthashram is the stage of a householder — a stage of 
married family life. The stage of Sannyas is a stage of renunciation of 
civic rights and responsibilities. It is a stage of civic death. The stage 
of Vanaprastha is in between Grahasthashram and Sannyas. It is a 
stage in which one belongs to society but is bound to live away from 
society. As the name implies it prescribes dwelling in forest. 

The Hindus believe that this institution of Ashram Dharma is as 
old as that of the Varna Dharma. They call the two by a joint name 
of Varnashram Dharma as though they were one and integral, and 
the two together form the steelframe of the Hindu Society. 

To begin with it would be better to have a full understanding of 
the Ashram Dharma before inquiring into its origin and its purpose 
and its peculiarities. The best source for an exposition of the Ashram 
system is the Manu Smriti from which the following relevant extracts 
are reproduced: 

Ch. 11-36. In the eighth year after conception, one should perform the 
initiation (upanayana) of a Brahmana, in the eleventh after conception 
(that) of a Kshatriya, but in the twelfth that of a Vaisya. 

Ch. 11-168. A twice-born man who, not having studied the Veda, 
applies himself to other (and wordly study), soon falls, even while 
living, to the condition of a Sudra and his descendants (after him). 

Ch. III-l. The vow of the three Vedas under a teacher must be kept 
for thirty-six years or for half that time, or for a quarter, or until the 
(student) has perfectly learnt them. 

Ch. III-2. Who has studied in due order the three Vedas, or two, or 
even one only, without breaking the (rule of) studentship, shall enter 
the order of householder. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


253 


APPENDIX I 253 

Ch. VI-8. The student, the householder, the hermit, and the ascetic, 
these (constitute) four separate orders, which all spring from (the order 
of) householders. 

Ch. VI-88. But all (or) even (any of) these orders, assumed successively 
in accordance with the Institutes (of the sacred law), lead the Brahmana 
who acts by the preceding (rules) to the highest state. 

Ch. VI-89. And in accordance with the precepts of the Veda and of 
the Smriti, the housekeeper is declared to be superior to all of them; 
for he supports the other three. 

Ch. VI-1. A twice-born Snataka, who has thus lived according to the 
law in the order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and 
keeping his organs in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing 
the rules given below). 

Ch. VI-2. When a householder sees his (skin) wrinkled and (his hair) 
white, and the sons of his sons, then he may resort to the forest. 

Ch. VI-33. But having thus passed the third part of (a man’s natural 
term of) life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth 
part of his existence, after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects. 

Ch. VI-34. He who after passing from order to order, after offering 
sacrifices and subduing his senses, becomes, tired with giving alms and 
offerings of food, an ascetic, gains bliss after death. 

Ch. VI-35. When he has paid the three debts, let him apply his mind 
to (the attainment of) final liberation; he who seeks it without having 
paid (his debts) sinks downwards. 

Ch. VI-36. Having studied the Vedas in accordance with the rule, having 
begot sons according to the sacred law, and having offered sacrifices 
according to his ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment of) 
final liberation. 

Ch. VI-37. A twice-born man who seeks final liberation, without having 
studied the Vedas, without having begotten sons and without having 
offered sacrifices, sinks downwards.” 

For these rules it is clear that according to Manu there are three 
features of the Ashram Dharma. First is that it is not open to Shudras 
and Women. The second is Brahmacharya which is compulsory, so is 
Grahasthashram. Vanaprastha and Sannyas are not compulsory. The 
third is that one must pass from one stage to another in the order in 
which they stand namely first Brahmacharya, then Grahasthashram, 
then Vanaprastha and lastly Sannyas. No one can omit one and enter 
the next stage. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Judging what Manu says in the light of history there are several 
questions which arise. Referring to the Vedas the theory of stages in life 
is quite unknown. The Vedas speak of Brahmachari. But there is nothing 
to show that Brahmarcharya was regarded as an inescapable stage in 
life. There is reference to ‘Yatis’ in the Rig-Veda. That again was not 
regarded as a stage in life. Indeed unlike the Sannyasi the Yati in the 
Rig-Vedic times is a hated institution. In fact there are many hymns 
in the Rig-Veda where Indra is spoken of as having thrown the Yatis 
to the wolves. Why did the Brahmins formulate this theory of the four 
Ashramas? This is the first riddle about the Ashram Dharma. 

The second riddle relates to the order of sequence among the four 
Ashramas. Now there is no doubt that there was a time when it was open 
to a Brahmachari to enter any of the three Ashrams. He may become a 
Grahasthashrami or he may at once become a Sannyasi without becoming 
a Grahasthashrami. Compare what the authors of the Dharma Sutras 
have to say on the point. 

Vashishta Dharma Sutra says 1 : 

“There are four orders, viz. (that of) the student, (that of ) the householder, 
(that of) the hermit, and (that of) the ascetic.” 

“A man who has studied one, two, or three Vedas without violating the 
rules of studentship, may enter any of these (orders), whichsoever he pleases.” 

Gautama Dharma Sutra says 2 : 

“Some (declare, that) he (who has studied the Veda) may make his choice 
(which) among the orders (he is going to enter).” 

“(The four orders are, that of) the student (that of) the householder, (that 
of) the ascetic (Bhikshu), (and that of) the hermit in the woods (vaikhanasa). 

Why did Manu remove the option and make the married state an 
obligatory state, why did he make the married state a condition precedent 
to the stage of hermit and the stage of hermit a condition precedent to 
the stage of a Sannyasi? 

If the four stages of life have been devised to serve some important 
end it is difficult to understand why the two classes Shudras and women 
were excluded? The Shudras and women can only be householders 
according to the scheme of Manu. Why can they not be Brahmachari, 
Vanaprasthi or Sannyasi? What harm can there be either to them or to 
society if the Ashram Dharma was open to them ? 

There are other riddles about the system of Ashram Dharma. 

1 S.B.E. Vol. XIV. p. 40. Chapter VII. verses 1, 2, 3. 

2 S.B.E. Vol. II, p. 192. Chapter III. verses 1, 2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


255 


APPENDIX I 255 

First relates to the distinctions which Manu makes among the 
Brahmacharis. 1 

Ch. 11-41. Let students according to the order (of their castes), wear 
(as upper dresses) the skins of black antelopes, spotted deer, and he- 
goats, and (lower garments) made of a hemp, flax or wool. 1 

Ch. 11-42. The girdle of a Brahmana shall consist of a triple cord of 
Munga grass, smooth and soft; (that) of a Kshatriya, of a bowstring, 
made of Murva fibres; (that) of a Vaisya, of hempen threads. 

Ch. 11-43. If Munga grass (and so forth) be not procurable, (the girdles) 
may be made of Kusa, Asmantaka, and Balbaga (fibres), with a single 
threefold knot, or with three or five (knots according to the custom of 
the family). 

Ch. 11-44. The sacrificial string of a Brahmana shall be made of cotton, 
(shall be) twisted to the right, (and consist) of three threads, that of a 
Kshatriya of hempen threads, (and) that of a Vaisya of woolen threads. 

Ch. 11-45. A Brahmana shall (carry), according to the sacred law, a 
staff of Bilva or Palasa a Kshatriya, or Vata or Khadira; (and) a Vaisya, 
of Pilu or Udumbara. 

Ch. 11-46. The staff of a Brahmana shall be made of such length as 
to reach the end of his hair; that of a Kshatriya, to reach his forehead; 
(and) that of a Vaisya, to reach (the tip of his) nose. 

Ch. 11-47. Let all the staves be straight, without a blemish, handsome to 
look at, not likely to terrify men, with their bark perfect, unhurt by fire. 

Ch. 11-48. Having taken a staff according to his choice, having 
worshipped the sun and walked round the fire, turning his right hand 
towards it, (the student) should beg alms according to the prescribed rule. 

Ch. 11-49. An initiated Brahmana should beg, beginning (his request 
with the word) lady (bhavati); a Kshatriya, placing (the word) Lady in 
the middle, but a Vaisya placing it at the end (of the formula). 

The Brahmacharis all belong to the same class, namely they are 
twiceborn. Why should it be necessary to make a distinction in the 
material of their upper garment ? Why should it be necessary to make 
a distinction in the material of their sacred thread ? Why should it be 
necessary to make a distinction in their staffs ? Why should it be necessary 
to make a distinction in the syntax of the formula for begging alms ? 
Why should a Brahman Brahmachari say “Bhagvati Bhikshyam Dehi” ? 
Why should a Kshatriya Brahmachari say “Bhikshyam Bhavati Dehi”? 
Why should a Vaishya Brahmachari say “Bhikshyam dehi bhavati”? 


S.B.E. Vol. XXV Manu pp. 37-39. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


256 


256 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Ashram Dharma is a peculiar institution of the Hindus and they 
are very proud of it. It is true that it has no parallel anywhere. But it 
is equally true that it is without any merit. Compulsory Brahmacharya 
appears very attractive since it has the look of compulsory education 
for children. It was certainly not universal. Shudras and women were 
excluded from it. Having regard to the fact that the Shudras and women 
form nearly 9/10ths of the Hindu Society it is obvious that the scheme 
was the result of cunningness rather than wisdom. It certainly was 
tainted by discrimination against the masses. It was scheme for the 
education of the governing classes. Compulsory marriage to say the least 
is a most stupid rule that can be imagined. To compel everyone to marry 
irrespective of money or health is to open the road to ruination both 
for the individual and the nation unless it is accompanied by a scheme 
whereby the state undertakes to guarantee subsistence to everybody. The 
most non-sensical stages are those of Vanaprastha and the Sannyasi. 
Let me quote the rules regarding these two. 

The following is the code prescribed by Manu for the Vanaprastha 1 : 

Ch. VI-3. Abandoning all food raised by cultivation, and all his 
belongings, he may depart into the forest, either committing his wife to 
his sons, or accompanied by her. 

Ch. VI-4. Taking with him the sacred fire and the implements required 
for domestic (sacrifices) he may go forth from the village into the forest 
and reside there, duly controlling his senses. 

Ch. VI-5. Let him offer those five great sacrifices according to the 
rule, with various kinds of pure food fit for ascetics, or with herbs, roots 
and fruit. 

Ch. VI-6. Let him wear a skin or a tattered garment; let him bathe 
in the evening or in the morning and let him always were (his hair in) 
braids, the hair on his body, his beard, and his nails (being unclipped). 

Ch. VI-7. Let him perform the Bali-offering with such food as he eats, 
and give alms according to his ability; let him honour those who come 
to his hermitage with alms consisting of water roots and fruit. 

Ch. VI-8. Let him be always industrious in privately reciting the Veda; 
let him be patient of hardships, friendly (towards all), of collected mind, 
ever liberal and never a receiver of gifts, and compassionate towards 
all living creatures. 

Ch. VI-9. Let him offer, according to the law, the Agnihotra with three 
sacred fires, never omitting the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices at 
the proper time. 

1 S.B.E. VOL XXV, pp. 199-203. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


257 


APPENDIX I 257 

Ch. VI-10. Let him also offer the Nakshatreshti, the Agrayana, and 
the Katurmasya (sacrifices), as well as the Turayana and likewise the 
Dakshayana, in due order. 

Ch. VI- 11. With pure grains, fit for ascetics, which grow in spring 
and in autumn, and which he himself has collected, let him severally 
prepare the sacrificial cakes (purodasa) and the boiled messes (karu), 
as the law directs. 

Ch. VI-12. Having offered those most pure sacrificial viands, consisting 
of the produce of the forest, he may use the remainder for himself, (mixed 
with) salt prepared by himself. 

Ch. VI-13. Let him eat vegetables that grow on dry land or in water, 
flowers, roots and fruits, the productions of pure trees, and oils extracted 
from forest fruits. 

Ch. VI- 14. Let him avoid honey, flesh and mushrooms growing on the 
ground (for elsewhere, the vegetables called) Bhustrina, and Sigruka, 
and the Sleshmantaka fruit. 

Ch. VI- 15. Let him throw away in the month of Asvina the food of 
ascetics, which he formerly collected, likewise his worn-out clothes and 
his vegetables, roots, and fruits. 

Ch. VI-16. Let him not eat anything (grown on) ploughed (land), though 
it may have been thrown away by somebody, nor roots and fruit grown 
in a village, though (he may be) tormented (by hunger). 

Ch. VI- 17. He may eat either what has been cooked with fire, or what 
has been ripened by time; he either may use a stone for grinding, or 
his teeth may be his mortar. 

Ch. VI- 18. He may either at once (after his daily meal) cleanse (his 
vessel for collecting food), or lay up a store sufficient for a month, or 
gather what suffices for six months or for a year. 

Ch. VI-19. Having collected food according to his ability he may either 
eat at night (only) or in the day-time (only), or at every fourth meal- 
time, or at every eighth. 

Ch. VI-20. Or he may live according to the rule of the lunar penance 
(Kandrayana, daily diminishing the quantity of his food) in the bright 
(half of the month) and (increasing it) in the dark (half); or he may eat 
on the last days of each fortnight, once (a day only), boiled barley-gruel. 

Ch. VI-21. Or he may constantly subsist on flowers, roots, and fruit 
alone, which have been ripened by time and have fallen spontaneously, 
following the rule of the (Institutes) of Vikhanas. 

Ch. VI-22. Let him either roll about on the ground, or stand during 
the day on tiptoe, (or) let him alternately stand and sit down; going 
at the Savanas (at sunrise, at midday, and at sunset) to water in the 
forest (in order to bathe). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Ch. VI-23. In summer let him expose himself to the heat of five fires, 
during the rainy season live under the open sky, and in winter be dressed 
in wet clothes, (thus) gradually increasing (the rigour of) his austerities. 

Ch. VI-24. When he bathes at the three Savanas (sunrise, midday, and 
sunset), let him offer libations of water to the manes and the gods and 
practising harsher and harsher austerities, let him dry up his bodily frame. 

Ch. VI-25. Having reposited the three sacred fires in himself, according 
to the prescribed rule, let him live without a fire, without a house, wholly 
silent, subsisting on roots and fruit. 

Ch. VI-26. Making no effort (to procure) things that give pleasure, 
chaste, sleeping on the bare ground, not caring for any shelter, dwelling 
at the roots of trees. 

Ch. VI-27. From Brahmanas (who live as) ascetics let him receive 
alms, (barely sufficient) to support life, or from other householders of the 
twiceborn (castes) who reside in the forest. 

Ch. VI-28. Or (the hermit who dwells in the forest may bring food) from 
a village, receiving it either in a hollow dish (of leaves), in (his naked) 
hand, or in a broken earthen dish, and may eat eight mouthfuls. 

Ch. VI-29. These and other observances must a Brahmana who dwells in 
the forest diligently practise, and in order to attain complete (union with) 
the (supreme) soul, (he must study) the various sacred texts contained in 
the Upanishadas. 

The rules for a Sannyasi prescribed in the Manu Smriti are as follows 1 : 

Ch. VI-38. Having performed the Ishti, sacred to the Lord of creatures 
(pragapati) where (he gives) all his property as the sacrificial fee, having 
reposited the sacred fires in himself, a Brahmana may depart from his 
house (as an ascetic). 

Ch. VI-39. Worlds, radiant in brilliancy, become (the portion) of him 
who recites (the texts regarding) Brahman and departs from his house (as 
an ascetic), after giving a promise of safety to all created beings. 

Ch. VI-40. For that twice-born man, by whom not the smallest danger 
even is caused to created beings, there will be no danger from any (quarter) 
after he is freed from his body. 

Ch. VI-41. Departing from his house fully provided with the means of 
purification (Pavitra), let him wander about absolutely silent, and caring 
nothing for enjoyments that may be offered (to him). 

Ch. VI-42. Let him always wander alone, without any companion, in 
order to attain (final liberation), fully understanding that the solitary 
(man, who) neither forsakes nor is forsaken, gains his end. 

1 S.B.E. Vol. XXV. Ch. VI verses 38-45 pp. 205-206; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


259 


APPENDIX I 259 

Ch. VI-43. He shall neither possess a fire, nor a dwelling, he may go 
to a village for his food, (he shall be) indifferent to everything, firm of 
purpose, meditating (and) concentrating his mind on Brahman. 

Ch. VI-44. A potsherd (instead of an alms-bowl), the roots of trees (for 
a dwelling), coarse worn-out garments, life in solitude and indifference 
towards, everything, are the marks of one who has attained liberation. 

Ch. VI-45. Let him not desire to die, let him not desire to live, let 
him wait for (his appointed) time, as a servant (waits) for the payment 
of his wages. 

Ch. VI-49. Delighting in what refers to the Soul, sitting (in the postures 
prescribed by the Yoga), independent (of external help) entirely abstaining 
from sensual enjoyments, with himself for his only companion, he shall 
live in this world, desiring the bliss (of final liberation). 

Ch. VI-50. Neither by (explaining) prodigies and omens, nor by skill, 
in astrology and palmistry, nor by giving advice and by the exposition 
(of the Sastras), let him ever seek to obtain alms. 

Ch. VI-51. Let him not (in order to beg) go near a house filled with 
hermits, Brahmanas, birds, dogs, or other mendicants. 

Ch. VI-52. His hair, nails, and beards being clipped, carrying an 
alms bowl, a staff, and a water-pot let him continually wander about 
controlling himself and not hurting any creature. 

Ch. VI-53. His vessels shall not be made of metal, they shall be free 
from fractures, it is ordained that they shall be cleansed with water, 
like (the cups, called) Kamasa, at a sacrifice. 

Ch. VI-54. A gourd, a wooden bowl, an earthen (dish), or one made 
of split cane, Manu, the son of Svayambhu, has declared (to be) vessels 
(suitable) for an ascetic. 

Ch. VI-55. Let him go to beg once (a day), let him not be eager to 
obtain a large quantity (of alms); for an ascetic who eagerly seeks, alms, 
attaches himself also to sensual enjoyments. 

Ch. VI-56. When no smoke ascends from (the kitchen), when the 
pestle lies motionless, when the embers have been extinguished, when 
the people have finished their meal, when the remnants in the dishes 
have been removed, let the ascetic always go to beg. 

Ch. VI-57. Let him not be sorry when he obtains nothing, nor rejoice 
when he obtains (something), let him (accept) so much only as will sustain 
life, let him not care about the (quality of his) utensils. 

Ch. VI-58. Let him disdain all (food) obtained in consequence of 
humble salutations, (for) even an ascetic who has attained final 

1 S.B.E. Chapter VI pp. 207-209. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

liberation, is bound (with the fetters of the Samsara) by accepting (food 
given) in consequence of humble salutations. 

Ch. VI-59. By eating little, and by standing and sitting in solitude, let 
him restrain his senses, if they are attracted by sensual objects. 

Ch. VI-60. By the restraint of his senses, by the destruction of love and 
hatred, and by the abstention from injuring the creatures, he becomes 
fit for immortality. 

Ch. VI-80. When by the disposition (of his heart) he becomes indifferent 
to all objects, he obtains eternal happiness both in this world and after 
death. 

Ch. VI-81. He who has in this manner gradually given up all 
attachments and is freed from all the pairs (of opposites), reposes in 
Brahman alone. 

Ch. VI-82. All that has been declared (above) depends on meditation; 
for he who is not proficient in the knowledge of that which refers to the 
Soul reaps not the full reward of the performance of rites. 

Ch. VI-83. Let him constantly recite (those texts of) the Veda which 
refer to the sacrifice (those) referring to the deities, and (those) which 
treat of the Soul and are contained in the concluding portions of the 
Veda (Vedanta). 

Ch. VI-84. That is the refuge of the ignorant, and even that (the refuge) 
of those who know (the meaning of the Veda); that is (the protection) of 
those who seek (bliss in) heaven and of those who seek endless (beatitude). 

Ch. VI-85. A twice-born man who becomes an ascetic, after the 
successive performance of the above-mentioned acts, shakes off sin here 
below and reaches the highest Brahman. 

Comparing the Vanaprastha with the Sannyasi the resemblance in this 
observances is so close that one is led to ask why these two stages are 
created as separate stages. There appear to be only a few differences. 
Firstly a Vanaprastha may take his wife with him and a Sannyasi cannot. 
Secondly a Vanaprastha is required only to leave his property behind, and 
a Sannyasi has to divest himself of it. Thirdly a Vanaprastha must make 
his dwelling in a forest and a Sannyasi cannot have a fixed dwelling but 
keep on wandering from place to place. As for the rest their mode of life 
is identical. Why did the Brahmins recognize an additional stage such as 
that of a Vanaprastha when the stage of Sannyas would have sufficed 
for both. But the question remains — namely what good these two stages 
serve. They cannot be cited as examples of self sacrifice. The Vanaprastha 
and Sannyasi cannot but be old men. Manu is very positive as to the 

1 S.B.E. Vol. XXV versus 80-85 pp. 213-14. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


261 


APPENDIX I 261 

period when a Man can become Vanaprastha. The time ripe for it is 
after wrinkles which is of course quite an advanced age. The Sannyasi 
must be still more advanced in age. To exhibit such people who have 
enjoyed all the pleasures of life as instances of self-sacrifice because 
they choose to give up their pleasures at a stage of life when they are 
incapable of enjoying them must be nothing short of folly. Admittedly 
this abandonment of home and family is not for the purpose of rendering 
social service to suffering humanity. The purpose is to enable them to 
perform austerities and to wait peaceful death. It seems to be a height 
of folly to cut of old and aged men from him and family and die in 
jungles uncared and unwept for so insignificant and trivial a purpose. 

The Ashram system is an ancient attempt of planned economy produced 
by the Brahmins. It is so stupid that it is a riddle to understand the 
causes and the motives which have led the Brahmins to devise it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


262 


APPENDIX II 

COMPULSORY MATRIMONY 


Manu prescribes that an individual’s life on earth be divided into four 
stages. The four stages are: (1) Brahmacharya, (2) Grahasthashram, (3) 
Vanaprastha and (4) Sanyas. The stage of Brahmacharya is the stage of 
studentship — a period devoted to the study of the Vedas. The stage of 
Grahasthashram is the stage of married state or as Manu calls it the 
state of being an householder marrying and rearing a family. In the 
Vanaprastha stage the Vanaprastha ceases to be an householder in as 
much as he abandons his house. He, however, does not abandon his wife. 
He lives in jungle but does not give up his right to his property. He is 
dead in so far as the religious duties of an householder are concerned 
but he is not civilly dead. The stage of Sanyas is the stage in which a 
person breaks his marital tie, abandons his wife, gives up his wordly goods 
and leaves his household and does not follow the religious injunctions 
enjoined upon a householder and goes and lives in jungle to meditate 
upon Brahma. He is deemed to have committed civil death. 

The division of man’s life into stages is an idea older than Manu. 
What is important is the changes Manu has made in the scheme. 

The first change Manu has made is that he has made marriage 
compulsory. A Brahmachari after he has finished his study must marry. 
This is the rule laid down by Manu as may be seen from the following: 

III. 2 (A student) “Who has studied in due order the three Vedas, or 
two, or even one only, without breaking (the rules of) studentship shall 
enter the order of householder.” 

III. 4 “Having bathed, with the permission of his teacher, and performed 
according to the rule the Samavartana (the rite on returning home), a 
twice-born man shall marry a wife of equal caste who is endowed with 
auspicious marks.” 


This chapter may he read along with the Riddle on ‘ The Four Ashramas’. 
Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


263 


APPENDIX II 263 

The second change Manu has made is to prohibit entry into the 
order of Sanyas for a Brahmachari who had not married. Marriage is 
made by Manu a condition precedent to Sanyas. He declares entry into 
Sanyas without having undergone the stage of marriage to be a sin. 

VI. 35 “When he has paid the three debts, let him apply his mind to 
(the attainment of) final liberation; he who seeks it without having paid 
(his debts) sinks downwards.” 

VI. 36 “Having studied the Vedas in accordance with the rule, having 
begot sons according to the sacred law, and having offered sacrifices 
according to his ability, he may direct his mind to (the attainment of) 
final liberation.” 

VI. 37 “A twice-born man who seeks final liberation, without having 
studied the Vedas, without having begotten sons, and without having 
offered sacrifices, sinks downwards.” 

VI. 38 “Having performed the Ishti, sacred to the Lord of creatures 
(Prajapati), where (he gives) all his property as the sacrificial fee, having 
reposited the sacred fires in himself, a Brahmana may depart from his 
house (as an ascetic).” 

The third change made by Manu is to prohibit an householder from 
becoming a Sannyasi without first entering the stage of Vanaprastha. 

VI. 1 “A twice-born Snataka, who has thus lived according to the law 
in the order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and keeping 
his organs in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing the rules 
given below).” 

VI. 2. “When a householder sees his (skin) wrinkled, and (his hair) 
white, and the sons of his sons, then he may resort to the forest. 

VI. 3. “Abandoning all food raised by cultivation, and all his belongings, 
he may depart into the forest, either committing his wife to his sons or 
accompanied by her.” 

These changes made by Manu are of course revolutionary changes 
as compared with the rules which governed them before the time of 
Manu. On this point, I will only quote the relevant rules contained 
in two of the Dharma Shastras, the Vasistha Dharma Sutra and the 
Gautama Dharma Sutra. 

Vasistha Dharma Sutra 1 says: 

“There are four orders viz., (that of) student, (that of) the householder, 
(that of) the hermit, and (that of) the ascetic.” 

“A man who has studied one, two or three Vedas without violating the 
rules of studentship, may enter any of these (orders) whichsoever he pleases. ” 


Chapter VII. Verses 1, 2, 3. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


264 


264 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Gautama Dharma Sutra 1 says: 

“ Some (declare, that) he (who has studied the Veda) may make his 
choice (which) among the orders (he is going to enter).” 

“ (The four orders are, that) the student (that of) the householder, (that) 
of the ascetic (bhikshu) (and that of) the hermit in the woods (Vaikhanasa).” 

As is clear from the two Dharma Shastras what order a person 
should enter after completing the stage of Brahmacharya is a matter 
which was left to his choice. If he wished he might marry and become 
as householder; or without entering into the marital state he might if 
so inclined straightaway enter into the order of a Sannyasi. That Manu 
in making matrimony a condition precedent for entry into the order of 
Vanaprashtha and Sannyas has made a revolutionary change is therefore 
quite obvious. 

There is another change Manu seems to have made. One does not see 
why to reach Sannyasa after matrimony it was necessary to go through 
Vanaprastha. Why one could not straightaway become a Sannyasi. After 
all is there any difference between a Vanaprastha and a Sannyasi which 
can be called to be fundamental? In an excursus to this Chapter, I have 
collected together the rules made by Manu for regulating the conduct 
of the Vanaprastha and the Sannyasi. From a perusal of these rules it 
will be found that there is hardly any difference. Except the fact that 
the Vanaprastha is required to perform some of the religious duties 
and observances which are prescribed for the householders there is in 
substance no difference between men who have entered the two orders. 
It is equally true that the ends to be realized by the Vanaprastha and 
the Sannyasi are the same. How similar are the ends to be achieved by 
them can be seen by reference to the following texts from Manu. 


ENDS TO BE ACHIEVED 


Vanaprastha 


Sannyasi 


VI. 29 “These and other observances 
must a Brahmana who dwells in 
the forest diligently practise, and 
in order to attain complete ( union 
with) the Supreme Soul, (he must 
study) the various sacred texts 
contained in the Upanishads. 


VI. 85 “A twice-born man who 
becomes an ascetic after the 
successive performance of the 
abovementioned acts, shakes 
off sin here below and reaches 
the highest Brahmin. 


Chapter III. Verses 1 and 2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


265 


APPENDIX II 265 

Why then Manu carved out Vanaprastha as a separate stage from 
Grahasthashram and from Sannyas? Regarding Vanaprastha it can be 
said that such a class existed before Manu. They were called Aranas. 
According to Prof. Radha Kumud Mookerji 1 : 

“Brahmacharis, who wanted to continue as such, without marrying in 
pursuit of knowledge, were called Aranas or Aranamans. These Aranas 
lived in hermitages in the forests outside the villages or centres of 
population. The forests where these Arana ascetics lived were, called 
Aranyas. The philosophical speculations of these learned ascetics regarding 
such ultimate problems as Brahma, Creation, Soul, or Immortality are 
embodied in works called Aranyakas.” 

To these old Aranas Manu gave the name Vanaprasthas which has 
the same meaning as Aranas. Manu has not only made a change in 
names he has introduced another change of considerable significance. 
In between Brahmacharya and Vanaprastha he has introduced a 
married state. While the original Vanaprastha or Arana was an 
unmarried person, Manu’s Vanaprastha was necessarily a married 
man. In the old system Brahmacharya was followed by Vanaprastha 
or by Grahasthashram depending upon the choice of the individual. 
Manu changed the order, so that no one could become a Vanaprastha 
unless he was first married. 

The old system, the two stages of Vanaprastha or Sannyasi, did not 
involve any hardship or cruelty to wives and children. The new system 
introduced by Manu did. For to force a person to marry and then to 
permit him to abandon his wife is nothing short of cruelty if it did 
not involve criminality. But Manu did not care for such considerations. 
He was bent on making matrimony compulsory for all. 

Why did Manu do it? Why did he make Grahasthashram compulsory 
for a Vanaprastha or Sannyasi? Manu recognizes the married state as 
a superior stage the foundation of all other states. As he says: 

VI. 87 “The student, the householder, the hermit and the ascetics, 
these (constitute) four separate orders, which all spring from (the order 
of) householders. 

VI. 88 “But all (or even any of) these orders, assumed successively in 
accordance with the Institutes (of the sacred law), lead the Brahmana 
who acts by the preceding (rules) to the highest state. 

VI. 89 “And in accordance with the precepts of the Veda and of the 
Smriti, the housekeeper is declared to be superior to all of them; for he 
supports the other three. 

1 Education in Ancient India p. 6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


VI. 90 “As all rivers, both great and small, find a resting-place in the 
ocean, even so men of all orders find protection with householders.” 

Granting the truth of this statement the question still remains why did 
Manu insist upon marriage as a condition precedent to Vanaprastha or 
Sannyas? The only answer is that he wanted to discourage persons, from 
becoming Sannyasi. Why did Manu dislike the order of Vanaprastha or 
Sannyasi? The answer is that the religion ofBuddhawas largely supported 
and propagated by Sannyasis called Bhikshus. It was easy for unmarried 
persons to become Bhikshus. Manu was anxious to stop this. Hence the 
condition of marriage. 

EXCURSUS 

COMPARATIVE CODE FOR VANAPRASTHA AND SANNYASI 

I. Connection with the household on entry into the order 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 


VI. 3 “Abandoning all food raised by 
cultivation and all his belongings he 
may depart into the forest, either 
committing his wife to his sons, or 
accompanied by her.” 


VI. 38 “Having performed the Ishti, 
sacred to the Lord of creatures 
(Pragapati) where (he gives) all 
his property as the sacrificial fee, 
having reposited the sacred fires in 
himself, a Brahmana may depart 
from his house (as an ascetic).” 


II. Rules Regarding Dwelling 


Vanaprastha 

VI. 4 “Taking with him the sacred 
fire and the implements required 
for domestic (sacrifices) he may go 
forth from the village into the forest 
and reside there, duly controlling his 
senses.” 


Sannyasi 

VI. 41 “Departing from his house 
fully provided with the means 
of purification (Pavitra), let him 
wander about absolutely silent, and 
caring nothing for enjoyments that 
may be offered (to him).” 

VI. 42 “ Let him always wander 
alone, without any companion, in 
order to attain (final liberation) 
fully understanding that the 
solitary man who neither forsakes 
nor is forsaken, gains his end.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


267 


APPENDIX II 


267 


II. Rules Regarding Dwelling — contd. 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 

VI. 43 “He shall neither possess a fire, 
nor a dwelling he may go to a village 
for his food, (he shall be) indifferent 
to everything, firm of purpose, 
meditating (and) concentrating his 
mind on Brahman.” 

III. Rules as to Mode of Life 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 

VI. 44 “A potsherd (instead of an alms- 
bowl) the roots of trees (for a dwelling), 
coarse worn-out garments, life in 
solitude and indifference towards, 
everything are the marks of one who 
has attained liberation.” 

VI. 52 “His hair, nails and beard being 
clipped carrying an alms-bowl, staff, 
and a water-pot let him continually 
wander about controlling himself and 
not hurting any creature.” 

VI. 53 “His vessels shall not be made 
of metal, they shall be free from 
fractures, it is ordained that they shall 
be cleansed with water, like (the cups 
called) Kamasa, at a sacrifice.” 

VI. 54 “A gourd, a wooden bowl, an 
earthen (dish) or one made of split 
cane, Manu the son of Swayambhu, 
has declared (to be) vessels (suitable) 
for an ascetic.” 

IV. Rules as to Means of Livelihood 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 

VI. 11 “With pure grains, fit for VI. 49 “ Delighting in what refers 
ascetics, which grow in spring, and to the Soul sitting in the posture 

in autumn and which he himself prescribed by the Yoga, 


VI. 6 “Let him wear a skin or a 
tattered garment; let him bathe in 
the evening or in the morning and let 
him always wear (his hair in) braids, 
the hair on his body, and his nails 
(being unclipped).” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


IV. Rules as to Means of Livelihood — contd. 


Vanaprastha 

has collected, let him severally prepare 
the sacrificial cakes (purodasa) and 
the boiled messes (Karu) as the law 
directs.” 

VI. 12 “Having offered those most 
pure sacrificial viands, consisting of 
the produce of the forest, he may 
use the remainder for himself (mixed 
with) salt prepared by himself.” 

VI. 26 “Making no effort (to procure) 
things that give pleasure chaste, 
sleeping on the bare ground, not 
caring for any shelter, dwelling at 
the roots of trees.” 

VI. 27 “From Brahmans (who live as) 
ascetics; let him receive alms, (barely 
sufficient) to support life, or from 
other householders of the twice-born 
(castes) who reside in the forest.” 

VI. 28 “Or (the hermit) who dwells 
in the forest) may bring (food) from a 
village, receiving it either in a hollow 
dish (of leaves) in (his naked) hand, 
or in a broken earthern dish, and 
may eat eight mouthfuls.” 


Sannyasi 

independent (of external help) entirely 
abstaining from sensual enjoyment 
with himself for his only companion 
he shall live in this world desiring the 
bliss (of final liberation).” 

VI. 50 “Neither by explaining prodigies 
and omens, nor by skill in astrology 
and palmistry nor by giving advice and 
by the exposition (of the Sastras) let 
him, ever seek to obtain alms.” 

VI. 51 “Let him not (in order to beg) 
go near a house filled with hermits, 
Brahmanas, birds, dogs, or other 
mendicants.” 


V. Rules as to Food 


Vanaprastha 

VI. 13 “Let him eat vegetables that 
grow on dry land or in water, flowers, 
roots and fruits, the productions of 
pure trees and oils extracted from 
forest-fruits.” 

VI. 14 “ Let him avoid honey, flesh 
and mushrooms growing on the 


Sannyasi 

VI. 55 “Let him go to beg once a day, 
let him not be eager to obtain a large 
quantity (of alms); for an ascetic who 
eagerly seeks alms, attaches himself 
also to sensual enjoyments.” 

VI. 56 “ When no smoke ascends 
from (the kitchen) when the pestle 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


269 


APPENDIX II 


269 


V. Rules as to Food — contd. 


Vanaprastha 

ground (or elsewhere, the vegetables 
called) Bhustrina and Sigruka, and 
the Sleshmantaka fruits.” 


VI. 15 “Let him throw away in the 
mouth of Asvina the food of ascetics, 
which he formerly collected, like- 
wise his worn-out clothes and his 
vegetables, roots and fruit.” 

VI. 16 “Let him not eat anything 
(grown on) ploughed (land), though 
it may have been thrown away by 
somebody, nor roots and fruit grown 
in a village, though (he may be) 
tormented (by hunger).” 

VI. 17 “He may eat either what has 
been cooked with fire, or what has 
been ripened by time; he either may 
use a stone for grinding or his teeth 
may be his mortar.” 


Sannyasi 

lies motionless, when the members 
have been extinguished, when the 
people have finished their meal, when 
the remnants in the dishes have been 
removed let the ascetic always go to 
beg.” 

VI. 57 “ Let him not be sorry when he 
obtains nothing, nor rejoice when he 
obtains (something), let him (accept) 
so much only as will sustain life, let 
him not care about the (quality of 
his) utensils. 


VI. 58 “Let him disdain all (food) 
obtained in consequence of humble 
salutations, (for) even an ascetic who 
has attained final liberation, is bound 
(with the fetters of the Samsara) by 
accepting (food given) in consequence 
of humble salutations.” 


VI. 18 “He may either at once (after 
his daily meal) cleanse (his vessel 
for collecting food), or lay up a store 
sufficient for a month, or gather what 
suffices for six months or for a year.” 

VI. 19 “Having collected food according 
to his ability, he may either eat at 
night (only), or in the day-time (only) 
or at every fourth meal-time or at 
every eighth.” 

VI. 20 “Or, he may live according 
to the rule of the lunar penance 
(Kandrayana, daily diminishing the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


V. Rules as to Food — contd. 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 

quantity of his food) in the bright (half 
of the month) and (increasing it) in 
the dark (half); or he may eat on the 
last days of each fortnight once (a day 
only), boiled barley-gruel.” 

VI. 21 “Or he may constantly subsist 
on flowers, roots, and fruit alone, 
which have been ripened by time 
and have fallen spontaneously, 
following the rule of the (Institutes) 
of Vikhanas.” 

VI. 22 “Let him either roll about on 
the ground, or stand during the day 
on tiptoe, (or) let him alternately stand 
and sit down; going at the Savanas (at 
sunrise, at midday, and at sunset) to 
water in the forest (in order to bathe). 


VI. Duties to be performed 


Vanaprastha 

VI. 5 “Let him offer those five great 
sacrifices according to the rule, with 
various kinds of pure food fit for 
ascetics, or with herbs, roots, and 
fruit.” 

VI. 7 “Let him perform the Balioffering 
with such food as he eats’, and give 
alms according to his ability; let 
him honour those who come to his 
hermitage with alms consisting of 
water, roots, and fruit.” 

VI. 8 “Let him be always industrious 
in privately reciting the Veda; let 
him be patient of hardships, friendly 
(towards all), of collected mind, ever 
liberal and never a receiver of gifts, 


Sannyasi 

VI. 65 “By deep meditation let him 
recognize the subtle nature of the 
Supreme Soul, and its presence in 
all organisms, both the highest and 
the lowest.” 

VI. 83 “Let him constantly recite (those 
texts) of the Veda which refer to the 
sacrifice (those) refering to the deities 
and (those) which treat of the soul 
and are contained in the concluding 
portions of the Veda (Vedanta).” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-05.indd MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


271 


APPENDIX II 


271 


VI. Duties to be performed — contd. 

Vanaprastha Sannyasi 

and compassionate towards all living 
creatures.” 

VI. 9 “Let him offer, according to 
the law, the Agnihotra with three 
sacred fires, never omitting the new- 
moon and full-moon sacrifices at the 
proper time.” 

VI. 10 “Let him also offer the 
Nakshatreshti, the Agrayana, and 
the Katurmasya (sacrifices), as 
well as Turayana and likewise the 
Dakshayana, in due order.” 

VI. 23 “In Summer let him expose 
himself to the heat of the five 
fires, during the rainy season live 
under the open sky, and in winter 
be dressed in wet clothes, (thus) 
gradually increasing (the rigour of) 
his austerities.” 

VI. 24 “When he bathes at the 
three Savanas (sunrise, midday and 
sunset), let him offer libations of 
water to the manes and the Gods, 
and practising harsher and harsher 
austerities, let him dry up his bodily 
frame.” 

VI. 25 “Having reposited the three 
sacred fires in himself, according 
to the prescribed rule, let him live 
without a fire, without a house wholly 
silent, subsisting on roots and fruit.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+DK+YS 23-9-2013/YS-8-11-2013 


272 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


273 


PART III 


Political 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd 


MK SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


274 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


275 


RIDDLE NO. 21 

THE THEORY OF MANVANTARA 


The Brahmins had a theory of the Government of their country from 
Heaven. This seems to be the idea underlying what is called a Manvantara. 

The idea underlying a Manvantara is related to the political Government 
of the country. It is founded on the belief that the Government of the 
world is entrusted to a corporation for a fixed period. This corporation 
consists of an officer called Manu and Saptarishis (seven Rishis) and one 
Indra conducting the affairs of the country from their seats in Heaven 
without consulting the people or ascertaining their wishes. The period 
of the reign by one corporation is called a Manvantara after Manu the 
premier authority in the ruling set. When the reign of one Manu is 
over he is succeeded by another Manu and so on. As in the case of the 
Yugas, the Manvantaras also move in cycles. Fourteen Manvantaras 
make one cycle. 

The Vishnu Purana gives us an idea of these Manvantaras which is 
as follows: 

“Then Brahma created himself the Manu Swayambhuva, born 
of, and identical with, his original self, for the protection of created 
beings; and the female portion of himself he constituted Satarupa, 
whom austerity purified from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and 
whom the divine Manu Swayambhuva took to wife. 

Stopping here for the moment one might ask — What does this mean? 
Does it mean that Brahma was a hermaphrodite? Does it mean that 
Manu Swayambhu married his sister Satarupa? How very strange if 
this is true as the Vishnu Purana seems to suggest. 

The Vishnu Purana proceeds to say: 

“From these two are born two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanpada, 
and two daughters, named Prasuti and Akuti graced with loveliness 


This is an 11-page MS of which last four pages are in the handwriting 
of the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


276 


276 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and exhalted merit. Prasuti he gave to Daksha and gave Akuti to 
the Patriarch Ruchi, who espoused her. Akuti bore to Ruchi twins, 
Yajna and Dakshina, who afterwards became husband and wife (again 
a case of a brother marrying his sister) and had twelve sons, the 
deities called Yamas, in the Manvantara of Swayambhuva.” 

“The first Manu was Swayambhuva, then came Swarochisha, then 
Auttami, then Tamasa, then Raivata, then Chakshusha; these six 
Manus have passed away. The Manu who presides over the seventh 
Manvantara, which is the present period, is Vaivaswata the son of 
the sun.” 

“I will now, enumerate, says the author of the Vishnu Purana, 
the presiding Gods, Rishis, and sons of the Manu Swarochisha. 
The deities of this period (or the second Manvantara) were called 
Paravatas and Tushitas; and the King of the gods was the mighty 
Vipaschit. The seven Rishis were Urja, Stambha, Prana, Dattoli, 
Rishabha, Nischara, and Arvarivat. And Chaitra, Kimpurusha, and 
others were the Manu’s sons. 

“In the third period, or Manwantara of Auttamin, Susanti was the 
Indra, the king of the gods, the orders of whom were the Sudhamas, 
Satyas, Sivas, Pradersanas, and Vasavertis; each of the five orders 
consisting of twelve divinities. The seven sons of Vasishtha were 
the seven Rishis; and Aja, Parasu, Divya, and others were the sons 
of Manu. 

“In the period of Tamasa, the fourth Manu, the Surupas, Haris, 
Satyas, and Sudhis were the classes of Gods, each comprising twenty- 
seven. Sivi was the Indra, also designated by his performance of 
a hundred sacrifices (or named Satakratu). The seven Rishis were 
Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Vanaka and Pivara. 
The sons of Tamasa were the mighty kings Nara, Khyati, Santhaya, 
Janujangha and others.” 

“In the fifth interval (Manvantara) the Manu was Raivata; the 
Indra was Vibhu, the classes of gods, consisting of fourteen each, 
were the Amitbhas, Abhutarasas, Vaikunthas, and Sumedhas; the 
seven Rishis were Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, Urddhabahu, Vedabahu, 
Sudhaman, Parjanya and Mahamuni; the sons of Raivata were 
Balabandhu, Susambhavya, Satyaka, and other valiant kings.” 

“These four Manus, Swarochisha, Auttami, Tamasa, and Raivata, 
were all descended from Priyavrata, who in consequence of propitiating 
Vishnu by his devotions, obtained these rules of the Manvantaras 
for his posterity. 

“Chakshusha was the Manu of the sixth period in which the 
Indra was Manojva; the five classes of Gods were the Adyas, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


277 


RIDDLE NO. 21 277 

Prastutas, Bhavyas, Prithugas, and the magnanimous Lekhas eight 
of each Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttama, Madhu, Abhinaman 
and Sahishnu were the seven sages; the kings of the earth, the sons 
of Chaksusha, were the powerful Uru, Puru, Satadhumna and others.” 

“The Manu of the present seventh Manvantara is the wise 
lord of obsequies, and illustrious offspring of the sun called 
Manu Vaivaswata and deities are the Adityas, Vasus and 
Rudras; their sovereign is Purandara; Vasishtha, Kasyapa, Atri, 
Jamadagni, Gautama, Viswamitra and Bharadwaja are the 
seven Rishis; and the nine pious sons of Vaivaswata Manu are 
the kings of Ikshwaku, Nabhanidishta, Karusha, Prishadhra, 
and the celebrated Vasumat.” 

So far the particulars of seven Manvantaras which are given by the 
Vishnu Purana relate to Manvantaras which had run out at the time when 
the Vishnu Purana was written. Whether the rule of the Manvantaras 
was an external one the Brahmins have been silent. But the author of 
the Vishnu Purana knew that seven more Manvantaras were to come. 
Below are given the particulars of these seven. 

Sanjana, the daughter of Vishwakarman was the wife of the sun, and 
bore him, three children, the Manu (Vaivaswata), Yama and the goddess 
Yami (or the Yamuna river). Unable to endure the fervours of her lord, 
Sanjana gave him Chhaya as his handmaid, and repaired to the forests 
to practise devout exercises. The sun, supposing Chhaya to be his wife 
Sanjana, begot by her three other children Sanaischara (Saturn), another 
Manu (Savarni) and a daughter Tapati (the Tapti river). Chhaya upon 
one occasion, being offended with Yama, the son of Sanjana, denounced 
an imprecation upon him, and thereby revealed to Yama and to the 
sun that she was not in truth Sanjana, the mother of the former. Being 
further informed by Chhaya that his wife had gone to the wilderness the 
sun beheld her by the eye of meditation engaged in austerities, in the 
figure of a mare (in the region of Uttara Kuru). Metamorphosing himself 
into a horse, he rejoined his wife, and begot three other children, the 
two Aswins, and Revanta, and then brought Sanjana back to his own 
dwelling. To diminish his intensity, Vishwakarman placed the luminary 
on his lathe to grind off some of his effulgence; and in this manner 
reduced it an eighth; for more than that was inseparable. The parts of 
the divine Vaishnava splendour, residing in the sun, that were filed off by 
Viswakarma fell blazing down upon the earth, and the artist constructed 
of them the discuss of Vishnu, the trident of Shiva, the weapon of the 
god of wealth, the lance of Kartikeya, and the weapons of the other gods; 
all these Viswakarman fabricated from the superflous rays of the sun.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


278 


278 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“The son of Chhaya, who was called also a Manu was denominated 
Savarni, from being of the same caste (Savarni) as his elder brother, 
the Manu Vaivaswata. He presides over the ensuing or eighth 
Manvantara; the particulars of which and the following, I will now 
relate. In the period in which Savarni shall be the Manu, the classes 
of the gods will be Sutapas, Ambitabhas and Mukhyas; twenty-one 
of each. The seven Rishis will be Diptimat, Gaiava, Rama, Kripa, 
Drauni; my son Vyasa will be the sixth and the seventh will be 
Rishyasringa. The Indra will be Bali, the sinless son of Virochana 
who through the favour of Vishnu is actually sovereign of part of 
Pataia. The royal progeny of Savarni will be Virajas, Arvarivas, 
Nirmoha, and others.” 

“The ninth Manu will be Dakshasavarni. The Paras, 
Marichigarbhas and Sudharmas will be the three classes of 
divinities; each consisting of twelve, their powerful chief will be 
the Indra Adbhuta Savana, Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, 
Jyotishaman and Satya, will be the seven Rishis. Dhritketu, 
Driptiketu, Panchahasta, Nirmaya, Prithusrava, and others will 
be the sons of the Manu. 

“In the tenth Manwantara the Manu will be Brahma-savarni; the 
gods will be the Sudhamas, Virudhas, and Satasankhyas; the Indra 
will be the mighty Santi; the Rishis will be Havishaman, Sukriti, 
Satya, Appammurthi, Nabhaga, Apratimaujas and Satyaketu; and 
the ten sons of the Manu will be Sukshetra, Uttamaujas, Harishena 
and others.” 

“In the eleventh Manwantara the Manu will be Dharma-savarni; 
the principal classes of gods will be the Vihangamas. Kamagamas, 
and the Nirmanaratis, each thirty in number; of whom Vrisha will 
be the Indra; the Rishis will be Nischara, Agnitejas, Vapushaman, 
Vishnu, Aruni, Havishaman, and Anagha; the kings of the earth, 
and sons of the Manu, will be Savarga, Sarvadharma, Devanika, 
and others.” 

“In the twelfth Manvantara the son of Rudra-Savarni, will be 
the Manu: Ritudhama will be the Indra; and the Haritas, Lohitas; 
Sumanasas and Sukramas will be the classes of gods, each 
comprising fifteen Tapaswi, Sutapas, Tapomurti Taporti, Tapodhriti, 
Tapodyuti and Tapodhana will be the Rishis; and Devas, Upadeva, 
Devasreshtha and others will be the manu’s sons, and mighty 
monarchs on the earth.” 

“In the thirteenth Manvantara the Manu will be Rauchya; 
the classes of gods, thirty-three in each, will be Sudhamanas, 
Sudharmans and Sukarmanas, their Indra will be Divaspati; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


279 


RIDDLE NO. 21 279 

the Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersin, Nishprakampa, Nirutsuka, 
Dhritimat, Avyaya and Sutapas; and Chitrasena, Vichitra, and others will 
be the kings.” 

“In the fourteenth Manvantara, Bhautya will be the Manu; Suchi, the 
Indra; the five classes of gods will be the Chakshushas, the Pavitras, 
Kanishthas Bhrajiras and Vavriddhas; the seven Rishis will be Agnibahu, 
Suchi, Sikra, Magadha, Gridhra, Yukta and Ajita; and the sons of the Manu 
will be Uru, Gabhir, Gabhira, Bradhna and others who will be kings, and 
will rule over the earth.” 

Such is the theory of Manvantaras. We now hear of the Dictatorship 
of the Proletariat. The Brahmanic theory was just the opposite of it. It 
was a theory of the Dictatorship over the Proletariat by the Heavenly 
fathers. 

Be that as it may the question that primarily comes to one’s mind is: 

How these fourteen Manus who succeeded one another rule the people ? 
What laws did they make for the governance of the people ? The only 
place where one can get an answer is the Manusmriti. 

Referring to the first chapter of Manusmriti we get the following 
answers: 

Ch. 1.1. The great sages approached Manu, who was seated with a 
collected mind, and, having duly worshipped him spoke as follows: 

2. Deign, divine one, do declare to us precisely and in due order 
the sacred laws of each of the (four chief) castes (Varna) and of the 
intermediate ones. 

3. For thou, O Lord, alone knowest the purport of the rites and 
knowledge of the Soul taught in this whole ordinance of the Swayambhu 
(Manu) which is unknowable and unfathomable. 

Manu replies to them saying: 

5. This universe existed in the shape of darkness unperceived, destitute 
of distinctive marks, unattainable by reasoning, unknowable, wholly 
immersed as it were in deep sleep. 

8. Swayambhu Manu desiring to produce beings of many kinds from 
his own body, first with a thought created the waters and placed his 
seed in them. 

9. That (Seed) became a golden egg, in brilliancy equal to the sun; in 
that Egg he himself was born as Brahman, the progenitor of the whole 
world. 

34. Then, I, desiring to produce created beings performed very difficult 
austerities and thereby called into existence ten great sages, lords of 
created beings. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


280 


280 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

35. Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Prachetas, 
Vashishta, Bhrigu and Narada. 

58. But he having composed these Institutes of the sacred law, himself 
taught them, according to rule, to me alone in the beginning: next I 
taught them to Marichi and the other sages. 

59. Bhrigu will fully recite to you these Institutes; for that sage learned 
the whole in its entirety from me. 

From this it appears that the only Manu who made laws was the 
Swayambhu Manu. According to Vishnu Purana, each Manvantara had 
its own Manu. Why did they not make laws for their own Manvantara. 
Or was it the laws made by Swayambhu Manu were to be Eternal. If 
so, why did the Brahmins have separate Manvantara. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


281 


RIDDLE NO. 22 

BRAHMA IS NOT DHARMA. WHAT 
GOOD IS BRAHMA? 


There are various forms of Government known to history — Monarchy, 
Aristocracy and Democracy to which may be added Dictatorship. 

The most prevalent form of Government at the present time is 
Democracy. There is however no unanimity as to what constitutes 
Democracy. When one examines the question one finds that there are 
two views about it. One view is that Democracy is a form of Government. 
According to this view where the Government is chosen by the people 
that is where Government is a representative Government there is 
Democracy. According to this view Democracy is just synonymous with 
Representative Government which means adult suffrage and periodical 
elections. 

According to another view a democracy is more than a form of 
Government. It is a form of the organization of Society. There are two 
essential conditions which characterize a democratically constituted 
society. First is the absence of stratification of society into classes. The 
Second is a social habit on the part of individuals and groups which is 
ready for continuous readjustment or recognition of reciprocity of interests. 
As to the first there can be no doubt that it is the most essential condition 
of Democracy. As Prof. Dewey 1 has observed: 

[Quotation referred to by the author is not recorded in the original MS 
from ‘Democracy and Education’, by Dewey p. 98.] 

The second condition is equally necessary for a democratically 
constituted society. The results of this lack of reciprocity of interests 

1 Democracy & Education p. 98. 

This chapter consists about 20 pages out of which first two pages and the 
concluding six are in the handwriting of the author. The rest are typed 
pages with all necessary modifications by Dr. Ambedkar. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

among groups and individuals produce anti-democratic results which 
have been well described by Prof. Dewey 1 when he says: 

[Quotation from ‘Democracy and Education’ of page 99 referred to by 
the author is not recorded in the original MS.] 

Of the two views about democracy there is no doubt that the first 
one is very superficial if not erroneous. There cannot be democratic 
Government unless the society for which it functions is democratic in 
its form and structure. Those who hold that democracy need be no more 
than a mere matter of elections seem to make three mistakes. 

One mistake they make is to believe that Government is something 
which is quite distinct and separate from society. As a matter of fact 
Government is not something which is distinct and separate from Society. 
Government is one of the many institutions which Society rears and to 
which it assigns the function of carrying out some of the duties which 
are necessary for collective social life. 

The Second mistake they make lies in their failure to realize that 
a Government is to reflect the ultimate purposes, aims, objects and 
wishes of society and this can happen only where the society in which 
the Government is rooted is democratic. If society is not democratic, 
Government can never be. Where society is divided into two classes 
governing and the governed the Government is bound to be the 
Government of the governing class. 

The third mistake they make is to forget that whether Government 
would be good or bad democratic or undemocratic depends to a large 
extent up on the instrumentalities particularly the Civil Service on 
which every where Government has to depend for administering the 
Law. It all depends upon the social milieu in which civil servants are 
nurtured. If the social milieu is undemocratic the Government is bound 
to be undemocratic. 

There is one other mistake which is responsible for the view that 
for democracy to function it is enough to have a democratic form of 
Government. To realize this mistake it is necessary to have some idea 
of what is meant by good Government. 

Good Government means good laws and good administration. This is 
the essence of good Government. Nothing else can be. Now there cannot 
be good Government in this sense if those who are invested with ruling 
power seek the advantage of their own class instead of the advantage 
of the whole people or of those who are downtrodden. 

Whether the Democratic form of Government will result in good 
will depend upon the disposition of the individuals composing society. 
If the mental disposition of the individuals is democratic then the 


Democracy & Education p. 99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


283 


RIDDLE NO. 22 283 

democratic form of Government can be expected to result in good 
Government. If not, democratic form of Government may easily become 
a dangerous form of Government. If the individuals in a society are 
separated into classes and the classes are isolated from one another 
and each individual feels that his loyalty to his class must come before 
his loyalty to every thing else and living in class compartments he 
becomes class conscious bound to place the interests of his class above 
the interests of others, uses his authority to pervert law and justice 
to promote the interests, of his class and for this purpose practises 
systematically discrimination against persons who do not belong to his 
caste in every sphere of life what can a democratic Government do. In a 
Society where classes clash and are charged with anti-social feelings and 
spirit of aggressiveness, the Government can hardly discharge its task of 
governing with justice and fairplay. In such a society, Government even 
though it may in form be a government of the people and by the people 
it can never be a Government for the people. It will be a Government by 
a class for a class. A Government for the people can be had only where 
the attitude of each individual is democratic which means that each 
individual is prepared to treat every other individual as his equal and is 
prepared to give him the same liberty which he claims for himself. This 
democratic attitude of mind is the result of socialization of the individual 
in a democratic society. Democratic society is therefore a prerequisite of 
a democratic Government. Democratic Governments have toppled down 
in largely due to the fact that the society for which they were set up 
was not democratic. 

Unfortunately to what extent the task of good Government depends 
upon the mental and moral disposition of its subjects has seldom been 
realized. Democracy is more than a political machine. It is even more 
than a social system. It is an attitude of mind or a philosophy of life. 

Some equate Democracy with equality and liberty. Equality and liberty 
are no doubt the deepest concern of Democracy. But the more important 
question is what sustains equality and liberty? Some would say that it 
is the law of the state which sustains equality and liberty. This is not a 
true answer. What sustains equality and liberty is fellow -felling. What 
the French Revolutionists called fraternity. The word fraternity is not 
an adequate expression. The proper term is what the Buddha called, 
Maitree. Without Fraternity Liberty would destroy equality and equality 
would destroy liberty. If in Democracy liberty does not destroy equality 
and equality does not destroy liberty, it is because at the basis of both 
there is fraternity. Fraternity is therefore the root of Democracy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


284 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The foregoing discussion is merely a preliminary to the main question. 
That question is — wherein lie the roots of fraternity without which 
Democracy is not possible? Beyond dispute, it has its origin in Religion. 

In examining the possibilities of the origin of Democracy or its 
functioning successfully one must go to the Religion of the people and 
ask — does it teach fraternity or does it not? If it does, the chances for a 
democratic Government are great. If it does not, the chances are poor. Of 
course other factors may affect the possibilities. But if fraternity is not 
there, there is nothing to built democracy on. Why did Democracy not 
grow in India? That is the main question. The answer is quite simple. 
The Hindu Religion does not teach fraternity. Instead it teaches division 
of society into classes or varnas and the maintenance of separate class 
consciousness. In such a system where is the room for Democracy ? 

The Hindu social system is undemocratic not by accident. It is designed 
to be undemocratic. Its division of society into varnas and castes, and 
of castes and outcastes are not theories but are decrees. They are all 
barricades raised against democracy. 

From this it would appear that the doctrine of fraternity was unknown 
to the Hindu Religious and Philosophic thought. But such a conclusion 
would not be warranted by the facts of history. The Hindu Religious and 
Philosophic thought gave rise to an idea which had greater potentialities 
for producing social democracy than the idea of fraternity. It is the 
doctrine of Brahmaism 1 . 

It would not be surprising if some one asked what is this Brahmaism? 
It is something new even to Hindus. The Hindus are familiar with 
Vedanta. They are familar with Brahmanism. But they are certainly 
not familiar with Brahmaism. Before proceeding further a few words of 
explanation are necessary. 

There are three strands in the philosophic and religious thought of 
the Hindus. They may be designated as (1) Brahmaism (2) Vedanta 
and (3) Brahmanism. Although they are correlated they stand for three 
different and distinct ideologies. 

The essence of Brahmaism is summed up in a dogma which is stated 
in three different forms. They are — 

(i) Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma — All this is Brahma. 

(ii) Aham Brahmasmi — Atmana (Self) is the same as Brahma. 

Therefore I am Brahma. 

(iii) Tattvamasi — Atmana (Self) is the same as Brahma. 

Therefore thou art also Brahma. 

1 have borrowed this word from Prof. Hopkin’s— The Epics of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


285 


RIDDLE NO. 22 285 

They are called Mahavakyas which means Great Sayings and they 
sum up the essence of Brahmaism. 

The following are the dogmas which sum up the teachings of Vedant — 
I Brahma is the only reality. 

II The world is maya or unreal. 

Ill Jiva and Brahma are — 

(i) according to one school identical; 

(ii) according to another not identical but are elements of him 
and not separate from him; 

(iii) according to the third school they are distinct and separate. 

The creed of Bramhanism may be summed up in the following dogmas — 

(i) Belief in the chaturvarna. 

(ii) Sanctity and infallibility of the Vedas. 

(iii) Sacrifices to Gods the only way to salvation. 

Most people know the distinction between the Vedanta and Brahmanism 
and the points of controversy between them. But very few people know 
the distinction between Brahmaism and Vedanta. Even Hindus are not 
aware of the doctrine of Brahmaism and the distinction between it and 
Vedanta. But the distinction is obvious. While Brahmaism and Vedanta 
agree that Atman is the same as Brahma. But the two differ in that 
Brahmaism does not treat the world as unreal, Vedanta does. This is 
the fundamental difference between the two. 

The essence of Brahmaism is that the world is real and the reality 
behind the world is Brahma. Everything therefore is of the essence of 
Brahma. 

There are two criticisms which have been levelled against Brahmaism. 
It is said that Brahmaism is piece of impudence. For a man to say 
“I am Brahma” is a kind of arrogance. The other criticism levelled 
against Brahmaism is the inability of man to know Brahma. T am 
Brahma’ may appear to be impudence. But it can also be an assertion 
of one’s own worth. In a world where humanity suffers so much from 
an inferiority complex such an assertion on the part of man is to 
be welcomed. Democracy demands that each individual shall have 
every opportunity for realizing its worth. It also requires that each 
individual shall know that he is as good as everybody else. Those who 
sneer at Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahma) as an impudent utterance 
forget the other part of the Maha Vakya namely Tatvamasi (Thou 
art also Brahma). If Aham Brahmasmi has stood alone without the 
conjunct of Tatvamasi it may not have been possible to sneer at it. But 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


286 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with the conjunct of Tatvanmsi the charge of selfish arrogance cannot 
stand against Brahmaism. 

It may well be that Brahma is unknowable. But all the same this 
theory of Brahma has certain social implications which have a tremendous 
value as a foundation for Democracy. If all persons are parts of Brahma 
then all are equal and all must enjoy the same liberty which is what 
Democracy means. Looked at from this point of view Brahma may be 
unknowable. But there cannot be slightest doubt that no doctrine could 
furnish a stronger foundation for Democracy than the doctrine of Brahma. 

To support Democracy because we are all children of God is a very 
weak foundation for Democracy to rest on. That is why Democracy is so 
shaky wherever it made to rest on such a foundation. But to recognize 
and realize that you and I are parts of the same cosmic principle leaves 
room for no other theory of associated life except democracy. It does not 
merely preach Democracy. It makes democracy an obligation of one and all. 

Western students of Democracy have spread the belief that Democracy 
has stemmed either from Christianity or from Plato and that there is 
no other source of inspiration for democracy. If they had known that 
India too had developed the doctrine of Brahmaism which furnishes a 
better foundation for Democracy they would not have been so dogmatic. 
India too must be admitted to have a contribution towards a theoretical 
foundation for Democracy. 

The question is what happened to this doctrine of Brahmaism ? It is 
quite obvious that Brahmaism had no social effects. It was not made 
the basis of Dharma. When asked why this happened the answer is that 
Brahmaism is only philosophy, as though philosophy arises not out of 
social life but out of nothing and for nothing. Philosophy is no purely 
theoretic matter. It has practical potentialities. Philosophy has its roots 
in the problems of life and whatever theories philosophy propounds 
must return to society as instruments of re-constructing society. It is 
not enough to know. Those who know must endeavour to fulfil. 

Why then Brahmaism failed to produce a new society? This is a 
great riddle. It is not that the Brahmins did not recognize the doctrine 
of Brahmaism. They did. But they did not ask how they could support 
inequality between the Brahmin and the Shudra, between man and 
woman, between casteman and outcaste ? But they did not. The result 
is that we have on the one hand the most democratic principle of 
Brahmaism and on the other hand a society infested with castes, 
sub-outcastes, primitive tribes and criminal tribes. Can there be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


287 


RIDDLE NO. 22 287 

a greater dilemma than this ? What is more ridiculous is the teaching of 
the Great Shankaracharya. For it was this Shankarcharya who taught 
that there is Brahma and this Brahma is real and that it pervades all 
and at the same time upheld all the inequities of the Brahmanic society. 
Only a lunatic could be happy with being the propounder of two such 
contradictions. Truely as the Brahmin is like a cow, he can eat anything 
and everything as the cow does and remain a Brahmin. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


288 


RIDDLE NO. 23 

KALI YUGA— WHY HAVE THE 
BRAHMINS MADE IT UNENDING? 


If there is any notion widespread among the Hindus and understood 
by every man and woman adult or old, mature or immature it is that of 
the Kali Yuga. They are all aware of the fact that the present Yuga is 
Kali Yuga and that they are living in the Kali Yuga. The theory of Kali 
Yuga has a psychological effect upon the mind of the people. It means 
that it is an unpropitious age. It is an immoral age. It is therefore an age 
in which human effort will not bear any fruit. It is therefore necessary 
to inquire as to how such a notion arose. There are really four points 
which require elucidation. They are (1) What is “Kali Yuga?, (2) When 
did Kali Yuga begin ?, (3) When is the Kali Yuga to end ? and (4) Why 
such a notion was spread among the people. 

I 

To begin with the first point. For the purposes of this inquiry it 
is better to split the words Kali Yuga and consider them separately. 
What is meant by Yuga ? The word Yuga occurs in the Rig-Veda in the 
sense of age, generation or tribe as in the expressions Yuge Yuge (in 
every age), Uttara Yugani (future ages), Uttare Yuge (later ages) and 
Purvani Yugani (former ages) etc. It occurs in connection with Manushy, 
Manusha, Manushah in which case it denotes generations of men. It 
just meant ages. Various attempts are made to asertain the period the 
Vaidikas intended to be covered by the term ‘Yuga’. Yuga is derived 
from the Sanskrit root Yuj which means to join and may have had the 

This chapter contains 45 typed pages. Only 9 pages of this chapter at the 
beginning are numbered. While no other pages are numbered. Howsoever 
the text of this chapter has been found to be complete and without any 
loss of material. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


289 


RIDDLE NO. 23 289 

same meaning as the astronomical term ‘conjunction’. Prof. Weber 
suggests that the period of time known as Yuga was connected with 
four lunar phases. 

Following this suggestion Mr. Rangacharya 1 has advanced the theory 
that “in all probability the earliest conception of a Yuga meant the period 
of a month from new-moon when the Sun and the Moon see each other 
i.e., they are in conjunction”. This view is not accepted by others. For 
instance, according to Mr. Shamshastry 2 the term Yuga is in the sense 
of a single human year as in the Setumahatmya which is said to form 
part of the Skanda Purana. According to the same authority it is used 
in the sense of a Parva or half a lunation, known as a white or dark 
half of a lunar month. 

All these attempts do not help us to know what was the period which 
the Vaidikas intended to be covered by a Yuga. 

While in the literature of the Vaidikas or theologians there is no 
exactitude regarding the use of the term Yuga in the literature of the 
astronomers (writers on Vedanga Jyotish) as distinguished from the 
Vaidikas the word Yuga connotes a definite period. According to them, 
a Yuga means a cycle of five years which are called (1) Samvatsara, (2) 
Parivatsara, (3) Idvatsara, (4) Anuvatsara and (5) Vatsara. 

Coming to Kali it is one of the cycles made up of four Yugas: Krita, 
Treta, Dwapar and Kali. What is the origin of- the term Kali ? The 
terms Krita, Treta, Dwapar and Kali are known to have been used in 
the three different connections. The earliest use of the term Kali as well 
as of other terms is connected with the game of dice. 

From the Rig-Veda it appears that the dice piece that was used in the 
game was made of the brown fruit of the Vibhitaka tree being about the 
size of a nutmeg, nearly round with five slightly flattened sides. Later on 
the dice was made of four sides instead of five. Each side was marked 
with the different numerals 4, 3, 2 and 1. The side marked with 4 was 
called Krita, with 3 Treta, with 2 Dwapara and with 1 Kali. Shamshastry 
gives an account of how a game of dice formed part of sacrifice and how 
it was played. The following is his account 3 : 

“Taking a cow belonging to the sacrificer, a number of players 
used to go along the streets of a town or village, and making the 
cow the stake, they used to play at dice in different batches with 
those who deposited grain as their stake. Each player used to throw 
on the ground a hundred or more Cowries (shells), and when the 

1 The Yugas: A question of Hindu Chronology and History p. 19. 

2 Drapsa: The Vedic cycle of Eclipses (1938) p. 88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

number of the Cowries thus cast and fallen with their face upwards 
or downwards, as agreed upon, was exactly divisible by four then the 
sacrificer was declared to have won; but if otherwise he was defeated. 
With the grain thus won, four Brahmans used to be fed on the day 
of sacrifice.” 

Professor Eggling’s references 1 to the Vedic literature leave no 
doubt about the prevalence of the game of dice almost from the 
earliest time. It is also clear from his references that the game was 
played with five dice four of which were called Krita while the fifth 
was called Kali. He also points out that there were various modes in 
which the game was played and says that according to the earliest 
mode of playing the game, if all the dice fell uniformly with the 
marked sides either upwards or downwards then the player won 
the game. The game of dice formed part of the Rajasuya and also 
of the sacrificial ceremony connected with the establishment of the 
sacred fire. 

These terms — Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kali — were also used 
in Mathematics. This is clear from the following passage from 
Abbayadevasuri’s Commentary on Bhagvati Sutra a voluminous 
work on Jaina religion. 

“In mathematical terminology an even number is called ‘Yugma’, and 
an odd number ‘Ojah’. Here there are, however, two numbers deserving 
of the name ‘Yugma’ and two numbers deserving of the name ‘Ojah’. 
Still, by the word ‘Yugma’ four Yugmas i.e., four numbers are meant. 

Of them i.e., Krita-yugma: Krita means accomplished, i.e., complete, 
for the reason that there is no other number after four, which bears a 
separate name (i.e., a name different from the four names Krita and 
others). That number which is not incomplete like Tryoja and other 
numbers, and which is a special even number is Kritayugma. As to 
Tryoja: that particular odd number which is uneven from above a 
Krityugma is Tryoja. As the Dwaparayugma: — That number which is 
another even number like Krityugma, but different from it and which 
is measured by two from the beginning or from above a Krityugma 
is Dwaparayugma — Dvapara is a special grammatical word. As to 
Kalyoja: — That special uneven number which is odd by Kali, i.e., to a 
Kritayugma is called Kalyoja. That number etc. which even divided by 
four, ends in complete division, Krityugma. In the series of numbers, 
the number four, though it need not be divided by four because it is 
itself four, is also called Krityugma.” 

Shamshastry 2 mentions another sense in which these terms are used. 
According to him, they are used to mean the Parvas of those names, 

1 See his note on the subject in his edition of Satpatha Brahmana. Vol. IV p. 107. 

2 Shamshastry, Drapsa pp. 92-93 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


291 


RIDDLE NO. 23 291 

such as Krita Parva, Treta Parva, Dwapara Parva and Kali Parva. A 
Parva is a period of 15 tithis or days otherwise called Paksha. For reasons 
connected with religious ceremonies the exact time when a Parva closed 
was regarded as important. It was held that the Parvas fell into four 
classes according to the time of their closing. They were held to close 
either (1) at Sunrise, (2) at one quarter or Pada of the day, (3) after 2 
quarters or Padas of the day or (4) at or after three quarters or Padas 
of the day. The first was called Krita Parva, the second Treta Parva, 
the third Dwapara Parva and the fourth Kali Parva. 

Whatever the meaning in which the words Kali and Yuga were used 
at one time, the term Kali Yuga has long since been used to designate 
a unit in the Hindu system of reckoning time. According to the Hindus 
there is a cycle of time which consists of four Yugas of which the Kali 
Yuga forms one. The other Yugas are called Krita, Treta and Dwapar. 

II 

When did the present Kali Yuga begin ? There are two different 
answers to the question. 

According to the Aitereya Brahmana it began with Nabhanedishta son 
of Vaivasvata Manu. According to the Puranas it began on the death of 
Krishna after the battle of Mahabharata. 

The first has been reduced to time term by Dr. Shamshastry 1 who says 
that Kali Yuga began in 3101 B.C. The second has been worked out by 
Mr. Gopal Aiyer with meticulous care. His view is that the Mahabharat 
War commenced on the 14th of October and ended on the night of 31st 
October 1194 B.C. He places the death of Krishna 16 years after the close 
of the war basing his conclusion on the ground that Parikshit was 16 
when he was installed on the throne and reading it with the connected 
facts namely that the Pandavas went of Mahaprasthan immediately 
after installing Parikshit on the throne and this they did on the very 
day Krishna died. This gives 1177 B.C. as the date of the commencement 
of the Kali Yuga. 

We have thus two different dates for the commencement of the 
Kali Yuga 3101 B.C. and 1177 B.C. This is the first riddle about the 
Kali Yuga. Two explanations are forthcoming for these two widely 
separated dates for the commencement of one and the same Yuga. One 
explanation is 3101 B.C. is the date of the commencement of the Kalpa 
and not of Kali and it was a mistake on the part of the copyist who 
misread Kalpa for Kali and brought about this confusion. The other 


Gavam Ay ana. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

explanation is that given by Dr. Shamshastry. According to him there 
were two Kali Yuga Eras which must be distinguished, one beginning in 
3101 B.C. and another beginning in 1260 or 1240. B.C. The first lasted 
about 1840 or 1860 years and was lost. 

Ill 

When is the Kali Yuga going to end ? On this question the view of the 
great Indian Astronomer Gargacharya in his Siddhanta when speaking 
of Salisuka Maurya the fourth in succession from Asoka makes the 
following important observation 1 : 

“Then the viciously valiant Greeks, after reducing Saketa, Panchala 
country to Mathura, will reach Kusumadhwaja (Patna): Pushpapura being 
taken all provinces will undoubtedly be in disorder. The unconquerable 
Yavanas will not remain in the middle country. There will be cruel 
and dreadful war among themselves. Then after the destruction of the 
Greeks at the end of the Yuga, seven powerful Kings reign in Oudha.” 

The important words are “after the destruction of the Greeks at the 
end of the Yuga”. These words give rise to two questions (1) which 
Yuga Garga has in mind and (2) when did the defeat and destruction 
of the Greeks in India take place. Now the answers to these questions 
are not in doubt. By Yuga he means Kali Yuga and the destruction and 
defeat of the Greeks took place about 165 B.C. It is not mere matter of 
inference from facts. There are direct statements in chapters 188 and 
190 of the Vanaparva of the Mahabharata that the Barbarian Sakas, 
Yavanas, Balhikas and many others will devastate Bharatvarsna ‘at the 
end of the Kali Yuga’. 

The result which follows when the two statements are put together is 
that the Kali Yuga ended in 165 B.C. There is also another argument 
which supports this conclusion. According to the Mahabharata, Kali 
Yuga was to comprise a period of one thousand years 2 . If we accept 
the statement that the Kali Yuga began in 1171 B.C. and deduct one 
thousand years since then we cannot escape the conclusion that Kali 
Yuga should have ended by about 171 B.C. which is not very far from 
the historical fact referred to by Garga as happening at the close of 
the Kali Yuga. There can therefore be no doubt that in the opinion of 
the chief Astronomer 3 , Kali Yuga came to end by about 165 B.C. What 
is however the position ? The position is that according to the Vaidika 
Brahman’s Kali Yuga has not ended. It still continues. This is clear 

1 Quoted by R. C. Dutt in his ‘Civilization in Ancient India’. 

2 Chronology of Ancient India p. 117. 

3 Garga’s statement seems to be corroborated by the statement in the Mahabharata 
that the period of Kali Yuga is 1000 years. For we add 171 to 1000 we get 1171 which 
is said to be the beginning of Kali. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


293 


RIDDLE NO. 23 293 

from the terms of Sankalpa which is a declaration which every Hindu 
makes even today before undertaking any religious ceremony. The 
Sankalpa is in the following terms 1 : 

“On the auspicious day and hour, in the second Parardha of First Bramha, 
which is called the Kalpa of the White Boar, in the period of Vaivasvata 
Manu, in the Kali Yuga, in the country of Jambudvipa in Bharatavarsha 
in the country of Bharat, in the luni-solar cycle of the sixty years which 
begins with Pradhava and ends with Kshaya or Akshaya and which is 
current, as ordained by Lord Vishnu, in the year (name), of the cycle, in 
the Southern or the Northern Ayana, as the case may be, in the white 
or dark half, on the Tithi, I (name) begin to perform the rite (name) the 
object of pleasing the Almighty.” 

The question we have to consider is why and how the Vedic Brahmins 
manage to keep the Kali Yuga going on when the astronomer had said 
it was closed. The first thing to do is to ascertain what is the original 
period of the Kali Yuga ? According to the Vishnu Purana: 

“The Kritayuga comprises 4000 years, the Treta 3000; the Dwapara 
2000 and the Kali 1000. Thus those that know the past have declared.” 

Thus Kali Yuga originally covered a period of 1000 years only. It is 
obvious that even on this reckoning the Kali Yuga should have ended 
long ago even according to the reckoning of the Vedic Brahmins. But it 
has not. What is the resason ? Obviously, because the period originally 
covered by the Kali Yuga came to be lengthened. This was done in two 
ways. 

Firstly, it was done by adding two periods called Sandhya and 
Sandhyamsa before and after the commencement and the end of a Yuga. 
Authority for this can be found in the same passage of the Vishnu Purana 
already referred to and which reads as follows: 

“The period that precedes a Yuga is called Sandhya and the period 

which comes after a Yuga is called Sandhyamsa, which lasts for a like 
period. The intervals between these Sandhyas and Sandhyamsas are known 
as the Yugas called Krita, Treta and the like.” 

What was the period of Sandhya and Sandhyamsa ? Was it uniform for 
all the Yugas or did it differ with the Yuga. Sandhya and Sandhyamsa 
periods were not uniform. They differed with each Yuga. The following 
table gives some idea of the four Yugas and their Sandhya and 
Sandhyamsa — 


Shamshastry. Drapsa p. 84 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Unit of a Mahayuga 

Period 

Dawn 

Twilight 

Total 

Krita Yuga 

.. 4000 

400 

400 

4800 

Treta Yuga 

.. 3000 

300 

300 

3600 

Dwapara Yuga 

.. 2000 

200 

200 

2400 

Kali Yuga 

.. 1000 

100 

100 

1200 


Maha Yuga .. .. .. 12000 

The Kali Yuga instead of remaining as before a period of 1,000 years 
was lengthened to a period of 1,200 years by the addition of Sandhya 
and Sandhyamsa. 

Secondly a new innovation was made. It was declared that the period 
fixed for the Yugas was really a period of divine years and not human 
years. According to the Vedic Brahmins one divine day was equal to 
one human year so that the period of Kali Yuga which was 1,000 years 
plus 200 years of Sandhya and Sandhamsa i.e. 1,200 years in all became 
(1200 x 360) equal to 4,32,000 years. In these two ways the Vedic 
Brahmins instead of declaring the end of Kali Yuga in 165 B.C. as the 
astronomer had said extended its life to 4,32,000 years. No wonder Kali 
Yuga continues even to-day and will continue for lakhs of years. There 
is no end to the Kali Yuga. 


IV 

What does the Kali Yuga stand for ? The Kali Yuga means an age of 
adharma, an age which is demoralized and an age in which the laws 
made by the King ought not to be obeyed. One question at once arises. 
Why was the Kali Yuga more demoralized than the preceding Yugas? 
What was the moral condition of the Aryans in the Yuga or Yugas 
preceding the present Kali Yuga? Anyone who compares the habits and 
social practices of the later Aryans with those of the ancient Aryans will 
find a tremendous improvement almost amounting to a social revolution 
in their manners and morals. 

The religion of the Vedic Aryans was full of barbaric and obscene 
observances. Human sacrifice formed a part of their religion and 
was called Naramedhayagna. Most elaborate descriptions of the rite 
are found in the Yajur-Veda Samhita, Yajur-Veda Brahmanas, the 
Sankhyana and Vaitana Sutras. The worship of genitals or what is 
called Phallus worship was quite prevalent among the ancient Aryans. 
The cult of the phallus came to be known as Skambha and was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


295 


RIDDLE NO. 23 295 

recognized as part of Aryan religion as may be seen in the hymn in 
Atharva-Veda X.7. Another instance of obscenity which disfigured the 
religion of the Ancient Aryans is connected with the Ashvamedha Yajna 
or the horse sacrifice. A necessary part of the Ashvamedha was the 
introduction of the Sepas (penis) of the Medha (dead horse) into the Yoni 
(vagina) of the chief wife of the Yajamana (the sacrificer) accompanied by 
the recital of long series of Mantras by the Brahmin priests. A Mantra 
in the Vajasaneya Samhita (xxiii. 18) shows that there used to be a 
competition among the queens as to who was to receive this high honour 
of being served by the horse. Those who want to know more about it 
will find it in the commentary of Mahidhara on the Yejur-Veda where 
he gives full description of the details of this obscene rite which had 
formed a part of the Aryan religion. 

The morals of the Ancient Aryans were no better than their religion. 
The Aryans were a race of gamblers. Gambling was developed by them 
into a science in very early days of the Aryan civilization so much so 
that they had even devised the dice and given them certain technical 
terms. The luckiest dice was called Krit and the unluckiest was called 
Kali. Treta and Dwapara were intermediate between them. Not only 
was gambling well developed among the ancient Aryans but they did 
not play without stakes. They gambled with such abandon that there 
is really no comparison with their spirit of gambling. Kingdoms and 
even wives were offered as stakes at gambling. King Nala staked his 
kingdom and lost it. The Pandvas went much beyond. They not only 
staked their kingdom but they also staked their wife, Draupadi, and 
lost both. Among the Aryans gambling was not the game of the rich. It 
was a vice of the many. 

The ancient Aryans were also a race of drunkards. Wine formed a 
most essential part of their religion. The Vedic Gods drank wine. The 
divine wine was called Soma. Since the Gods of the Aryans drank wine 
the Aryans had no scruples in the matter of drinking. Indeed to drink 
it was a part of an Aryan’s religious duty. There were so many Soma 
sacrifices among the ancient Aryans that there were hardly any days 
when Soma was not drunk. Soma was restricted to only the three upper 
classes, namely, the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas. That 
does not mean the Shudras were abstainers. Those who were denied 
Soma drank Sura which was ordinary, unconsecrated wine sold in 
the market. Not only the Male Aryans were addicted to drinking but 
the females also indulged in drinking. The Kaushitaki Grihya Sutra . 
1.11.12 advises that four or eight women who are not widowed after 
having been regaled with wine and food should be called to dance for 
four times on the night previous to the wedding ceremony. This habit 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of drinking intoxicating liquor was not confined to the Non-Brahmin 
women. Even Brahmin women were addicted to it. Drinking was not 
regarded as a sin. It was not even a vice, it was quite a respectable 
practice. The Rig-Veda says: 

“Worshipping the Sun before drinking Madira (wine).” 

The Yajur-Veda says: 

“ Oh, Deva Soma! being strengthened and invigorated by Sura (wine), 
by thy pure spirit please the Devas; give juicy food to the sacrificer and 
vigour to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas.” 

The Mantra Brahmana says: 

“By which women have been made enjoyable by men, and by which 
water has been transformed into wine (for the enjoyment of men), etc.” 

That Rama and Sita both drank wine is admitted by the Ramayana. 
Utter Khand says: 

“Like Indra in the case of (his wife) Shachi, Rama Chandra made Sita 
drink purified honey made wine. Servants brought for Rama Chandra 
meat and sweet fruits.” 

So did Krishna and Arjuna. In the Udyoga Parva of the Mahabharat 
Sanjaya says: 

“Arjuna and Shri Krishna drinking wine made from honey and being 
sweet-scented and garlanded, wearing splendid clothes and ornaments, sat 
on a golden throne studded with various jewels. I saw Shrikrishna’s feet 
on Arjuna’s lap, and Arjuna’s feet on Draupadi and Satyabhama’s lap.” 

We may next proceed to consider the marital relations of men and 
women. What does history say? In the beginning there was no law of 
marriage among the Aryans. It was a state of complete promiscuity 
both in the higher and lower classes of the society. There was no such 
thing as a question of prohibited degrees as the following instances 
will show. 

Brahma married his own daughter Satarupa. Their son was Manu 
the founder of the Pruthu dynasty which preceded the rise of the 
Aiksvakas and the Ailas. 

Hiranyakashpu married his daughter Rohini. Other cases of father 
marrying daughters are Vashishtha and Shatrupa, Janhu and Jannhavi, 
and Surya and Usha. That such marriages between father and daughters 
were common is indicated by the usage of recognizing Kanin sons. 
Kanin sons mean sons born to unmarried daughter. They were in law 
the sons of the father of the girl. Obviously they must be sons begotten 
by the father on his own daughter 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


297 


RIDDLE NO. 23 297 

There are cases of father and son cohabiting with the same woman, 
Brahma is the father of Manu and Satarupa is his mother. This Satarupa 
is also the wife of Manu. Another case is that of Shradha. She is the wife 
of Vivasvat. Their son is Manu. But Shradha is also the wife of Manu 
thus indicating the practice of father and son sharing a woman. It was 
open for a person to marry his brother’s daughter. Dharma married 10 
daughters of Daksha though Daksha and Dharma were brothers. One 
could also marry his uncle’s daughter as did Kasyapa who married 13 
wives all of whom were the daughters of Daksha and Daksha was the 
brother of Kasyapa’s father Marichi. 

The case of Yama and Yami mentioned in the Rig-Veda is a notorious 
case, which throws a great deal of light on the question of marriages 
between brothers and sisters. Because Yama refused to cohabit with 
Yami it must not be supposed that such marriages did not exist. 

The Adi Parva of the Mahabharata gives a geneology which begins 
from Brahmadeva. According to this geneology Brahma had three 
sons Marichi, Daksha and Dharma and one daughter whose name the 
geneology unfortunately does not give. In this very geneology it is stated 
that Daksha married the daughter of Brahma who was his sister and 
had a vast number of daughters variously estimated as being between 
50 and 60. Other instances of marriages between brothers and sisters 
could be cited. They are Pushan and his sister Acchoda and Amavasu. 
Purukutsa and Narmada, Viprachiti and Simhika, Nahusa and Viraja, 
Sukra-Usanas and Go, Amsumat and Yasoda, Dasaratha and Kausalya, 
Rama and Sita; Suka and Pivari; Draupadi and Prasti are all cases of 
brothers marrying sisters. 

The following cases show that there was no prohibition against son 
cohabiting with his mother. There is the case of Pushan and his mother 
Manu and Satrupa and Manu and Shradha. Attention may also be 
drawn to two other cases, Arjuna and Urvashi and Arjuna and Uttara. 
Uttara was married to Abhimanyu son of Arjuna when he was barely 16. 
Uttara was associated with Arjuna. He taught her music and dancing. 
Uttara is described as being in love with Arjuna and the Mahabharata 
speaks of their getting married as a natural sequel to their love affair. 
The Mahabharata does not say that they were actually married but If 
they were, then Abhimanyu can be said to have married his mother. 
The Arjuna Urvasi episode is more positive in its indication. 

Indra was the real father of Arjuna. Urvashi was the mistress of 
Indra and therefore in the position of a mother to Arjuna. She was 
a tutor to Arjuna and taught him music and dancing. Urvasi became 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

enamoured of Arjuna and with the consent of his father, Indra, approached 
Arjuna for sexual intercourse. Arjuna refused to agree on the ground 
that she was like mother to him. Urvashi’s conduct has historically more 
significant than Arjuna’s denial and for two reasons. The very request 
by Urvashi to Arjuna and the consent by Indra show that Urvashi was 
following a well established practice. Secondly, Urvashi in her reply to 
Arjuna tells him in a pointed manner that this was a well recognized 
custom and that all Arjuna’s forefathers had accepted precisely similar 
invitations without any guilt being attached to them. 

Nothing illustrates better than the complete disregard of consanguity 
in cohabitation in ancient India than the following story which is related 
in the second Adhyaya of the Harivamsha. According to it Soma was 
the son of ten fathers — suggesting the existence of Polyandry — each one 
of whom was called Pralheta. Soma had a daughter Marisha — The ten 
fathers of Soma and Soma himself cohabited with Marisha. This is a 
case of ten grand-fathers and father married to a woman who was a 
grand-daughter and daughter to her husbands. In the same Adhyaya 
the story of Daksha Prajapati is told. This Daksha Prajapati who is the 
son of Soma is said to have given his 27 daughters to his father, Soma 
for procreation. In the third Adhyaya of Harivamsha the author says 
that Daksha gave his daughter in marriage to his own father Brahma 
on whom Brahma begot a son who became famous as Narada. All these 
are cases of cohabitation of Sapinda men, with Sapinda women. 

The ancient Aryan women were sold. The sale of daughters is evidenced 
by the Arsha form of marriage. According to the technical terms used the 
father of the boy gave Go-Mithuna and took the girl. This is another way 
of saying that the girl was sold for a Go-Mithuna. Go-Mithuna means 
one cow and one bull which was regarded as a reasonable price of a 
girl. Not only daughters were sold by their fathers but wives also were 
sold by their husbands. The Harivamsha in its 79th Adhyaya describes 
how a religious rite called Punyaka-Vrata should be the fee that should 
be offered to the officiating priest. It says that the wives of Brahmins 
should be purchased from their husbands and given to the officiating 
priest as his fee. It is quite obvious from this that Brahmins freely sold 
their wives for a consideration. 

That the ancient Aryans let their women on rent for cohabitation 
to others is also a fact. In the Mahabharata there is an account of 
the life of Madhavi in Adhyayas 103 to 123. According to this account 
Madhavi was the daughter of King Yayati. Yayati made a gift of her to 
Galawa. Galva who was a Rishi as a fee to a priest. Galva rented her 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


299 


RIDDLE NO. 23 299 

out to three kings in succession but to each for a period necessary to beget 
a son on her. After the tenancy of the third king terminated Madhavi 
was surrendered by Galva to his Guru Vishvamitra who made her his 
wife. Vishvamitra kept her till he begot a son on her and gave her back 
to Galva. Galva returned her to her father Yayati. 

Polygamy and Polyandry were raging in the ancient Aryan society. 
The fact is so well known that it is unnecessary to record cases which 
show its existence. But what is probably not well known is the fact of 
promiscuity. Promiscuity in matters of sex becomes quite apparent if 
one were only to examine the rules of Niyoga which the Aryan name 
for a system under which a woman who is wedded can beget on herself 
a progeny from another who is not her husband. This system resulted 
in a complete state of promiscuity for it was uncontrolled. In the first 
place, there was no limit to the number of Niyogas open to a woman. 
Madhuti had one Niyoga allowed to her. Ambika had one actual Niyoga 
and another proposed. Saradandayani had three. Pandu allowed his wife 
Kunti four Niyogas. Vyusistasva was permitted to have 7 and Vali is 
known to have allowed as many as 17 Niyogas, 11 on one and 6 on his 
second wife. Just as there was no limit to the number of Niyogas so also 
there was no definition of cases in which Niyoga was permissible. Niyoga 
took place in the lifetime of the husband and even in cases where the 
husband was not overcome by any congenital incapacity to procreate. 
The initiative was probably taken by the wife. The choice of a man 
was left to her. She was free to find out with whom she would unite a 
Niyoga and how many times, if she chose the same man. The Niyogas 
were another name for illicit intercourse between men and women which 
might last for one night or twelve years or more with the husband a 
willing and a sleeping partner in this trade of fornication. 

These were the manners and morals of common men in the ancient 
Aryan Society. What were the morals of the Brahmins ? Truth to tell 
they were no better men than those of the common men. The looseness 
of the morals among the Brahmins is evidenced by many instances. But 
a few will suffice. The cases showing that the Brahmins used to sell 
their wives has already been referred to. I will give other cases showing 
looseness. The Utanka is a pupil of Veda (the Purohita of Janmejaya 
III). The wife of Veda most calmly requests Utanka to take the place 
of her husband and ‘approach’ her for the sake of virtue. Another case 
that may be referred to in this connection is that of Uddalaka’s wife. 
She is free to go to other Brahmins either of her own free will, or in 
response to invitations. Shwetketu is her son by one of her husband’s 
pupils. These are not mere instances of laxity or adultery. These are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


300 


300 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cases of recognized latitudes allowed to Brahmin women. Jatila-Gautami 
was a Brahmin woman and had 7 husbands who were Rishis. The 
Mahabharata says that the wives of the citizens admire Draupadi in the 
company of her five husbands and compare her to Jatila Gautami with 
her seven husbands. Mamata is the wife of Utathya. But Brahaspati the 
brother of Utathya had free access to Mamata during the life time of 
Utathya. The only objection Mamata once raises to him is to ask him 
to wait on account of her pregnancy but does not say that approaches 
to her were either improper or unlawful. 

Such immoralities were so common among the Brahmins that Draupadi 
when she was called a cow by Duryodhana for her polyandry is said to 
have said she was sorry that her husbands were not born as Brahmins. 

Let us examine the morality of the rishis. What do we find? 

The first thing we find is the prevalence of bestiality among the 
rishis. Take the case of the rishi called Vibhandaka. In Adhyaya 100 
of the Vana Parva of the Mahabharata it is stated that he cohabited 
with a female deer and that the female deer bore a son to him who 
subsequently became known as Rishi Shranga. In Adhyaya 1 as well 
as in 118 of the Adi Parva of the Mahabharata there is a narration 
of how Pandu the father of the Pandavas received his curse from the 
Rishi by name Dama. Vyas says that the Rishi Dama was once engaged 
in the act of coitus with a female deer in a jungle. While so engaged 
Pandu shot him with an arrow before the rishi was spent as a result 
of it Dama died. But before he died Dama uttered a curse saying that 
if Pandu ever thought of approaching his wife he would die instantly. 
Vyas tries to gloss this bestiality of the rishi by saying that the Rishi 
and his wife had both taken the form of deer in fun and frolic. Other 
instances of such bestiality by the rishis it will not be difficult to find if 
a diligent search was made in the ancient religious literature in India. 

Another heinous practice which is associated with the rishis is 
cohabitation with women in the open and within the sight of the public. 
In Adhyaya 63 of the Adi Parva of the Mahabharata a description 
is given of how the Rishi Parashara had sexual intercourse with 
Satyavati, alias Matsya Gandha a fisherman’s girl. Vyas says that 
he cohabited with her in the open and in public. Another similar 
instance is to be found in Adhyaya 104 of the Adi Parva. It is stated 
therein that the Rishi Dirgha Tama cohabited with a woman in the 
sight of the public. There are many such instances mentioned in the 
Mahabharata. There is, however, no need to encumber the record with 
them. For the word Ayonija is enough to prove the general existence 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


301 


RIDDLE NO. 23 301 

of the practice. Most Hindus know that Sita, Draupadi and other renowned 
ladies are spoken of Ayonija. What they mean by Ayonija is a child born 
by immaculate conception. There is however no warrant from etymological 
point of view to give such a meaning to the Ayoni. The root meaning 
of the word Yoni is house. Yonija means a child born or conceived in 
the house. Ayonija means a child born or conceived outside the house. 
If this is the correct etymology of Ayonija it testifies to the practice of 
indulging in sexual intercourse in the open within the sight of the public. 

Another practice which evidences the revolting immorality of the rishis 
in the Chandyogya Upanishad. According to this Upanishad it appears that 
the rishis had made a rule that if while they were engaged in performing 
a Yajna if a woman expressed a desire for sexual intercourse with the 
rishi who was approached should immediately without waiting for the 
completion of the Yajna and without caring to retire in a secluded spot 
proceeded to commit sexual intercourse with her in the Yajna Mandap 
and in the sight of the public. This immoral performance of the rishi was 
elevated to the position of a Religious observance and given the technical 
name of Vamadev- Vrata which was later on revived as Vama-Marga. 

This does not exhaust all that one finds in the ancient sacredotal 
literature of the Aryans about the morality of the rishis. One phase of 
their moral life remains to be mentioned. 

The ancient Aryans also seem to be possessed with the desire to 
have better progeny which they accomplished by sending their wives to 
others and it was mostly to the rishis who were regarded by the Aryas 
as pedigree cattle. The number of rishis who figure in such cases form 
quite a formidable number. Indeed the rishis seemed to have made a 
regular trade in this kind of immorality and they were so lucky that even 
kings asked them to impregnate the queens. Let us now take the Devas 1 . 

The Devas were a powerful and most licentious community. They 
even molested the wives of the rishis. The story of how Indra raped 
Ahalya the wife of Rishi Gautama is well known. But the immoralities 
they committed on the Aryan women were unspeakable. The Devas 
as a community appears to have established an overlordship over the 
Aryan community in very early times. This overlordship had become 
degenerated that the Aryan women had to prostitute themselves to 

1 One does not know what to say of the scholar who first translated the Sanskrit word 
Deva by the English word God. It was the greatest blunder which has resulted in confusion 
and has prevented a proper understanding of the social life of the Aryans as revealed in 
the Vedic literature. That Deva was the name of a community is beyond question. That 
Rakshas, Daityas, Danavas are also names of different communities in the same manner 
as the words Arya and Dasyu are must also be accepted without question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


302 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

satisfy the lust of the Devas. The Aryans took pride if his wife was in 
the keeping of a Deva and was impregnated by him. The mention is in 
the Mahabharata and in the Harivamsha of sons born to Arya women 
from Indra, Yama, Nasatya, Agni, Vayu and other Devas is so frequent 
that one is astounded to note the scale on which such illicit intercourse 
between the Devas and the Arya women was going on. 

In course of time the relations between the Devas and the Aryans 
became stablized and appears to have taken the form of feudalism. The 
Devas exacted two boons 1 from the Aryans. 

The first boon was the Yajna which were periodic feasts given by the 
Aryans to the Devas in return for the protection of the Devas in their fight 
against the Rakshasas, Daityas and Danavas. The Yajnas were nothing 
but feudal exactions of the Devas. If they have not been so understood 
it is largely because the word Deva instead of thought to be the name 
of a community is regarded as a term for expressing the idea of God 
which is quite wrong at any rate in the early stages of Aryan Society. 

The second boon claimed by the Devas against the Aryans was the 
prior right to enjoy Aryan woman. This was systematized at a very early 
date. There is a mention of it in the Rig-Veda in X. 85.40. According 
to it the first right over an Arya female was that of Soma, second of 
Gandharva, third of Agni and lastly of the Aryan. Every Aryan woman 
was hypothecated to some Deva who had a right to enjoy her first on 
becoming puber. Before she could be married to an Aryan she had to be 
redeemed by getting the right of the Deva extinguished by making him a 
proper payment. The description of the marriage ceremony given in the 
7th Khandika of the 1st Adhyaya of the Ashvalayan Grahya Sutra furnish 
the most cogent proof of the existence of the system. A careful and critical 
examination of the Sutra reveals that at the marriage three Devas were 
present. Aryaman, Varuna and Pushan, obviously because they had a 
right of prelibation over the bride. The first thing that the bride-groom 
does, is to bring her near a stone slab and make her stand on it telling 
her ‘Tread on this stone, like a stone be firm. Overcome the enemies; 
tread the foes down’. This means that the bridegroom does it to liberate 
the bride from the physical control of the three Devas whom he regards 
as his enemies. The Devas get angry and march on the bridegroom. The 
brother of the bride intervenes and tries to settle the dispute. He brings 
parched gram with a view to offer it the Angry Deva with a view to 

1 Whether the relations between the Devas and the Aryans were of the nature of the 
feudal relations between the Lord and the Vellein has not yet been investigated largely 
because the Devas are not considered as a community of men. The boons claimed by the 
Devas from the Aryans are the same as those claimed by the Lord from his Vellein. (1) 
First fruits and (2) Prima Noctis. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


303 


RIDDLE NO. 23 303 

buy off their rights over the bride. The brother then asks the bride to 
join her palms and make a hollow. He then fills the hollow of her palm 
with the parched grain and pours clarified butter on it and asks her 
to offer it to each Deva three times. This offering is called Avadana. 
While the bride is making this Avadana to the Deva the brother of the 
bride utters a statement which is very significant. He says “This girl is 
making this Avadana to Aryaman Deva through Agni. Aryaman should 
therefore relinquish his right over the girl and should not disturb the 
possession of the bridegroom”. Separate Avadanas are made by the 
bride to the other two Devas and in their case also the brother alters 
the same formula. After the Avadan follows the Pradakshana round the 
Agni which is called SAPTAPADI after which the marriage of the bride 
and bridegroom becomes complete valid and good. All this of course is 
very illuminating and throw a flood of light on the utter subjection of 
the Aryans to the Devas and moral degradation of Devas as well as of 
the Aryans. 

Lawyers know that Saptapadi is the most essential ceremony in a 
Hindu marriage and that without it there is no marriage at Law. But 
very few know why Saptapadi has so great an importance. The reason 
is quite obvious. It is a test whether the Deva who had his right of 
prelibation over the bride was satisfied with the Avadana and was 
prepared to release her. If the Deva allowed the bridegroom to take 
the bride away with him up to a distance covered by the Saptapadi 
it raised an irrebutable presumption that the Deva was satisfied with 
the compensation and that his right was extinguished and the girl was 
free to be the wife of another. The Saptapadi cannot have any other 
meaning. The fact that Saptapadi is necessary in every marriage shows 
how universally prevalent this kind of immorality had been among the 
Devas and the Aryans. 

This survey cannot be complete without separate reference to the 
morals of Krishna. Since the beginning of Kali Yuga which is the same 
thing is associated with his death his morals became of considerable 
importance. How do the morals of Krishna compare with those of the 
others? Full details are given in another place about the sort of life 
Krishna led. To that I will add here a few. Krishna belonged to the 
Vrasni (Yadava family). The Yadavas were polygamous. The Yadava 
Kings are reported to have innumerable wives and innumerable 
sons — a stain from which Krishna himself was not free. But this 
Yadava family and Krishna’s own house was not free from the stain of 
parental incest. The case of a father marrying daughter is reported by 
the Matsya Purana to have occurred in the Yadav family. According to 
Matsya Purana, King Taittiri an ancestor of Krishna married his own 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

daughter and begot-on her a son by name Nala. The case of a son 
cohabiting with his mother is found in the conduct of Samba the son of 
Krishna. The Matsya Purana tells how Samba lived an illicit life with 
the wives of Krishna his father and how Krishna got angry and cursed 
Samba and the guilty wives on that account. There is a reference to this 
in the Mahabharata also. Satyabhama asked Draupadi the secret of her 
power over her five husbands. According to the Mahabharata Draupadi 
warned her against talking or staying in private with her step-sons. This 
corroborates what the Matsya Purana has to say about Samba. Samba’s 
is not the only case. His brother Pradyumna married his foster mother 
Mayavati the wife of Sambara. 

Such is the state of morals in the Aryan Society before the death of 
Krishna. It is not possible to divide this history into definite Yugas and 
to say that what state of morals existed in the Krita, what in Treta and 
what in Dwapara Yuga which closed at the death of Krishna If, however, 
we allow the ancient Aryans a spirit of progressive reform it is possible 
to say that the worst cases of immorality occurred in earliest age i.e. 
the Krita age, the less revolting in the Treta and the least revolting in 
the Dwapara and the best in the Kali age. 

This line of thinking does not rest upon mere general development of 
human society as we see all over the world. That instead of undergoing 
a moral decay the ancient Aryan society was engaged in removing social 
evils by undertaking bold reforms is borne out by its history. 

Devas and the rishis occupied a very high place in the eyes of the 
common Aryan and as is usual the inferior always imitate their superior. 
What the superior class does forms a standard for the inferior. The 
immoralities which were prevalent in the Aryan Society were largely 
the result of the imitation by the common man of the immoral acts and 
deeds of the Devas and the rishis. To stop the spread of immoralities 
in society the leaders of the Aryan Society introduced a reform of the 
greatest significance. They declared that acts and deeds of the Devas 
and the rishis are not to be cited 1 or treated as precedents. In this 
way one cause and source of immorality was removed by a bold, and 
courageous stroke. 

Other reforms were equally drastic. The Mahabharata refers to 
two reformers Dirghatama and Shwetaketu. It was laid down by 
Shwetketu that the marriage is indissoluble and there was to be 
no divorce. Two reforms are attributed to Dirghatama. He stopped 
polyandry and declared that a woman can have only one husband at 

1 The rules that Rishis’ conduct is not to be cited or treated as precedent is laid down 
in Gautama Dharma Sutra Na Deva Charitama Chareta has reference to the bar enacted 
against treating the acts and deeds of the Devas as precedent. It is a floating verse whose 
source it has not been possible to locate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


305 


RIDDLE NO. 23 305 

a time. The second reform he is said to have carried out was to lay down 
conditions for regulating Niyog. The following were the most important 
of these conditions. 

(i) The father or brother of the widow (or of the widow’s husband) 
shall assemble the Gurus who taught or sacrificed for the deceased 
husband and his relatives and shall appoint her to raise issue 
for the deceased husband 1 . 

(ii) (1) The husband, whether living or dead, must have no sons; (2) 
The Gurus in a family council should decide to appoint the widow 
to raise issue for her husband; (3) The person appointed must 
be either the husband’s brother or a sapinda, or sagotra of the 
husband or (according to Gautama) a sapravara or a person of 
the same caste. (4) The person appointed and the widow must be 
actuated by no lust but only by a sense of duty; (5) The person 
appointed must be anointed with ghee or oil (Narada Stripumsa, 
82) must not speak with or kiss her or engage in the sportive 
dalliance with the women; (6) This relationship was to last till 
one son was born (or two according to some); (7) The widow must 
be comparatively young, she should not be old or sterile, or past 
child-bearing or sickly or unwilling or pregnant (Baud. Dh. S. 
II. 2.70, Narad, Stripumsa 83.84); (8) After the birth of a son 
they were to regard themselves as father-in-law and daughter- 
in-law (Manu IX, 62). It is further made clear by the texts that 
if a brother-in-law has intercourse with his sister-in-law without 
appointment by elders or if he does so even when appointed 
by elders but the other circumstances do not exist (e.g., if the 
husband has a son), he would be guilty of the sin of incest.” 

There are other reforms carried out by the ancient Aryan Society 
necessary to improve its morals. One was to establish the rule of 
prohibited degrees for purposes of marriage to prevent recurrence of 
father-daughter, brother-sister, mother-son, grandfather-grand daughter 
marriages. The other was to declare sexual intercourse between the wife 
of the Guru and the pupil a heinous sin. Equally clear is the evidence in 
support of an attempt to control gambling. Every treatise in the series 
called Dharma Sutras contain references to laws made throwing on the 
King the duty and urgency of controlling gambling by State authorities 
under stringent laws. 

All these reforms had taken effect long before the Kali Yuga started 
and it is natural to hold that from the point of view of morality the 
Kali Yuga was a better age. To call it an age in which morals were 
declining is not only without foundation but is an utter perversion. 


Kane Vol. II part 1 p. 601. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


306 


306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This discussion about the Kali Yuga raised many riddles in the first 
place. How and when did the idea of mahayuga arise? It is true that 
all over the world the idea of a golden age lying in the past has been 
prevalent. But the idea of a Mahayuga is quite satisfied with the idea 
of a golden past prevelent elsewhere in India. Elsewhere the golden 
past is deemed to return. It is gone for ever. But in the idea of the 
Mahayuga the golden past is not gone for ever. It is to return after the 
cycle is complete. 

The second riddle is why was the Kali Yuga not closed in 165 B.C. 
When according to the astronomer it was due to end why was it continued. 
Third riddle is the addition of Sandhya and Sandhyamsa periods to the 
Kali Yuga. It is quite obvious that these were later additions. For the 
Vishnu Purana states them separately. If they were original parts of 
Kali Yuga they would not have been stated separately why were these 
additions made. A fourth riddle is the change in the counting of the 
period. Originally the period of the Kali Yuga was said to be human 
years. Subsequently it was said to be a period of divine years with the 
result of the Kali Yuga being confined to 1200 years became extended 
to 4,32,000 years. That this was an innovation is quite obvious. For the 
Mahabharata knows nothing about this calculation in term of divine 
years. Why was this innovation made? What was the object of the Vedic 
Brahmins in thus indefinitely extending the period of the Kali Yuga? 
Was it to blackmail some Shudra Kings that the theory of Kali Yuga 
was invented and made unending so as to destroy his subjects from 
having any faith in his rule? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


307 


RIDDLE NO. 24 

THE RIDDLE OF THE KALI YUGA 


The Units into which time is broken up for the purposes of reckoning 
it which are prevalent among the Hindus have not deserved the attention 
which their extraordinary character call for. This is a matter which forms 
one of the principal subject matter of the Puranas. There are according to 
the Puranas five measures of time (1) Varsha, (2) Yuga, (3) Maha Yuga, 
(4) Manwantara and (5) Kalpa. I will draw upon the Vishnu Purana to 
show what these units are. 

To begin with the Varsha. This is how the Vishnu Purana explains it 1 : 

“Oh best of sages, fifteen twinklings of the eye make a Kashtha; thirty 
Kalas, one Muhurtta; thirty Muhurttas constitute a day and night of 
mortals : thirty such days make a month, divided into two half-months : 
six months form an Ayana (the period of the Sun’s progress north or south 
of the ecliptic): and two Ayanas compose a year.” 

The same is explained in greater details at another place in the 
Vishnu Purana 2 . 

“Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimedhas) make a Kashtha; thirty 
Kashthas, a Kala; Thirty Kalas, a Muhurtta (forty-eighty minutes); 
and thirty Muhurttas, a day and night; the portions of the day are 
longer or shorter, as has been explained; but the Sandhya is always 
the same in increase or decrease, being only one Muhurtta. From 
the period that a line may be drawn across the Sun (or that half 
his orb is visible) to the expiration of three Muhurttas (two hours 
and twenty-four minutes), that interval is called Pratar (morning), 

1 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana pp. 22-23. 

2 Ibid. 

This is another version entitled ‘The Riddle of the Kali Yuga’. The copy 
available with us is a carbon copy having no corrections or modifications 
by the author. This chapter contains 40 pages. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


308 


308 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

forming a fifth portion of the day. The next portion, or three Muhurttas 
from morning, is termed Sangava (forenoon): the three next Muhurttas 
constitute mid-day; the afternoon comprises the next three Muhurttas; the 
three Muhurttas following are considered as the evening; and the fifteen 
Muhurttas of the day are thus classed in five portions of three each.” 

“Fifteen days of thirty Muhurttas each are called a Paksha (a lunar 
fortnight); two of these make a month; and two months, a solar season; 
three seasons a northern or southern declination (Ayana); and those two 
compose a year.” 

The conception of Yuga is explained by the Vishnu Purana in the 
following terms 1 : 

“Twelve thousand divine years, each composed of (three hundred and 
sixty) such days, constitute the period of the four Yugas, or ages. They are 
thus distributed : the Krita age has four thousand divine years; the Treta 
three thousand; the Dwapara two thousand; and Kali age one thousand; 
so those acquainted with antiquity have declared. 

“The period that precedes a Yuga is called a Sandhya, and it is of as 
many hundred years as there are thousand in the Yuga; and the period that 
follows a Yuga, termed the Sandhyansa, is of similar duration. The interval 
between the Sandhya and the Sandhyasana is the Yuga, denominated, 
Krita, Treta, &c.” 

The term Yuga is also used by the Vishnu Purana to denote a different 
measure of time. It says 2 : 

“Years, made up of four kinds of months, are distinguished into five 
kinds; and an aggregate of all the varieties of time is termed a Yuga, or 
cycle. The years are severally, called Samvatsara, Idvatsara, Anuvatsara, 
Parivatsara, and Vatsara. This is the time called a Yuga.” 

The measure of Maha Yuga is an extension of the Yuga. As the Vishnu 
Purana points out 3 : 

“The Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali constitute a great age, or aggregate 
of four ages : a thousand such aggregates are a day of Brahma.” 

The Manwantara is explained by the Vishnu Purana in the following 
terms 4 : 

“The interval, called a Manwantara, is equal to seventy-one times, the 
number of years contained in the four Yugas, with some additional years.” 

1 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana. p. 23. 

2 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana. p. 23. 

3 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana. p. 23. 

4 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana pp. 24. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


309 


RIDDLE NO. 24 309 

What is Kalpa is stated by the Vishnu Purana in the following brief 
text : 

“Kalpa (or the day) of Brahma.” 

These are the periods in which time is divided. The time included in 
these periods may next be noted. 

The Varsha is simple enough. It is the same as the year or a period 
of 365 days. The Yuga, Maha Yuga, Manwantara and Kalpa are not 
so simple for calculating the periods. It would be easier to treat Yuga, 
Maha Yuga etc., as sub-divisions of a Kalpa rather than treat the Kalpa 
as a multiple of Yuga. Proceeding along that line the relation between a 
Kalpa and a Maha Yuga is that in one Kalpa there are 71 Maha Yugas 
while one Maha Yuga consists of four Yugas and a Manwantara is equal 
to 71 Maha Yugas with some additional years. 

In computing the periods covered by these units we cannot take Yuga 
as our base for computation. For the Yuga is a fixed but not uniform 
period. The basis of computation is the Maha Yuga which consists of a 
fixed period. 

A Maha Yuga consists of a period of four Yugas called (1) Krita, (2) 
Treta, (3) Dwapara and (4) Kali. Each Yuga has its period fixed. Each 
Yuga in addition to its period has a dawn and a twilight which have 
fixed-duration. Actual period as well as the period of the dawn and the 
twilight are different for the different Yugas. 


Yug 

Period 

Dawn 

Twilight 

Total 

Krita 

.. 4000 

400 

400 

4800 

Treta 

.. 3000 

300 

300 

3600 

Dwapara 

.. 2000 

200 

200 

2400 

Kali 

.. 1000 

100 

100 

1200 

Maha Yuga 




12000 


This computation of the Maha Yuga is in terms of divine years i.e. 
12000 divine years or years of Brahma make up one Maha Yuga at the 
rate of one year of men being equal to one divine day the Maha Yuga in 
terms of human or mortal years comes to (360 x 12000) 43,20,000 years. 

Seventy-one Maha Yugas make one Kalpa. This means that a Kalpa 
is equal to (43,20,000 x 71) 3,06,72,000. 

Coming to Manwantaras one Manvantara is equal to 71 Maha 
Yugas plus something more. The period of a manvantara is equal to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


310 


310 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that of a Kalpa i.e. 3,06,72,000 plus something more. The period of a 
Manvantara is bigger than the period included in a Kalpa. 

The conception of a Varsha is in accord with astronomy and is necessary 
for the purpose of calculating time. 

The conception of a Kalpa is both mythological and cosmological and is 
based upon the belief that the Universe undergoes the process of creation 
and dissolution; at the hands of Brahma and the period between creation 
and dissolution is called Kalpa. The first book of the Vishnu Purana is 
occupied with this. It begins with the details of creation. Creation is 
of twofold character, (1) primary (sarga) i.e. the origin of the universe 
from Prakriti or eternal crude matter; (2) Secondary (Pratisarga) i.e. 
the manner in which forms of things are developed from elementary 
substances previously evolved, or the manner in which they reappear 
after their temporary destruction. Both these creations are periodical, but 
the termination of the first occurs only at the end of the life of Brahma, 
when not only all the Gods and all other forms are annihilated, but the 
elements are again merged into primary substance, besides which one 
only spiritual being exists; the later takes place at the end of every Kalpa 
or day of Brahma, and affects only the forms of inferior creatures, and 
lower worlds, leaving the substance of the universe entire, and sages 
and Gods unharmed. Such is the conception underlying Kalpa. 

The conception underlying Manvantara is mythological if not historical. 
It starts with the belief that Brahma gave rise to creation, inanimate as 
well as animate. But the animates did not multiply themselves. Brahma 
then created other 9 mind born sons but they were without desire 
or passion, inspired with holy, wisdom, estranged from the universe, 
and undesirous of progeny. Brahma having perceived this was filled 
with wrath. Brahma then converted himself into two persons, the first 
male, or Manu Swayambhuva and the first woman, or Satarupa. Manu 
Swayambhuva married Satarupa. Thus began the first Manvantara 
which is called Manvantara Swayambhuva. The fourteen Manvantaras 
are described as follows 1 

“Then, Brahma created himself the Manu Swayambhuva, born of, and 
identical with, his original self, for the protection of created beings, and 
the female portion of himself he constituted Satarupa, whom austerity 
purified from the sin (of forbidden nuptials), and whom the divine Manu 
Swayambhuva took to wife. From these two were born two sons, Priyavrata 
and Uttanapada, and two daughters, named Prasuti and Akuti graced with 
loveliness and exalted merit. Prasuti he gave to Daksha, after giving Akuti to 
the Patriarch Ruchi, who espoused her. Akuti bore to Ruchi twins, Yajna and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


311 


RIDDLE NO. 24 

Dakshina, who afterwards became husband and wife; and had twelve 
sons, the deities called Yamas, in the Manwantara of Swayambhuva.” 

“’The first Manu was Swayambhuva, then came Swarochisha, the 
Auttami, then Tamasa, then Raivata, then Chakshusha : these six 
Manus have passed away. The Manu who presides over the seventh 
Manwantara, which is the present period, is Vaivaswata, the son of 
the Sun.” 

“The period of Swayambhuva Manu, in the beginning of the Kalpa, 
has already been described by me, together with the gods, Rishis, 
and other personages, who then flourished. I will now, therefore, 
enumerate the presiding gods, Rishis, and sons of the Manu, in the 
Manwantara of Swarochisha. The deities of this period (or the second 
Manvantara) were the classes called Paravatas and Tushitas; and the 
king of the gods was the mighty Vipaschit. The seven Rishis were 
Urja, Stambha, Praria, Dattoli, Rishabha, Nischara, and Arvarivat; 
and Chaitra, Kimpurusha and others, were the Manu’s sons. 

“In the third period, Or Manwantara of Auttami, Susanti was the 
Indra, the king of the gods the orders of whom were the Sudhamas, 
Satyas, Sivas, Pradersanas, and Vasavertis; each of the five orders 
consisting of twelve divinities. The seven sons of Vasishtha were the 
seven Rishis; and Aja, Parasu, Divya and others, were the sons of 
the Manu. 

“The Surupas, Haris, Satyas, and Sudhis were the classes of gods, 
each comprising twenty-seven, in the period of Tamasa, the fourth 
Manu. Sivi was the Indra, also designated by his performance of 
a hundred sacrifices (or named Satakratu). The seven Rishis were 
Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Vanaka, and Pivara. The 
sons of Tamasa were the mighty kings Nara, Khyati, Santahaya, 
Janujangha, and others.” 

“In the fifth interval the Manu was Raivata; the Indra was vibhu : 
the classes of gods, consisting of fourteen each, were the Amitabhas, 
Abhutarajasas, Vaikunthas, and Sumedhasas; the seven Rishis were 
Hiranyaroma, Vedasri, Urdohabahu, Vedabahu, Sudhaman, Parjanya, 
and Mahamuni : the sons of Raivata were Balabandhu Susambhavya, 
Satyaka, and other valiant kings.” 

“These four Manus, Swarochisha, Auttami, Tamasa, and Raivata, 
were all descended from Priyavrata, who in consequence of propitiating 
Vishnu by his devotions, obtained these rulers of the Manwantaras 
for his posterity. 

“Chakshusha was the Manu of the sixth period in which the 
Indra was Janojava; the five classes of gods were the Adya, 


311 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


312 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prastutas, Bhavyas, Prithugas, and the magnanimous Lekhas, 
eight of each : Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttama, Madhu, 
Abhinaman, and Sahishnu were the seven sages; the kings of 
the earth, the sons of Chakshusha, were the powerful Uru, Puru, 
Satadhumna, and others.” 

“The Manu of the present is the wise lord of obsequies, the 
illustrious offspring of the sun; the deities are the Adityas, 
Vasus, and Rudras; their sovereign is Purandra : Vasistha, 
Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama, Viswamitra, and Bharadwaja 
are the seven Rishis; and the nine pious sons of Vaivaswata 
Manu are the kings Ikshwaku, Nabhaga, Dhrishta, Sanyati, 
Narishyanata Nabhanidishta, Karusha, Prishadhra, and the 
celebrated Vasumat.” 

So far the particulars of seven Manvantaras which are spoken of 
by the Vishnu Purana as the past Manwantaras. Below are given the 
particulars of other seven 1 : 

“Sanjana, the daughter of Viswakarman, was the wife of 
the Sun, and bore him three children, the Manu (Vaivaswata), 
Yama, and the goddess Yami (or the Yamuna river). Unable to 
endure the fervours of her lord, Sanjana gave him. Chhaya as 
his handmaid, and repaired to the forests to practise devout 
exercises. The Sun, supposing Chhaya to be his wife Sanjana, 
begot by her three other children, Sanaischara (Saturn), another 
Manu (Savarni), and a daughter Tapati (the Tapti river). Chhaya, 
upon one occasion, being offended with Yama, the son of Sanjana, 
denounced an imprecation upon him, and thereby revealed to 
Yama and to the Sun that she was not in truth Sanjana, the 
mother of the former. Being further informed by Chhaya that 
his wife had gone the wilderness, the Sun beheld her by the 
eye of meditation engaged in austerities, in the figure of a mare 
(in the region of Uttara Kuru). Metamorphosing himself into a 
horse, he rejoined his wife, and begot three other children, the 
two Aswins, and Revanta, and then brought Sanjana back to his 
own dwelling. To diminish his intensity, Viswakarman placed 
the luminary on his lathe to grind off some of his effulgence; 
and in this manner reduced it an eight, for more than that was 
inseparable. The parts of the divine Vaishnava slendour, residing 
in the Sun, that were filed off by Viswakarman, fell blazing down 
upon the earth, and the artist constructed of them the discuss of 
Vishnu, the trident of Siva, the weapon of the god of wealth, the 
lance of Kartikeya, and the weapons of the other gods : all these 
Viswakarman fabricated from the superfluous rays of the sun. 

1 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana pp. 266-69. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


313 


RIDDLE NO. 24 

“The son of Chhaya, who was called also a Manu was 
denominated Savarni, from being of the same caste (Savarni) as 
his elder brother, the Manu Vaivaswata. He presides over the 
ensuing or eighth Manwantara; the particulars of which, and the 
following, I will now relate. In the period in which Savarni shall be 
the Manu, the classes of the gods will be Sutapas, Amitabhas, and 
Mukhyas; twentyone of each. The seven Rishis will be Diptimat, 
Galava, Rama, Kripa, Drauni; my son Vyasa will be the sixth, 
and the seventh will be Rishyasringa. The Indra will be Bali, 
the sinless son of Virochan who through the favour of Vishnu is 
actually sovereign of part of Patala. The royal progeny of Savarni 
will be Virajas, Arvariva, Nirmoha, and others.” 

“The ninth Manu will be Daksha-Savarni. The Paras, 
Marichigarbhas, and Sudharmas will be the three classes of 
divinities, each consisting of twelve; their powerful chief will be 
the Indra, Abhuta. Savana, Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, 
Jyotishaman, and Satya will be the seven Rishis. Dhritketu, 
Driptiketu, Panchahasta, Niramaya, Prithusraya, and others will 
be the sons of the Manu.” 

“In the tenth Manwantara the Manu will be Brahma-savarni; the 
gods will be the Sudhamas, Viruddhas, and Satasankhyas; the Indra 
will be the mighty Santi; the Rishis will be Havishaman, Sukriti, 
Satya, Appammurti, Nabhaga, Apratimaujas and Satyaketu; and 
the ten sons of the Manu will be Sukshetra, Uttamaujas, Harishena 
and others.” 

“In the eleventh Manwantara the Manu will be Dharma-savarni; 
the principal classes of gods will be the Vihangama Kamagamas, 
and the Nirmanaratis, each thirty in number; of whom Vrisha will 
be the Indra : the Rishis will be Nischara, Agnitejas, Vapushaman, 
Vishnu, Aruni, Havishaman, and Anagha; the kings of the earth, 
and sons of the Manu, will be Savarga, Sarvadharma, Devanika, 
and others.” 

“In the twelfth Manwantara the son of Rudra, Savarni, will 
be the Manu : Ritudhama will be the Indra; and the Haritas, 
Lohitas : Sumanasas, and Sukrmas will be the classes of gods, 
each comprising fifteen Tapaswi, Sutapas, Tapomurti, Taporati, 
Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti and Tapodhana will be the Rishis; and 
Devavan, Upadeva, Devasreshtha and others, will be the Manu’s 
sons, and mighty monarchs on the earth.” 

“In the thirteenth Manwantara the Manu will be Rauchya; 
the classes of gods thirty-three in each will be the Sudhamanas, 
Sudharmans, and Sukarmanas, their Indra will be Divaspati; the 


313 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersin, Nishprakampa, Nirutsuka, 
Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutapas; and Chitrasena, Vichitra, and others, 
will be the kings.” 

“In the fourteenth Manwantara, Bhautya will be the Manu; Suchi, the 
Indra : the five classes of gods will be the Chakshushas, the Pavitras. 
Kanishthas, Bhrajiras, and Vavriddhas; the seven Rishis will be Agnibahu, 
Suchi, Sukra, Magadha, Gridhra, Yukta and Ajita; and the sons of the 
Manu will be Uru, Gabhira, Bradhna, and others, who will be kings, and 
will rule over the earth.” 

The scheme of Manwantaras seems to be designed to provide a governing 
body for the universe during the period of a Manwantara. Over every 
Manwantara there presides a Manu as the legislator, Deities to worship, 
seven Rishis and a King to administer the affairs. 

As the Vishnu Purana says 1 : 

“The deities of the different classes receive the sacrifices during the 
Manwantaras to which they severally belong; and the sons of the Manu 
themselves, and their descendants, are the sovereigns of the earth for the 
whole of the same term. The Manu, the seven Rishis, the gods, the sons 
of the Manu, who are kings, and Indra, are the beings who preside over 
the world during each Manwantara.” 

But the scheme of chronology called the Maha Yuga is a most perplexing 
business. 

Why Kalpa should have been divided into Maha Yugas and why a 
Maha Yuga should have been sub-divided into four Yugas, Krita, Treta, 
Dwapara and Kali is a riddle which needs explanation. It is not based 
on mythology and unlike the era it has no reference to any real or 
supposed history of the Hindus. 

In the first place why was the period covered by a Yuga so enormously 
extended as to make the whole chronoloy appear fabulous and fabricated 

In the Rig-Veda the word Yuga occurs at least 38 times. It is used in 
the sense of age, generation, yoke or tribe. In a few places it appears 
to refer to a very brief period. In many places it appears to refer to a 
very brief period and Sayana even goes so far as to render the term 
yuge yuge by pratidinam i.e. every day. 

In the next place the conception of four Yugas is associated with a 
deterioration in the moral fibre in society. This conception is well stated 
in the following extract from the Mahabharata 2 : 

“The Krita is that age in which righteousness is eternal. In the 
time of that most excellent of Yugas (everything) had been done 

1 Wilson’s Vishnu Purana pp. 269-70. 

2 Muir’s Sanskrit Text Vol. I pp. 144-146. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


315 


RIDDLE NO. 24 

(Krita) and nothing (remained) to be done. Duties did not then 
languish, nor did the people decline. Afterwards, through (the 
influence of) time, this yuga fell into a state of inferiority. In that 
age there were neither Gods, Danavas, Gahdharvas, Yakshas, 
Rakshasas, nor Pannagas; no buying or selling went on; the 
Vedas were not classed as Saman, Rich, and Yajush; no efforts 
were made by men: the fruit (of the earth was obtained) by 
their mere wish : righteousness and abandonment of the world 
(prevailed). No disease or decline of the organs of sense arose 
through the influence of the age; there was no malice, weeping, 
pride, or deceipt; no contention, and how could there be any 
lassitude ? No hatred, cruelty, fear affliction, jealousy, or envy. 
Hence the Supreme Brahma was the transcendent resort of 
those Yogins. Then Narayana the soul of all beings, was white, 
Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras possessed the 
characteristics of Krita. In that age were born creatures devoted 
to their duties. They were alike in the object of their trust, in 
observances and in their knowledge. At that period the castes, 
alike in their functions, fulfilled their duties, were unceasingly 
devoted to one deity, and used one formula (mantra), one rule 
and one rite. Though they had separate duties, they had but one 
Veda, and practised one duty. By works connected with the four 
orders, and dependent on conjunctures of time, but unaffected 
by desire, or (hope of) reward, they attained to supreme felicity. 
This complete and eternal righteousness of the four castes during 
the Krita was marked by the character of that age and sought 
after union with the supreme soul. The Krita age was free 
from the three qualities. Understand now the Treta, in which 
sacrifice commenced, righteousness decreased by a fourth, Vishnu 
became red; and men adhered to truth, and were devoted to a 
righteousness dependent on ceremonies. Then sacrifices prevailed, 
with holy acts and a variety of rites. In the Treta men acted with 
an object in view, seeking after reward for their rites and their 
fights, and no longer disposed to austerities and to liberality 
from (a simple feeling of) duty. In this age, however, they were 
devoted to their own duties, and to religious ceremonies. In the 
Dwapara age righteousness was diminished by two quarters, 
Vishnu became yellow, and the Veda fourfold. Some studied four 
Vedas, others three, others two, others one, and some none at all. 
The scriptures being thus divided, ceremonies were celebrated 
in a great variety of ways; and the people being occupied with 
austerity and the bestowal of gifts; became full of passion (rajasi). 
Owing to ignorance of the one Veda, Vedas were multiplied. And 
now from the decline of goodness (Sattva) few only adhered to 


315 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

truth. When men had fallen away from goodness, many diseases, 
desires and calamities, caused by destiny, assailed them, by which 
they were severely afflicted, and driven to practice austerities. 
Others desiring enjoyment and heavenly bliss, offered sacrifices. 

Thus, when they had reached the Dwapara, men declined through 
unrighteousness. In the Kali righteousness remained to the extent 
of one fourth only. Arrived in that age of darkness, Vishnu became 
black; practices enjoined by the Vedas, works of righteousness, 
and rites of sacrifice, ceased. Calamities, diseases, fatigue, faults, 
such as anger, etc., distresses, anxiety, hunger, fear, prevailed. As 
the ages revolve, righteousness again declines. When this takes 
places the people also decline. When they decay, the impulses 
which actuate them also decay. The practices generated by this 
declension of the Yugas frustrate men’s aims. Such is the Kali 
Yuga which has existed for a short time. Those who are long lived 
act in conformity with the character of the age.” 

This is undoubtedly very strange. There is reference to these terms 
in the ancient vedic literature. The words Krita, Treta, Dwapara and 
Askanda occur in the Taittiriya Sanhita and in the Vajasaneyi Sanhita, 
in the Aiteriya Brahmana and also in the Satapatha Brahmana. The 
Satapatha Brahmana refers “to Krita as one who takes advantage of 
mistakes in the game; to the Treta as one who plays on a regular plan; 
to the Dwapara as one who plans to over reach his fellow player to 
Askanda a post of the gaming room”. In the Aiteriya Brahmana and 
the Taiteriya Brahmana the word Kali is used in place of Askanda. 
The Taiteriya Brahmana speaks of the Krita as the master of the 
gaming hall, to the Treta as one who takes advantage of mistakes, 
to the Dwapara as one who sits outside, to the Kali as one who is 
like a post of the gaming house i.e. never leaves it. The Aiteriya 
Brahmana says : 

There is every success to be hoped; for the unluckiest die, the 
Kali is lying, two others are slowly moving and half fallen, but the 
luckiest, the Krita, is in full motion.” It is clear that in all these 
places the words have no other meaning than that of throws or dice 
in gambling. 

The sense in which Manu uses these terms may also be noted. 
He says 1 

“The Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kaliyugas are all modes of a 
King’s action; for a King is called a Yuga; while asleep he is Kali; 
waking he is the Dwapra age; he is intent upon action he is Treta, 
moving about he is Krita.” 


Manu IX 301-302. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


317 


RIDDLE NO. 24 317 

Comparing Manu with his predecessors one has to admit that a definite 
change in the connotation of these words have taken place-words which 
formed part of the gamblers jargon have become terms of Politics having 
reference to the readiness of the King to do his duty and making a 
distinction between various types of kings, those who are active, those 
who are intent on action, those who are awake and those who are sleeping 
i.e. allowing society to go to dogs. 

The question is what are the circumstances that forced the Brahmins 
to invent the theory of Kali Yuga ? Why did the Brahmins make Kali 
Yuga synonymous with the degraded state of Society ? Why Manu calls 
a sleeping ruler King Kali ? Who was the King ruling in Manu’s time ? 
Why does he call him a sleeping King ? These are some of the riddles 
which the theory of Kali Yuga gives rise to. 

There are other riddles besides these which a close examination of 
the Kali Yuga theory presents us with. When does the Kali age actually 
commence ? 

There are various theories about the precise date when the Kali Yuga 
began. The Puranas have given two dates. Some say that it commenced 
about the beginning of the XIV century B.C. Others say that it began 
on the 18th February 3102 B.C. a date on which the war between the 
Kauravas and Pandavas is alleged to have been found. As pointed out by 
Prof. Iyengar there is no evidence to prove that the Kali era was used 
earlier than the VII century A.D. anywhere in India. It occurs for the 
first time in an inscription belonging to the reign of Pulakeshi II who 
ruled at Badami between 610 and 642 A.D. It records two dates the Saka 
date 556 and the Kali date 3735. These dates adopt 3102 B.C. as the 
starting date of Kali Yuga. This is wrong. The date 3102 B.C. is neither 
the date of the Mahabharata war nor is the date of the commencement 
of the Kali Yuga. Mr. Kane has conclusively proved. According to the 
most positive statements regarding the king of different dynasties that 
have ruled from Parikshit the son of the Pandavas the precise date of 
the Mahabharata War was 1263 B.C. It cannot be 3102 B.C. Mr. Kane 
has also shown that the date 3102 B.C. stands for the beginning of the 
Kalpa and not for the beginning of Kali and that the linking up of Kali 
with the date 3102 B.C. instead of with the Kalpa was an error due to 
a misreading or a wrong transcription the term Kalpadi into Kalyadi. 
There is thus no precise date which the Brahmins can give for the 
commencement of the Kali Age. That there should be precise beginning 
which can be assigned to so remarkable an event is a riddle. 

But there are other riddles which may be mentioned. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


318 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There are two dogmas associated with the Kali Age. It is strongly held by 
the Brahmans that in the Kali Age there are only two Varnas — the first and 
the last — the Brahmins and the Shudras. The two middle ones Kshatriyas 
and Vaishyas they say are non-existent. What is the basis of this dogma ? 
What does this dogma mean ? Does this mean that these Varnas were lost 
to Brahmanism or does this mean that they ceased to exist ? 

Which is the period of India’s history which in fact accords with this dogma ? 

Does this mean that the loss of these two Varnas to Brahmanism marks 
the beginning of Kali Yuga ? 

The second dogma associated with the theory of the Kali Yuga is called Kali 
Varjya — which means customs and usages which are not to be observed in the 
Kali Age. They are scattered in the different Puranas. But the Adityapurana 
has modified them and brought them in one place. The practices which come 
under Kali Varjya are given below 1 : 

1. To appoint the husband’s brother for procreating a son on a widow 2 . 

“2. The remarriage of a (married) girl (whose marriage is not consummated) 
and of one (whose marriage was consummated) to another husband (after the 
death of the first).” 3 

3. 4 The marriage with girls of different Varna among persons of the three 
twice-born classes.” 5 

“4. 6 The killing even in a straight fight of Brahmanas that have become 
desperadoes. 7 ” 

“5. The acceptance (for all ordinary intercourse such as eating with him) 
of a twice-born person who is in the habit of voyaging over the sea in a ship, 
even after he has undergone a prayascitta 8 . 


1 Kali Varjya, P. V. Kane, pp. 8-16. 

2 This refers to the practice of niyoga, which was allowed by Gautama (18-9-14, Narada stripuma 
verse 58), Yajnavalkya (I. 68-69) though it was condemned by Manu (9.64-68), and Brahaspati. 

3 This refers to re-marriage of widows. Narada (stripumsa, verses 98-100) allowed re-marriage of 
even Brahmana widows in certain calamities and Parasara did the same while Vasistha (17.74) and 
Baudhayana-dharma-sutra (IV. 1.18) allow the re-marriage of a girl whose first marriage was not 
consummated. 

The passage is read ‘balikaksatayonysca’ also; in that case it will mean only ‘a married girl whose 
marriage has not been consummated’ while the other reading refers to two kinds of widows (whose 
marriage is consummated and whose marriage is not so). 

4 Kali Varjya, P. V. Kane, pp. 8-16. 

5 Most ancient smritis allowed anuloma marriages e.g. Baudhayanadharmasutra I. 8. 2-5, Vashishtha 
I. 24-27, Manu III 14-19, Yajnavalkya 1. 56-57. 

6 Kali Varjya, P. V. Kane, pp. 8-16. 

7 This is a subject which very much exercised the minds of writers on dharma; Manu (8.350.351) 
Vishnu V. 180-80, Vashishtha (III. 15-18) permit the killing of an atatayibrahmans, while Sumantu 
says ‘there is no sin in killing an attatayin, except a brahmana and a cow’, and so forbids the killing 
even of an atatayi-brahmana. Vide Mitaksara on Yaj. II. 21 for a discussion on this. 

8 Baudhayana-dharmasutra 1.1.20 mentions voyage as a practice peculiar to Brahmanas of Northern 
India and condemns it, by placing it first among Pataniyas (II. 1.41). Some writers say that prohibition 
applies to one who often crosses the sea as the compound ‘nauyathu’ shows. Ausanasa says that 
‘samudraga’ is patita (p. 525, of Jivananada). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


319 


RIDDLE NO. 24 319 


“6. The initiation for a sattra. 

“7. The taking a Kamandalu (a jar for water 1 )” 

“8. Starting on the Great Journey.” 2 

“9. The killing of a cow in the sacrifice called Gomedha;” 3 

“10. The partaking of wine even in the Srautmani sacrifice.” 4 

11-12. Licking the ladle (sruc) after the Agnihotra Homa in order to take off 
the remains of the offerings and using the ladle, in the agnihotra afterwards 
when it has been so licked.” 5 

“13. Entering into the stage of forest hermit as laid down in sastras about it.” 6 

“14. Lessening the periods of impurity (due to death and birth) in accordance 
with the conduct and vedic learning of a man.” 7 

“15. Prescribing death as the penance (Prayascitta) for Brahmanas.” 8 

“16. Explanation (by secretly performed Prayascittas) of the mortal sins other 
than theft (of gold) and the sin of contact (with those guilty of Mahapatakas).” 9 

“17. The act of offering with Mantras animal flesh to the bridegroom, the 
guest, and the pitrs.” 10 

1 Baudhayana-dharmasutra (1.3-4) prescribes among the observances of Snatakas (those who have finished 
their study and have married or are about to marry) that they should carry a (earthen or wooden) pot filled 
with water Vashishtha 12.14 and Manu 4.36 and Yaj. I 132 also do the same. The Madanaparijata (pp. 15- 
16) while ‘quoting some of these verses says that ‘Kamandaluvidharana’ refers to perpetual studenthood, but 
that is not correct, since in the Naradiya-purana quoted above note 5,) the two are separately mentioned 
as forbidden. 

2 This refers to the practice of starting towards the north-east in the case of those who had become forest- 
dwellers (vide Manu VI. 31 and Yaj. 111. 55) and the practice of old men killing themselves by starting on 
the great journey till the body falls, by falling from a percipice or by entering the Ganges at a holy place like 
Prayaga or by entering fire. Vide Apararka p. 536 where the Smriti passages allowing this are quoted. Note 
that Sudraka, the reputed Author of the Mreccchakatika, is said to have entered fire and vide Raghuvamsa 
8,94; Atri, verses 218-219 which are quoted even by Medhatithi on Manu V. 88; E. instances of kings throwing 
themselves into the Ganges at Prayaga. 

3 Vide Sankhayana-srauta 14.15.1, Katyayanasrauta XXII, 11.3-4 and Manu XI. 74. 

4 This is a sacrifice principally to Sutraman (i.e. Indra) in which three cups of wine were offered to the 
Asvins, Sarasvati and Indra and a Brahmana had to be hired for drinking the remnants of wine offered. 
Vide Taittiriya — Brahmana 1. 8.6.2, Sankhayana-Srauta 15.15-1-14 and Sahara on Purva mimansa-sutra 
111. 5. 14-15. 

5 Vide Tai-Br. II. 1.4. and Satyasadhastrauta for this. 

6 Ap. Dharma-sutra. 11. 9.21. 18. II. 9. 23.2, Manu VI. 1-32, Vashishtha IX. I-II contain elaborate rules 
about this stage. 

7 Vide Parasara quoted above saying that a Brahmana who is endowed with both vedic learning and 
agnihotra has to observe Assucha (mourning) only for one day and he who is only learned has to observe it 
for three days. Vide also Brahaspati quoted by Haradatta on Gautama 14.1. In Kali a flat rule of ten days for 
all came to be prescribed. Visvarupa on Yaj. III. 30 has an eleborate discussion on this text and ultimately 
gets rid of it by saying that it is only an arthavada meant to praise the absence of greed and presence of 
excellent conduct. It is not quite unreasonable to infer that if Visvarupa had attached any value to or known 
these verses on Kalivarjya he would not have failed to make use of them for explaining away Parasara. 

8 Manu (II. 89 and 146) says that for wilfully killing a Brahmana and drinking wine the Prayachitta is 
death Gautama 21, 7 says-the same, following Manu. 

9 Manu XI, 54 enumerates contact with those guilty of the four mahapataka, as a fifth mahapataka. 
Gautama 24 and Vashishtha 25 prescribe secret prayascittas even for mahapatakas like Brahmahatya. This 
rule says that there are no secret prayascittas in Kali for Brahmahatya, or drinking wine and for incest. 
Vide Apararka p. 1212 for rules as to who was entitled to secret prayascittas. 

10 Madhuparka was offered to honoured guests among whom the bridegroom was included. Vide Gautama 
V, 25-35, Yaj. 1. 109. The offering of flesh of various animals in Sraddha was supposed to conduce to the 
enjoyment of pitrs. Vide Yaj. I. 258-260, Manu III. 123. According to Asvalayana Grhyasutra 1. 24-26 
Madhuparka could not be offered without flesh. Vide Vashishtha IV. 5-6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


320 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


“18. ir The acceptance as sons of those other than the aurasa 

(natural) and adopted sons.” 2 

“19. Ordinary intercourse with those who incurred the sin of (having 
intercourse with) women of higher castes, even after they had undergone 
the Prayascitta for such sin.” 3 

“20. The abandonment of the wife of an elderly person (or of one who 
is entitled to respect) when she has had intercourse with one with whom 
it is severely condemned.” 4 

“21. 5 ‘Killing oneself for the sake of another.” 6 

“22. Giving up food left after one has partaken of it.” 7 

“23. Resolve to worship a particular idol for life (in return for payment)” 8 . 

“24. Touching the bodies of persons who are in impurity due to death 
after the charred bones are collected” 9 . 

“25. The actual slaughter by Brahmanas of the sacrificial animal.” 

“26. 10 Sale of the Soma plant by Brahamanas.” 1 11 

“27. Securing food even from a Shudra when a Brahamana has had no 
food for six times of meals (i.e. for three days).” 12 

“28. Permission to (a Brahamana) householder to take cooked food 
from Shudras if they are his dasas, cowherds, hereditary friends, persons 
cultivating his land on an agreement to pay part of the produce.” 13 


1 Kane’s Kalivarjya pp. 8-16. 

2 Manu 9. 165-80, Yaj. II. 128-132 and others speak of twelve kinds of sons. 

3 Gautama (IV. 20 and 22-23) severely condemns the intercourse of men of lower castes with women of 
higher castes and holds that their progeny is dharmahina. 

4 Vashishtha 21.10 says ‘four kinds of women viz. one who has intercourse with a pupil or with the 
husband’s teacher, or one who kills her husband or commits adultery with a man or degraded caste, should 
be abandoned. 

Yaj. (III. 296-297) is against and says that even such women should be kept, near the house and given 
starving maintenance. Vide Atri V. 1-5. 

5 Kane’s Kalivarjya pp. 8-12. 

6 The Smritis say that a man should run the risk of life for cows and Brahmanas; vide Manu XI. 79 
and Vishnu III. 45. 

7 Vashishtha 14.20-21 says that food left after one has partaken of it from what was taken out for oneself 
or food touched by such leaving should not be eaten. Or this may mean ‘giving to another the leavings of 
food’: some smritis permit giving Ucchista to Shudras and the like, which is forbidden here. Vide Gautama 
X. 61 and Manu X. 125. 

8 Manu III. 152 makes a Brahmana performing worship for money unfit for invitation in sraddha and 
‘devakrtya’. 

9 Collection of charred bones took place on the fourth day after cremation. Vishnu 19, 10-12; Vaikhanasa- 
Smartasutra V. 7; Samvarta, verses 38-39. 

10 Kane’s Kalivarjya p. 13. 

11 Katyayana Srauta (VII. 6.2-4) says that Soma should be purchased from a Brahmana of the Kautsa 
gotra or a Shudra; but Manu X. 88 forbids a Brahmana the sale of Soma along with many other things 
even though living by agriculture and the avocations of a Vaishya and Manu (III. 158 and 170) condemns a 
Brahmana who sells Soma as unfit for being invited at a Sraddha. 

12 Manu XI. 16 allows a Brahmana who has had no food for three-days to take food for one day from one 
whose actions are low and so does Yaj. III. 43. if we read ‘hinakarmana’ it would mean ‘even by doing what 
is low’ (i.e. by begging or theft or by such actions as are described in Narada, abhyupetya-susrusa, w. 5-7). 

13 Manu smritis allow a Brahmana to have cooked food from Shudras if they are that Brahmana’s dasas, 
barber, cowherd, or cultivator of his land, hereditary, friends. Vide Gautama 17.6, Manu IV. 253, Yaj. 1. 166 
(where the first half is the same as here). Angiras 120, Parasara XI. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


321 


RIDDLE NO. 24 321 

“29. 'Going on a very distant pilgrimage.” 

“30. Behaviour of a pupil towards his teacher’s wife as towards a teacher 
that is declared in smrtis” 2 . 

“31. The maintenance by Brahamanas in adversity (by following unworthy 
avocations) and the mode of livelihood in which a Brahmana does not care 
to accumulate for tomorrow.” 3 

“32. 4 The acceptance of aranis (two wooden blocks for producing fire) by 
Brahmanas (in the Homa at the time of jatakarma) in order that all the 
ceremonies for the child from jatakarma to his marriage may be performed 
therein.” 5 

“33. Constant journeys by Brahamanas.” 

“34. Blowing of fire with the mouth (i.e. without employing a bamboo 
dhamni.” 6 

“35. Allowing women who have become polluted by rape, &c, to freely 
mix in the caste (when they have performed prayascitta) as declared in 
the sastric texts.” 7 

“36. s Begging of food by a sannayasin from persons of all Varnas 
(including sudra).” 9 

“37. To wait (i.e. not to use) for ten days water that has recently been 
dug in the ground.” 

“38. Giving fee to the teacher as demanded by him (at the end of study) 
according to the rules laid down in the sastra.” 10 

“39. “The employment of sudras as cook for Brahmanas and the rest.” 12 

“40. Suicide of old people by calling from a precipice or into fire.” 13 

1 Kane’s Kalivarjya p. 14. 

2 Manu 11. 210 prescribes that the wives of one’s teacher, if they are of the same Varna as the teacher, 
are to be honoured like the teacher and if they are not of the same Varna then by rising to receive them 
and by saluting them. 

3 Gautama VII. 1-7, Ap. Dh. S. I. 7.20. 11-17, 21. 4, Yaj. III. 35.44 and others allow a Brahmana to live 
by the occupations of a Kshatriya or Vaishya in adversity. Manu IV. 7 places before a Brahmana the ideal 
that he should not accumulate more corn than what is required for three days or for the current day. Both 
these extremes are forbidden here. 

4 Kane’s Kalivarjya p. 14. 

5 The Samsakarya-kaustubha quotes a grhyaphrisista for this. 

6 In Manu IV. 53 also the same prohibition occurs. In Vedic passages blowing at the fire with breath 
from the mouth direct was allowed. Vide Haradatta on Ap. Dh. S. 1.5.15.20. 

7 Even so late a smrti a Devala’s (verse 47) allows a woman raped even by Mlecchas to become pure after 
prayaschitta for three days. The Adityapurana appears to be most harsh on innocent and unfortunate women. 

8 Kane’s Kalivarjya p. 15. 

9 Baudhayana-dharma-sutra II. 10 allows a Sannyasin to beg food from all Varnas, while Manu (VI. 43) 
and Yaj. 111. 59 prescribe that he should beg in a village in the evening and Vashishtha also (X. 7) requires 
him to beg at seven houses not selected beforehand. But Vasishta says a little later on (X. 24) that he should 
subsist on what he would get at the houses of Brahmanas. 

10 Yaj. I. 51 prescribes that a student after finishing Vedic study and performing vratas should give fees 
to the teacher as the latter desires and should perform the ceremonial bath. 

11 Kane’s Kalivarjya p. 15. 

12 The Apastamba-dharmasutra II. 2.3.4 allowed sudras to be cooks for the three higher Varnas under 
the supervision of aryas. 

13 Vide Item No. 8 above. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


322 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“41. Performing Acamana by respectable people in water that would 
remain even after a cow has drunk it to its heart’s content.” 1 2 3 

“42. Fining witnesses who depose to a dispute between father and son.” 12 

“43. Sannyasin should stay where he happened to, be in the evening.” 13 
These are the Kali Varjyas set out in the adityapurana. 

The strange thing about this code of Kali Varjya is that its significance 
has not been fully appreciated, it is simply referred to as a list of things 
forbidden in the Kali Yuga. But there is more than this behind this list 
of don’ts. People are no doubt forbidden to follow the practices listed 
in the Kali Varjya Code. The question however is : Are these practices 
condemned as being immoral, sinful or otherwise harmful to society ? 
The answer is no. One likes to know why these practices if they are 
forbidden are not condemned ? Herein lies the riddle of the Kali Varjya 
Code. This technique of forbidding a practice without condemning it stands 
in utter contrast with the procedure followed in earlier ages. To take 
only one illustration. The Apastamba Dharma Sutra forbids the practice 
of giving all property to the eldest son. But he condemns it. Why did 
the Brahmins invent this new technics forbid but not condemn ? There 
must be some special reason for this departure. What is that reason ? 

• • 


1 Vashishtha III. 35 says that water accumulated in a hole on the ground would be fit for acamana 
if it is as much as would quench the thirst of a cow. Vide Manu V. 128 and Yaj I. 192. 

2 Yaj. II. 239 prescribes a fine of three panas for witnesses in disputes between father and son. 

3 This may also mean ‘a sannyasin should be at the houses in the evening’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


323 


Appendix I 

THE RIDDLE OF RAMA AND 
KRISHNA 


Rama is the hero of the Ramayana whose author is Valmiki. The 
story of the Ramayana is a very short one. Besides it is simple and in 
itself there is nothing sensational about it. 

Rama is the son of Dasharatha the king of Ayodhya the modern Benares. 
Dasharatha had three wives, Kausalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra besides 
several hundred concubines. Kaikeyi had married Dasharatha on terms 
which were at the time of marriage unspecified and which Dasharatha 
was bound to fulfil whenever he was called upon by Kaikeyi to do so. 
Dasharatha was childless for a long time. An heir to the throne was 
ardently desired by him. Seeing that there was no hope of his begetting 
a son on any of his three wives he decided to perform a Putreshti Yajna 
and called the sage Shrung at the sacrifice who prepared pindas and gave 
the three wives of Dasharatha to eat them. After they ate the pindas 
three wives became pregnant and gave birth to sons. Kausalya gave birth 
to Rama, Kaikeyi gave birth to Bharata and Sumitra gave birth to two 
sons Laxman and Satrughana. In due course Rama was married to Sita. 
When Rama came of age, Dasharatha thought of resigning the throne in 
favour of Rama and retiring from kingship. While this was being settled 
Kaikeyi raised the question of rendering her satisfaction of the terms on 
which she had married Dasharatha. On being asked to state her terms 
she demanded that her son Bharata should be installed on the throne 
in preference to Rama and Rama should live in forest for 12 years. 
Dasharatha with great reluctance agreed. Bharata became king of Ayodhya 
and Rama accompanied by his wife Sita and his step brother Laxman went 
to live in the forest. While the three living in the forest Ravana the king 
of Lanka kidnapped Sita and took her away and kept her in his palace 

This is a 49-page typed copy placed in a well-bound file along with the 
MS of ‘Symbols of Hinduism’. This riddle does not find place in the 
original Table of Contents. Hence this is included as an Appendix to 
this part. — Ed. 


Note: Government does not concur with the views expressed in this Chapter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

intending to make her one of his wives. Rama and Laxman then started 
search of Sita. On the way they meet Sugriva and Hanuman two leading 
personages of the Vanara (monkey) race and form friendship with them. 
With their help the place of the abduction was located and with their 
help they marched on Lanka, defeated Ravana in the battle and rescued 
Sita. Rama returns with Laxman and Sita to Ayodhya. By that time 
twelve years had elapsed and the term prescribed by Kaikeyi was fulfilled 
with the result that Bharata gave up the throne and in his place Rama 
became the king of Ayodhya. 

Such is in brief the outline of the story of the Ramayana as told by 
Valmiki. 

There is nothing in this story to make Rama the object of worship. 
He is only a dutiful son. But Valmiki saw something extraordinary in 
Rama and that is why he undertook to compose the Ramayana. Valmiki 
asked Narada the following question 1 : 

“Tell me Oh ! Narada, who is the most accomplished man on earth at 
the present time ?” 

and then goes on to elaborate what he means by accomplished man. 
He defines his accomplished man as : 

“Powerful, one who knows the secret of religion, one who knows gratitude, 
truthful, one who is ready to sacrifice his self interest even when in distress 
to fulfil a religious vow, virtuous in his conduct, eager to safeguard the 
interests of all, strong pleasing in appearance with power of self-control, 
able to subdue anger, illustrious, with no jealousy for the prosperity of 
others, and in war able to strike terror in the hearts of Gods.” 

Narada then asks for time to consider and after mature deliberation 
tells him that the only person who can be said to possess these virtues 
is Rama, the son of Dasharatha. 

It is because of his virtues that Rama has come to be deified. 

But is Rama a worthy personality of deification ? Let those who accept 
him an object worthy of worship as a God consider the following facts. 

Rama’s birth is miraculous and it may be that the suggestion that he 
was born from a pinda prepared by the sage Shrung is an allegorical 
glass to cover the naked truth that he was begotten upon Kausalya by 
the sage Shrung although the two did not stand in the relationship of 
husband and wife. In any case his birth if not disreputable in its origin 
is certainly unnatural. 

There are other incidents connected with the birth of Rama the 
unsavory character of which it will be difficult to deny. 

1 Balakanda Sarga I. slokas 1-5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


325 


APPENDIX I 325 

Valmiki starts his Ramayana by emphasizing the fact that Rama 
is an Avatar of Vishnu and it is Vishnu who agreed to take birth as 
Rama and be the son of Dasharatha. The God Brahma came to know 
of this and felt that in order that this Rama Avatar of Vishnu be a 
complete success arrangement shall be made that Rama shall have 
powerful associates to help him and cooperate with him. There were 
none such existing then. 

The Gods agreed to carry out the command of Brahma and engaged 
themselves in wholesale acts of fornication not only against Apsaras 
who were prostitutes not only against the unmarried daughters of 
Yakshas and Nagas but also against the lawfully wedded wives of 
Ruksha, Vidhyadhar, Gandharvas, Kinnars and Vanaras and produced 
the Vanaras who became the associates of Rama. 

Rama’s birth is thus accompanied by general debauchery if not in 
his case certainly in the case of his associates. His marriage to Sita 
is not above comment. According to Buddha Ramayana, Sita was the 
sister of Rama, both were the children of Dasharatha. The Ramayana 
of Valmiki does not agree with the relationship mentioned in Buddha 
Ramayana. According to Valmiki Sita was the daughter of the king 
Janaka of Videha and therefore not a sister of Rama. This is not 
convincing for even according to Valmiki she is not the natural born 
daughter of Janaka but a child found by a farmer in his field while 
ploughing it and presented by him to king Janaka and brought up by 
Janaka. It was therefore in a superficial sense that Sita could be said 
to be the daughter of Janaka. The story in the Buddha Ramayana is 
natural and not inconsistent with the Aryan rules 1 of marriage. If the 
story is true, then Rama’s marriage to Sita is no ideal to be copied. 
In another sense Rama’s marriage was not an ideal marriage which 
could be copied. One of the virtues ascribed to Rama is that he was 
monogamous. It is difficult to understand how such a notion could 
have become common. For it has no foundation in fact. Even Valmiki 
refers 2 to the many wives of Rama. These were of course in addition 
to his many concubines. In this he was the true son of his nominal 
father Dasharatha who had not only the three wives referred to above 
but many others. 

Let us next consider his character as an individual and as a king. 

In speaking of him as an individual I will refer to only two incidents 
one relating to his treatment of Vali and other relating to his treatment 
of his own wife Sita. First let us consider the incident of Vali. 

1 Among the Aryans marriages between brothers and sisters were allowed. 

2 Ayodhyakanda Sarga VIII sloka 12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


326 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vali and Sugriva were two brothers. They belonged to the Vanar race 
and came from a ruling family which had its own kingdom the capital 
of which was Kishkindha. At the time when Sita was kidnapped by 
Ravana, Vali was reigning at Kishkindha. While Vali was on the throne 
he was engaged in a war with a Rakshasa by name Mayavi. In the 
personal combat between the two Mayavi ran for his life. Both Vali and 
Sugriva pursued him. Mayavi entered into a deep cavity in the earth, 
Vali asked Sugriva to wait at the mouth of the cavity and himself went 
inside. After sometime a flood of blood came from inside the cavity. 
Sugriva concluded that Vali must have been killed by Mayavi and came 
to Kishkindha and got himself declared king in place of Vali and made 
Hanuman his Prime Minister. 

As a matter of fact, Vali was not killed. It was Mayavi who was killed 
by Vali. Vali came out of the cavity but did not find Sugriva there. He 
proceeded to Kishkindha and to his great surprise he found that Sugriva 
had proclaimed himself king. Vali naturally became enraged at this act 
of treachery on the part of his brother Sugriva and he had good ground 
to be. Sugriva should have ascertained, should not merely have assumed 
that Vali was dead. Secondly Vali had a son by name Angad whom 
Sugriva should have made the king as the legitimate heir of Vali. He 
did neither of the two things. His was a clear case of usurpation. Vali 
drove out Sugriva and took back the throne. The two brothers became 
mortal enemies. 

This occurred just after Ravana had kidnapped Sita. Rama and Laxman 
were wandering in search of her. Sugriva and Hanuman were wandering 
in search of friends who could help them to regain the throne from Vali. 
The two parties met quite accidentally. After informing each other of their 
difficulties a compact was arrived at between the two. It was agreed that 
Rama should help Sugriva to kill Vali and to establish him on the throne 
of Kishkindha. On the part of Sugriva and Hanuman it was agreed that 
they should help Rama to regain Sita. To enable Rama to fulfil his part 
of the compact it was planned that Sugriva should wear a garland in his 
neck as to be easily distinguishable to Rama from Vali and that while the 
dual was going on Rama should conceal himself behind a tree and then 
shoot an arrow at Vali and kill him. Accordingly a dual was arranged, 
Sugriva with a garland in his neck and while the daul was on, Rama 
standing behind a tree shot Vali with his arrow and opened the way to 
Sugriva to be the king of Kishkindha. This murder of Vali is the greatest 
blot on the character of Rama. It was a crime which was thoroughly 
unprovoked, for Vali had no quarrel with Rama. It was most cowardly 
act for Vali was unarmed. It was a planned and premeditated murder. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


327 


APPENDIX I 327 

Consider his treatment of his own wife Sita. With the army collected 
for him by Sugriva and Hanuman, Rama invades Lanka. There too he 
plays the same mean part as he did as between the two brothers Vali 
and Sugriva. He takes the help of Bibhishana the brother of Ravana 
promising him to kill Ravana and his son and place him on the vacant 
throne. Rama kills Ravana and also his son Indrajit. The first thing 
Rama does after the close of the fight is to give a decent burial to the 
dead body of Ravana. Thereafter he interests himself in the coronation of 
Bibhishana and it is after the coronation is over that he sends Hanuman 
to Sita and that took to inform her that he, Laxman and Sugriva are 
hale and hearty and that they have killed Ravana. 

The first thing he should have done after disposing of Ravana was 
to have gone to Sita. He does not do so. He finds more interest in the 
coronation than in Sita. Even when the coronation is over he does not 
go himself but sends Hanuman. And what is the message he sends ? He 
does not ask Hanuman to bring her. He asks him to inform her that he 
is hale and hearty. It is Sita who expresses to Hanuman her desire to 
see Rama, Rama does not go to Sita his own wife who was kidnapped 
and confined by Ravana for more than 10 months. Sita is brought to 
him and what does Rama say to Sita when he sees her ? It would be 
difficult to believe any man with ordinary human kindness could address 
to his wife in such dire distress as Rama did to Sita when he met her 
in Lanka if there was not the direct authority of Valmiki. This is how 
Rama addressed her 1 : 

“I have got you as a prize in a war after conquering my enemy your 
captor. I have recovered my honour and punished my enemy. People have 
witnessed my military prowess and I am glad my labours have been 
rewarded. I came here to kill Ravana and wash off the dishonour. I did 
not take this trouble for your sake.” 

Could there be anything more cruel than this conduct of Rama towards 
Sita ? He does not stop there. He proceeded to tell her : 

“I suspect your conduct. You must have been spoiled by Ravana. Your 
very sight is revolting to me. On you daughter of Janaka, I allow you to 
go anywhere you like. I have nothing to do with you. I conquerred you 
back and I am content for that was my object. I cannot think that Ravana 
would have failed to enjoy a woman as beautiful as you are.” 

Quite naturally Sita calls Rama low and mean and tells him quite 
plainly that she would have committed suicide and saved him all this 
trouble if when Hanuman first came he had sent her a message that 
he had abandoned her on the ground that she was kidnapped. To, give 

1 Yudhakanda Sarga 115 slokas 1-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

him no excuse Sita undertakes to prove her purity. She enters the 
fire and comes out unscathed. The Gods satisfied with this evidence 
proclaim that she is pure. It is then that Rama agrees to take her 
back to Ayodhya. 

And what does he do with her when he brings her back to Ayodhya. 
Of course, he became king and she became queen. But while Rama 
remained king, Sita ceased to be a queen very soon. This incident 
reflects great infamy upon Rama. It is recorded by Valmiki in his 
Ramayana that some days after the coronation of Rama and Sita as 
king and queen Sita conceived. Seeing that she was carrying some 
residents of evil disposition began to calumniate Sita suggesting that 
she must have conceived from Ravana while she was in Lanka and 
blaming Rama for taking such a woman back as his wife. This malicious 
gossip in the town was reported by Bhadra, the Court joker to Rama. 
Rama evidently was stung by this calumny. He was overwhelmed with 
a sense of disgrace. This is quite natural. What is quite unnatural is 
the means he adopts of getting rid of this disgrace. To get rid of this 
disgrace he takes the shortest cut and the swiftest means — namely to 
abandon her, a woman in a somewhat advanced state of pregnancy in 
a jungle, without friends, without provision, without even notice in a 
most treacherous manner. There is no doubt that the idea of abandoning 
Sita was not sudden and had not occurred to Rama on the spur of the 
moment. The genesis of the idea the developing of it and the plan of 
executing are worth some detailed mention. When Bhadra reports to 
him the gossip about Sita which had spread in the town Rama calls 
his brothers and tells them his feelings. He tells them Sita’s purity 
and chastity was proved in Lanka, that Gods had vouched for it and 
that he absolutely believed in her innocence, purity and chastity. “All 
the same the public are calumniating Sita and are blaming me and 
putting me to shame. No one can tolerate such disgrace. Honour is a 
great asset, Gods as well as great men strive to maintain it in tact. 
I cannot bear this dishonour and disgrace. To save myself from such 
dishonour and disgrace I shall be ready even to abandon you. Don’t 
think I shall hesitate to abandon Sita.” 

This shows that he had made up his mind to abandon Sita as the 
easiest way of saving himself from public calumny without waiting to 
consider whether the way was fair or foul. The life of Sita simply did 
not count. What counted was his own personal name and fame. He of 
course does not take the manly course of stopping this gossip, which 
as a king he could do and which as a husband who was convinced of 
his wife’s innocence he was bound to it. He yielded to the public gossip 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


329 


APPENDIX I 329 

and there are not wanting Hindus who use this as ground to prove that 
Rama was a democratic king when others could equally well say that he 
was a weak and cowardly monarch : Be that as it may that diabolical 
plan of saving his name and his fame he discloses to his brothers but 
not to Sita the only person who was affected by it and the only person 
who was entitled to have notice of it. But she is kept entirely in the 
dark. Rama keeps it away from Sita as a closely guarded secret and was 
waiting for an opportunity to put his plan into action. Eventually the 
cruel fate of Sita gives him the opportunity he was waiting for. Women 
who are carrying exhibit all sorts of cravings for all sorts of things. 
Rama knew of this. So one day he asked Sita if there was anything 
for which she felt a craving. She said yes. Rama said what was it. She 
replied that she would like to live in the vicinity of the Ashrama of sage 
on the bank of the river Ganges and live on fruits and roots at least 
for one night. Rama simply jumped at the suggestion of Sita and said 
“Be easy my dear I shall see that you are sent there tomorrow”. Sita 
treats this as an honest promise by a loving husband. But what does 
Rama do ? He thinks it is a good opportunity for carrying through his 
plan of abandoning Sita. Accordingly he called his brothers to a secret 
conference and disclosed to them his determination to use this desire 
of Sita as an opportunity to carry out his plan of abandonment of Sita. 
He tells his brothers not to intercede on behalf of Sita, and warns them 
that if they came in his way he would look upon them as his enemies. 
Then he tells Laxman to take Sita in a chariot next day to the Ashram 
in the jungle on the bank of the river Ganges and to abandon her there. 
Laxman did not know how he could muster courage to tell Sita what 
was decided about Sita by Rama. Sensing his difficulty Rama informs 
Laxman that Sita had already expressed her desire to spend some time 
in the vicinity of an Ashrama on the bank of the river and eased the 
mind of Laxman. This confabulation took place at night. Next morning 
Laxman asked Sumanta to yoke the horses to the chariot. Sumanta 
informs Laxman of his having done so. Laxman then goes into the 
palace and meets Sita and reminds her of her having expressed her 
desire to pass some days in the vicinity of an Ashrama and Rama having 
promised to fulfil the same and tells her of his having been charged 
by Rama to do the needful in the matter. He points to her the chariot 
waiting there and says ‘let us go!’ Sita jumps into the chariot with her 
heart full of gratitude to Rama. With Laxman as her companion and 
Sumanta as coachman the chariot proceeds to its appointed place. At 
last they were on the bank of the Ganges and were ferried across by 
the fishermen. Laxman fell at Sita’s feet, and with hot tears issuing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


330 


330 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

from his eyes he said ‘Pardon me, O, blameless queen, for what I am 
doing. My orders are to abandon you here, for the people blame Rama 
for keeping you in his house.” 

Sita abandoned by Rama and left to die in a jungle went for shelter 
in the Ashrama of Valmiki which was near about. Valmiki gave her 
protection and kept her in his Ashram. There in course of time Sita gave 
birth to twin sons, called Kusa and Lava. The three lived with Valmiki. 
Valmiki brought up the boys and taught them to sing the Ramayana 
which he had composed. For 12 years the boys lived in the forest in the 
Ashrama of Valmiki not far from Ayodhya where Rama continued to 
rule. Never once in those 12 years this model husband and loving father 
cared to inquire what had happened to Sita whether she was living or 
whether she was dead. Twelve years after Rama meets Sita in a strange 
manner. Rama decided to perform a Yadna and issued invitation to all 
the Rishis to attend and take part. For reasons best known to Rama 
himself no invitation was issued to Valmiki although his Ashram was 
near to Ayodhya. But Valmiki came to the Yadna of his own accord 
accompanied by the two sons of Sita introducing them as his disciples. 
While the Yadna was going on the two boys used to perform recitations 
of Ramayana in the presence of the Assembly. Rama was very pleased 
and made inquiries when he was informed that they were the sons of 
Sita. It was then he remembered Sita and what does he do then ? He 
does not send for Sita. He calls these innocent boys who knew nothing 
about their parents’ sin, who were the only victims of a cruel destiny to 
tell Valmiki that if Sita was pure and chaste she could present herself 
in the Assembly to take a vow thereby remove the calumny cast against 
herself and himself. This is a thing she had once done in Lanka. This is 
a thing she could have been asked to do again before she was sent away. 
There was no promise that after this vindication of her character Rama 
was prepared to take her back. Valmiki brings her to the Assembly. When 
she was in front of Rama, Valmiki said, ‘O, son of Dasharatha, here is 
Sita whom you abandoned in consequence of public disapprobation. She 
will now swear her purity if permitted by you. Here are your twin-born 
sons bred up by me in my hermitage.’ ‘I know,’ said Rama ‘that Sita is 
pure and that these are my sons. She performed an ordeal in Lanka in 
proof of her purity and therefore I took her back. But people here have 
doubts still and let Sita perform an ordeal here that all these Rishis 
and people may witness it.” 

With eyes cast down on the ground and with hands folded Sita swore 
“As I never thought of any man except Rama even in my mind, let 
mother Earth open and bury me. As I always loved Rama in words, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


331 


APPENDIX I 331 

in thoughts, and in deed, let mother Earth open and bury me ! As she 
uttered the oath, the earth verily opened and Sita was carried away 
inside seated on a golden simhasana (throne). Heavenly flowers fell on 
Sita’s head while the audience looked on as in a trance. 

That means that Sita preferred to die rather than return to Rama 
who had behaved no better than a brute. 

Such is the tragedy of Sita and the crime of Rama the God. 

Let me throw some search light on Rama the King. 

Rama is held out as an ideal King. But can that conclusion be said 
to be founded in fact ? 

As a matter of fact Rama never functions, as a King. He was a nominal 
King. The administration as Valmiki states were entrusted to Bharata 
his brother. He had freed himself from the cares and worries about his 
kingdom and his subjects. Valmiki has very minutely described 1 the 
daily life of Rama after he became King. According to that account the 
day was divided into two parts. Up to forenoon and afternoon. From 
morning to forenoon he was engaged in performing religious rites and 
ceremonies and offering devotion. The afternoon he spent alternately 
in the company of Court jesters and in the Zenana. When he got tired 
of the Zenana he joined the company of jesters and when he got tired 
of jesters he went back to the Zenana 2 . Valmiki also gives a detailed 
description of how Rama spent his life in the Zenana. This Zenana was 
housed in a park called Ashoka Vana. There Rama used to take his meal. 
The food according to Valmiki consisted of all kinds of delicious viands. 
They included flesh and fruits and liquor. Rama was not a teetotaller. 
He drank liquor copiously and Valmiki records that Rama saw to it 
that Sita joined with him in his drinking bouts 3 . From the description 
of the Zenana of Rama as given by Valmiki it was by no means a mean 
thing. There were Apsaras, Uraga and Kinnari accomplished in dancing 
and singing. There were other beautiful women brought from different 
parts. Rama sat in the midst of these women drinking and dancing. 
They pleased Rama and Rama garlanded them. Valmiki calls Rama as 
a ‘Prince among women’s men’. This was not a day’s affair. It was a 
regular course of his life. 

As has already been said Rama never attended to public business. 
He never observed the ancient rule of Indian kings of hearing the 
wrongs of his subjects and attempting to redress them. Only one 
occasion has been recorded by Valmiki when he personally heard the 
grievance of his subjects. But unfortunately the occasion turned out 
to be a tragic one. He took upon himself to redress the wrong but. in 

1 Uttara Kanda Sarga 42 sloka 27. 

2 Uttara Kanda Sarga 43 sloka 1. 

2 Ibid., Sarga 42 sloka 8. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


332 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

doing so committed the worst crime that history has ever recorded. 
The incident is known as the murder of Sambuka the Shudra. It is 
said by Valmiki that in Rama’s reign there were no premature deaths 
in his kingdom. It happened, however, that a certain Brahman’s son 
died in a premature death. The bereaved father carried his body to 
the gate of the king’s palace, and placing it there, cried aloud and 
bitterly reproached Rama for the death of his son, saying that it 
must be the consequence of some sin committed within his realm, and 
that the king himself was guilty if he did not punish it; and finally 
threatened to end his life there by sitting dharna (hunger-strike) 
against Rama unless his son was restored to life. Rama thereupon 
consulted his council of eight learned Rishis and Narada amongst 
them told Rama that some Shudra among his subjects must have 
been performing Tapasya (ascetic exercises), and thereby going against 
Dharma (sacred law); for according to it the practice of Tapasya was 
proper to the twice-born alone, while the duty of the Shudras consisted 
only in the service of the twice-born. Rama was thus convinced that 
it was the sin committed by a Shudra in transgressing Dharma in 
that manner, which was responsible for the death of the Brahmin 
boy. So, Rama mounted his aerial car and scoured the countryside 
for the culprit. At last, in a wild region far away to the south he 
espied a man practising rigorous austerities of a certain kind. He 
approached the man, and with no more ado than to enquire of him 
and inform himself that he was a Shudra, by name Sambuka who 
was practising Tapasya with a view to going to heaven in his own 
earthly person and without so much as a warning, expostulation 
or the like addressed to him, cut off his head. And lo and behold ! 
that very moment the dead Brahman boy in distant Ayodhya began 
to breathe again. Here in the wilds the Gods rained flowers on the 
king from their joy at his having prevented a Shudra from gaining 
admission to their celestial abode through the power of the Tapasya 
which he had no right to perform. They also appeared before Rama 
and congratulated him on his deed. In answer to his prayer to 
them to revive the dead Brahman boy lying at the palace gate in 
Ayodhya, they informed him that he had already come to life. They 
then departed. Rama thence proceeded to the Ashrama which was 
nearby of the sage Agastya, who commended the step he had taken 
with Sambuka, and presented him with a divine bracelet. Rama then 
returned to his capital. 


Such is Rama. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


333 


APPENDIX I 333 

ii 


Now about. Krishna. 

He is the hero of the Mahabharata. Really speaking the Mahabharata 
is principally connected with the Kauravas and the Pandavas. It is 
the story of the war fought by the two for right to the kingdom which 
belonged to their ancestors. They should be the principal characters. 
But they are not. It is Krishna who is the hero of the epic. This is 
a little strange thing. But what is stranger still is the possibility not 
being a contemporary of the Kauravas and Pandavas. Krishna was the 
friend of the Pandavas who had their empire. Krishna was the enemy 
of Kansa who also had his empire. It does not seem possible that two 
such empires should subsist side by side at once and at the same time. 
Secondly, in the Mahabharata there is nothing to show that there was 
any intercourse between the two empires. The two stories of Krishna and 
the Pandavas have been mixed together at some later date in order to 
provide Krishna with a larger theater to play a bigger part. The mixture 
of the two stories is the result of a deliberate design on the part of Vyas 
to glorify Krishna and to raise him above all. 

In the hands of Vyas Krishna is God among men. That is why he 
is made the hero of the Mahabharata. Does Krishna really deserve to 
be called God among men ? A short sketch of his life alone will help 
to give a correct answer. Krishna was born at Mathura at midnight on 
the 8th day of the month of Bhadra. His father was Vasudeva of the 
Yadu race, and his mother Devaki, daughter of Devaka, the brother 
of Ugrasen, king of Mathura. Ugrasen’s wife had an illicit connection 
with Drumila the Danava king of Saubha. From this illicit connection 
was born Kansa who was in a sense the cousin of Devaki. Kansa 
imprisoned Ugrasen and usurped the throne of Mathura. Having heard 
from Narada or Daivavani, a voice from Heaven that Devaki’s eighth 
child would kill him, Kansa imprisoned both Devaki and her husband 
and killed six of their children as they were born one after another. The 
seventh child, Balarama, was miraculously transferred from Devaki’s 
womb to that of Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva. When the eighth 
child, Krishna, was born, he was secretly borne by his father to the 
other side of the river Yamuna, where Nanda and his wife Yasoda, 
natives of Vraja, were then living. The Yamuna rolled back her waters 
to make way for the divine child, the Ananta, the chief of serpents 
protected him with his ample hood from the heavy torrent of rain that 
was then falling. By a previous arrangement, Vasudeva exchanged his 
son for Nanda’s newly born daughter, Yogindra or Mahamaya, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


334 


334 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

presented the latter to Kansa as his eighth child, but she flew away, 
telling him that the child which is being brought up by Nanda and 
Yasoda would kill him. This led Kansa to make a series of unsuccessful 
attempts to kill the child Krishna. With this object he sent to Vraja a 
number of Asuras in various forms. The killing of these Asuras and 
number of other heroic deeds, impossible for an ordinary human child, 
are the chief staple of the Puranic account of Krishna’s early life. Some 
of them are mentioned in the Mahabharata also. As might be expected, 
the authorities differ largely in their narration of these facts. I mention 
only some of them, following chiefly the later authorities. 

The first or one of the first of these is the killing of Putana. She 
was Kansa’s nurse and was sent by him to kill Krishna in the form of 
a female vulture, according to Harivamsa, and of a beautiful woman 
according to the Bhagavata. As she pretending to suckle Krishna, put 
her poisoned breast into his mouth, he sucked it so powerfully as to 
draw out her very life-blood so that she fell down with an yell and died. 

Krishna performed another of these feats when he was only three 
months old. It was the breaking of a Sakata, a cart which was used 
as a cupboard and had several jars and pans, full of milk and curd, 
ranged on it. According to the Harivamsa Sakata was an Asura sent by 
Kansa and had entered the cart intending to crush the infant Krishna 
by its weight. However, Yasoda had placed the boy under the cart and 
gone to bathe in the Yamuna. On her return she was told that he had 
kicked against it and broken it to pieces with all that lay on it. This 
event surprised and frightened Yasoda, and she offered pujas to avert 
the evils threatened by it. 

When Putana and Sakata’s attempts to kill Krishna having failed, 
Kansa sent another of his emissaries an asura named Trinavarta, to 
attempt the same task. He came in the form of a bird and carried aloft 
the divine child, then only a year old. But he soon dropped down dead 
with the child safe and holding his throat tightly. 

The next feat was the breaking of two arjuna trees growing side by 
side. They are described as the bodies of two Yakshas who were converted 
into this form by a curse, and who were released by this feat of Krishna. 
When he had learnt to crawl about and could hardly be kept out of 
mischief Yasoda tied him with a rope to a wooden mortar and went to 
mind her household duties. When she was out of sight, Krishna began 
to drag the mortar after him till it stuck fast between the trees. Still 
pulling the heavy weight after him, he uprooted the trees and made them 
fall down with a tremendous noise, himself remaining unhurt by them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


335 


APPENDIX I 335 

Now these events filled Nanda with fear, and he seriously thought 
of leaving Vraja and moving to another settlement. While he was thus 
thinking, the place was infested with wolves which made great havoc 
among the cattle and made it quite unsafe. This fixed the wavering 
intention of the nomads and they moved with all their belongings to 
the pleasant woodland named Vrindavan. Krishna was then only seven 
years old. 

After his removal to this new settlement, Krishna killed quite a large 
number of Asuras. One of them was Aristha, who came in the form 
of a bull; another, Kesin, who was disguised as a horse. Five others, 
Vratrasura, Bakasura, Aghasura, Bhomasura and Sankhasura, the last 
a Yaksha. More important than these was Kaliya, a snake chief, who 
lived with his family in a whirlpool of the Yamuna and thus poisoned 
its water. Krishna one day threw himself on Kaliya’s hood and danced 
so wildly as to make him vomit blood. He would thus have killed him, 
but on the intervention of the snake’s family, he spared him and allowed 
him to move away to another abode. 

The subjugation of Kaliya was followed by Vastra-harana, the carrying 
away of clothes, a hard nut to crack for worshippers and admirers of 
the Puranic Krishna. The whole narration is so obscene, that even the 
merest outlines will, I fear, be felt to be indelicate. But I must give them 
in as decent a form as is possible, to make my brief account of Krishna’s 
doings as full as I can. Some Gopies had dived into the waters of the 
Yamuna for a bath, leaving their clothes on the banks, as is said to be 
still the custom in some parts of the country. Krishna seized the clothes 
and with them climbed upon a tree on the riverside. When asked to 
return them, he refused to do so unless the women approached the tree 
and each begged her own dress for herself. This they could do only by 
coming naked out of the water and presenting themselves naked before 
Krishna. When they did this, Krishna was pleased and he gave them 
their clothes. This story is found in the Bhagavata. 

The next of Krishna’s feats was the uplifting of the Govardhan Hill. 
The Gopas were about to celebrate their annual sacrifices to Indra, 
the God of rain, and began to make grand preparations for it. Krishna 
pointed out to them that as they were a pastoral and not an agricultural 
tribe, their real Gods were kine, hills and woods, and them only they 
should worship, and not such Gods as the rain-giving Indra. The Gopas 
were convinced, and giving up their intention of worshipping Indra 
celebrated a grand sacrifice to the hill Govardhan, the nourisher of 
kine, accompanied with feasting and dancing. Indra was as he could 
not but be greatly enraged at this affront offered to him, and as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


336 


336 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

punishment, he poured rain on the Gopa settlement for seven days and 
nights continually. Krishna, nothing daunted, uprooted the hill and 
held it up as an umbrella over the settlement and thus protected the 
Gopas and their cattle from the ruinous effects of Indra’s wrath. As to 
the jealousy between Indra and the Krishna of the Rig-Veda and that 
between the former and the Vishnu of the Satapatha Brahmana, I have 
already spoken in my first lecture. 

Krishna’s youthful career was full of illicit intimacy with the young 
women of Brindaben which is called his Rasalila. Rasa is a sort of circular 
dance in which the hands of the dancers, men and women, are joined 
together. It is said to be still prevalent among some of the wild tribes of 
this country. Krishna, it is stated, was in the habit of often enjoying this 
dance with the young Gopis of Brindaben, who loved him passionately. 
One of these dances is described in the Vishnu Purana, the Harivamsa 
and the Bhagavata. All these authorities interpret the Gopi’s love for 
Krishna as piety — love to God, and see nothing wrong in their amorous 
dealings with him — dealings which, in the case of any other person, would 
be highly reprehensible according to their own admission. All agree as 
to the general character of the affair — the scene, the time and season, 
the drawing of the women with sweet music, the dance, the amorous 
feelings of the women for Krishna, and their expression in various ways. 
But while the Vishnu Purana tries — not always successfully — to keep 
within the limits of decency, the Harivamsa begins to be plainly indecent, 
and. the Bhagavata throws away all reserve and revels in indecency. 

Of all his indecencies the worst is his illicit life with one Gopi by 
name Radha. Krishna’s illicit relations with Radha are portrayed in the 
Brahmavaivarta Purana. Krishna is married to Rukmani the daughter of 

King Rukmangad. Radha was married to Krishna who abandons 

his lawfully wedded wife Rukmini and seduces Radha wife of another 
man and lives with her in sin without remorse. 

Krishna was also a warrior and a politician even at a very early age, 
we are told, when he was in his twelfth year. Every one of his acts 
whether as a warrior or as a politician was an immoral act. His first 
act in this sphere was the assassination of his maternal uncle Kamsa. 
‘Assassination’ is not too strong a term for it, for though Kamsa had 
given him provocation, he was not killed in the course of a battle or 
even in a single combat. The story is that having heard God Krishna’s 
youthful feats at Brindaban, Kamsa got frightened and determined to 
secure his death by confronting him with a great athelete in an open 
exhibition of arms. Accordingly he announced the celebration of a 
dhanuryajna a bow sacrifice, and invited Krishna, Balarama and their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


337 


APPENDIX I 337 

Gopa friends to it. Akrura, an adherent of Krishna, but an officer of 
Kamsa, was deputed by the latter to bring the brothers to Mathura. 
They came, determined to kill Kamsa. He had provoked not only them, 
but other Yadavas also, whom his persecution had compelled to leave 
Mathura. The brothers were therefore supported by a conspiracy against 
him. Having arrived at Mathura, they desired to change their simple 
Gopa dress for a more decent one, and asked for clothes from Kamsa’s 
washerman, whom they met in the street. As the man behaved insolently 
with them, they killed him and took from his stock whatever clothes 
they liked. They then met Kubja, a hunch-backed woman who served 
as Kamsa’s perfumer. At their request she annointed them with sandal 
paste and in return was cured by Krishna of her bodily deformity. The 
Bhagvata makes him visit her on a subsequent occasion and describes 
his union with her with its characteristic indecency. However, on the 
present occasion, the brothers annointed by Kubja and garlanded by 
Sudama, a flower-seller, entered the place of sacrifice and broke the 
great bow to which the sacrifice was to be offered. The frightened Kamsa 
sent an elephant named Kuvalayapida to kill them. Krishna killed the 
elephant and entered the arena. There the brothers encountered Kamsa’s 
chosen athletes, Chanura, Mustika, Toshalaka and Andhra. Krishna 
killed Chanura and Toshalaka and Balarama the other two. Frustrated 
in his plan of securing Krishna’s death by stratagem Kamsa ordered 
the brothers and their Gopa friends to be turned out and banished from 
his kingdom, their herds to be confiscated and Vasudeva, Nanda and 
his own father Ugrasen to be assassinated. At this Krishna got upon 
the platform on which Kamsa was seated, and seizing him by the hair, 
threw him down on the ground and killed him. Having consoled Kamsa’s 
weeping wives he ordered a royal cremation for him, and refusing the 
kingdom offered him by Ugrasen, installed the latter on the throne and 
invited his banished relatives to return to Mathura. 

The next episode is Krishna’s fight with Jarasandha, emperor 
of Magadha, and Kalayavana. Jarasandha was the son-in-law of 
Kamsa. Enraged by Krishna’s assassination of Kamsa, his son-in-law, 
Jarasandha is said to have invaded Mathura seventeen times and to 
have been every time repulsed by Krishna. Fearing, however, that an 
eighteenth invasion would be disastrous to the city, Krishna removed 
the Yadavas to Dwarka at the west end of Gujarat Peninsula. After 
the removal of the Yadavas from Mathura, the city was besieged by 
Kalayavana at the instigation of Jarasandha. While pursuing the 
unarmed Krishna, however, out of the city, the invader was burnt to 
ashes, by fire issuing from the eyes of king Muchakunda, who had 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

been sleeping in a mountain cave and whom he had awakened with a kick 
mistaking him for Krishna. Krishna defeated the army of Kalayavana but 
while flying to Dwaraka with the booty, he was overtaken by Jarasandha. 
He, however, evaded his enemy by climbing a hill and flying to Dwaraka 
after jumping down from it. 

Krishna was now, for the first time, married. He married Rukmini, 
daughter of Bhishmaka, king of Vidarbha. Her father, at Jarasandha’s 
advice, was making preparations to get her married to Sishupala, 
Krishna’s cousin and king of Chedi. But Krishna carried her off on the 
day before the proposed marriage. The Bhagavata says she had fallen 
in love with Krishna and had addressed a love letter to him. This does 
not seem to be true. For Krishna did not remain a true and faithful 
husband of Rukmini. Rukmini was gradually followed by an enormously 
vast army of co-wives till the number of Krishna’s consorts rose to sixteen 
thousand one hundred and eight. His children numbered one lakh and 
eighty-thousand. The chief of his wives were the well-known eight, 
Rukmini, Satyabhama, Jambavati, Kalindi, Mitrabinda, Satya, Bhadra, 
and Lakshmana. The remaining sixteen thousand and one hundred were 
married to him on the same day. They belonged originally to the harem 
of king Naraka of Pragjyotish whom Krishna defeated and killed at the 
invitation of Indra, whose mother’s ear-rings had been carried away 
by Naraka. While paying a visit after the battle to Indra’s heaven in 
company with Satyabhama, this lady took fancy to Indra’s famous parijat 
tree. To oblige his wife, Krishna had to fight with the God whom he had 
just favoured. Indra, though the chief of the Vedic Gods, and though 
he was helped by the latter on this occasion was indeed no match for 
the ‘Incarnation of the Supreme Being’ and was forced to part with his 
favourite flower-tree, which was thus carried to Dwarka and planted there. 
The story of how he obtained his chief eight wives is very interesting. 
The story of how he got Rukmini is already told. Satyabhama was the 
daughter of Satyajit, a Yadava chief who gave her away in marriage 
to Krishna because he was afraid of him and wished to buy his favour. 
Jambavati was the daughter of Jambavna, a bear chief, against whom 
Krishna waged a long war to recover a previous gem he had taken away 
from a Yadava. Jambavana was defeated and presented his daughter to 
Krishna, as a peace-offering. Kalindi went through a series of austerities 
in order to get Krishna as her husband and her devotion was rewarded 
by the marriage she had sought. Mitrabinda was a cousin of Krishna 
and was carried off by him from the Svayamvara grounds. Satya was 
the daughter of Nagnajit, king of Ayodhya and was won by Krishna 
when he had achieved a brave feat of arms, namely, killing a number of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


339 


APPENDIX I 339 

naughty bulls belonging to Nagnajit. Bhadra was another cousin of 
Krishna and was married by him in the usual way. Lakshmana was 
the daughter of Brihatsena, king of Madra. and was carried off by him 
from the Swayamavara grounds. 

Krishna’s part in Arjuna’s marriage with Subhadra, sister of Balarama 
and Krishna’s half sister is noteworthy. In the course of his travels Arjuna 
arrived at the holy place of Prabhasa, and was received by Krishna on 
the hill of Raivataka. There he was enamoured of Subhadra and asked 
Krishna how he could get her. Krishna advised him to carry her off as a 
brave Kshatriya without depending upon the chances of a Svayamvaram, 
the usual Kshatriya form of marriage. The Yadavas were at first enraged 
at this outrage, but when Krishna convinced them that Arjuna would 
be a very worthy husband for Subhadra, and that by carrying her off 
he had done nothing unworthy of a hero, they consented to the union. 
And how could they do otherwise ? Krishna did not simply argue like 
us, poor talkers. He, as we have already seen, had backed his precepts 
by his example. 

It is interesting to note how Krishna disposed of Jarasandha and 
Sishupala who created trouble at the Rajasuya performed by Yudhisthira. 
Jarasandha had imprisoned a large number of kings and intended to 
sacrifice them to Rudra. Unless he was killed and the imprisoned princes 
released and given an opportunity to pay homage to Yudhisthira, the 
latter’s claim as emperor could not be established. Krishna therefore 
proceeded with Bhima and Arjuna to Rajagriha, Jarasandha’s capital, 
and challenged him to a single combat with anyone of them he might 
choose. Such a challenge could not be refused by a Kshatriya, and 
Jarasandha, at the anticipation of death at his opponent’s hand, declared 
his son Sahadev as his heir apparent and chose Bhima as his opponent. 
The combat lasted thirteen days, and Jarasandha at length met with a 
painful death at his rival’s hand. Having put Sahadev on his father’s 
throne, and invited the released princes to attend Yudhisthira’s Rajasuya, 
Krishna and his friends returned to Indraprastha. 

In due course the Rajasuya came off. Of the various functions and 
duties connected with the ceremony, Krishna is said to have taken 
charge of washing the feet of the Brahmans. This is a sure indication 
of the comparative modernness of the Mahabharata, at any rate, of 
this story. For in ancient times, even when the supremacy of the 
Brahmans had been established, the Kshatriyas never paid them any 
servile honour. However when the sacrifice was over, the time came 
for Yudhisthira to make presents to the assembled princes, priests and 
other persons deserving honour. To whom must honour be paid first ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


340 


340 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Yudhisthira having asked Bhishma’s opinion on the matter, the latter 
replied that Krishna was the person to be honoured first. Accordingly 
Sahadeva at Yudhishtira’s command presented the Arghya, the mark 
of honour, to Krishna, and the latter accepted it. This upset Sishupala, 
who made a long speech, challenging Krishna’s right to the honour and 
abusing the Pandavas for paying any honour and Krishna for accepting 
it. Bhishma made another speech narrating Krishna’s exploits and 
achievements at length, and declaring his divinity. Sishupala rose again, 
rebutted Bhishma’s arguments one after another, and grossly abused him. 
It is pointed out by Krishna’s recent biographers, that of the charges 
brought against Krishna by Sishupala, there is no mention of his dealings 
with the Brindaban Gopis, a sure indication, according to them, that 
when the Mahabharatha was composed, the story of these dealings of 
Krishna, a story made so much of by the writers of the Puranas and 
the later poets, was not conceived. However, at the end of Sishupala’s 
speech Bhishma, who saw that Yudhishtira was afraid lest Sishupala 
and his followers might obstruct the completion of the ceremony, said, 
addressing them that if they were resolved to die they might challenge 
the divine Krishna himself to fight. At this Sishupala challenged Krishna, 
who rose in response and narrated his opponent’s numerous misdeeds. 
Then with the words, “At the request of his mother, my aunt, I have 
pardoned a hundred of Sishupala’s offences. But I cannot pardon the 
insulting words he has spoken of me before the assembled princes : I kill 
him before you all”. He threw his chakra at him and cut off his head. 

Actions of Krishna during the Mahabharata War may now be reviewed. 
The following are some of them : 

1. When Satyaki, Krishna’s friend, was hard pressed by Bhurisrava, 
son of Somadatta, Krishna induced Arjuna to cut off his arms, and 
thereby made it easy for Satyaki to kill him. 

2. When Abhimanyu was unfairly surrounded and killed by seven 
Kaurava warriors, Arjuna vowed the death of the ring leader, Jayadratha, 
next day before sunset, or, failing that his own death by entering into 
fire. When the Sun was about to set, and Jayadratha remained unslain, 
Krishna miraculously hid the Sun, on which Jayadratha, having come 
out Krishna uncovered the Sun, and Arjuna killed Jayadratha when he 
was unaware. 

3. Despairing of Drona being ever killed by fair means Krishna 
advised the Pandavas to kill him unfairly. If he could be made to 
cast down his arms, he could, Krishna said, be killed easily. This 
could be done if he was told that his son, Asvathama was dead. 
Bhima tried the suggested device. He killed an elephant named after 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


341 


APPENDIX I 341 

Drona’s son and told him that Asvathama was killed. The warrior 
was somewhat depressed by the news, but did not quite believe it. 
At this juncture he was hard pressed by a number of sages to cease 
fighting and prepare himself for heaven with meditations worthy of 
a Brahmana. This checked the hero still more and he applied to the 
truthful Yudhisthira for correct information about his son. Finding 
Yudhisthira unwilling to tell a lie, Krishna overcame his reluctance by 
a long exhortation, in the course of which he announced his ethics of 
untruth in the following edifying text from Vasishtha’s Smriti. 

“In marriage, in amorous dealings, when one’s life is in danger, when 
the whole of one’s possession is going to be lost, and when a Brahman’s 
interest is at stake, untruth should be told. The wise have said that 
speaking untruth on these five occasions is not a sin.” Yudhisthir’s 
scruples were stifled, and he said to his preceptor, “Yes, Asvathama is 
killed” adding in a low voice, “that is, an elephant” which last words, 
however were not heard by Dron. His depression was complete, and 
on hearing some bitterly reproachful words from Bhima, he gave up 
his arms, and while sitting in a meditative posture, was killed by 
Dhristhadyumna . 

4. When Bhima was unsuccessfully fighting with Duryodhana by the 
side of the Dvaipayana Lake Krishna reminded him through Arjuna 
that he had vowed the breaking of his opponent’s thighs. Now striking 
a rival below the navel was unfair, but as Duryodhana could not be 
killed except by such an unfair means, Krishna advised Bhima to adopt 
the same and Bhima did.” 

The death of Krishna throws a flood of light on his morals. Krishna 
died as the Ruler of Dwaraka. What was this Dwaraka like and what 
sort of death awaited him ? 

In founding his city of Dwaraka he had taken care to settle 
thousands of ‘unfortunates’ there. As the Harivamsa said : ‘O, hero 
having conquerred the abodes of the Daityas (giants) with the help 
of brave Yadus, the Lord settled thousands of public women in 
Dwaraka”. Dancing, singing and drinking by men and women married 
and prostitutes filled the city of Dwaraka. We get a description of a 
seatrip in which these women formed a principal source of enjoyment. 
Excited by their singing and dancing, the brothers Krishna and 
Balarama joined in the dancing with their wives. They were followed 
by the other Yadava chiefs and by Arjuna and Narada. Then a fresh 
excitement was sought. Men and women all fell into the sea and at 
Krishna’s suggestion, the gentlemen began a jalakrida water sport, 
with the ladies, Krishna leading one party, and Balarama another, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

while the courtesans added to the amusement by their music. This was 
followed by eating and drinking and this again by a special musical 
performance in which the leaders themselves exhibited their respective 
skill in handling various musical instruments. It will thus be seen 
what a jolly people these Yadavas were, and with what contempt they 
would have treated the objections urged nowadays by the Brahmans 
and such other purists against nautch parties and the native theatres. 
It was in one of these revels — a drunken revel — that the Yadavas were 
destroyed. They, it is said, had incurred the displeasure of a number 
of sages by a childish trick played on the latter by some of their boys. 
These boys disguised Samba, one of Krishna’s sons, as a woman with 
child, tying an iron pestle below his navel, and asked the sages to say 
what child the ‘woman’ would give birth to. The enraged sage said ‘she’ 
would produce an iron pestle which would be the ruin of the Yadavas. 
Fearing the worst consequences from this curse, the boys took the 
pestle to the sea-side and rubbed it away. But its particles came out 
in the form of erakas, a kind of reeds and its last remaining bit, which 
had been thrown into the sea, was afterwards recovered and used by 
a hunter as the point of an arrow; Now it was with these erakas that 
the Yadavas killed themselves. They had gone in large parties to the 
holy place of Prabhasa. They indulged in drinking there and this proved 
their ruin. The evils of drinking there had been found out at length by 
Krishna and some other Yadava leaders, and it was prohibited on pain 
of death by a public notification. But the prohibition had no effect. The 
drunken Yadavas at first quarrelled and then began to fight and kill 
one another. When some of Krishna’s own sons were killed he himself 
joined in the fight and killed a large number of his own people. He then 
went in search of Balarama. He found him in meditative posture and 
saw his spirit passing out of his body in the form of a large serpent i.e., 
Sesha Naga, the divine snake whom he had incarnated. Krishna now 
felt that it was time for him also to pass away. He then bade farewell 
to his father and his wives, telling them that he had sent for Arjuna, 
who would take charge of them. Then he seated himself under a tree, 
hidden by its leafy and outstretching branches, and composed his mind 
in meditation. While thus sitting, a hunter named Jara mistook him for 
a deer and hit him with an arrow, one pointed with the last remaining 
bit of the fatal pestle. Discovering his mistake, the man fell at Krishna’s 
feet and was pardoned and flew away to heaven, illumining all sides by 
its dazzling light. Arjuna came and proceeded towards Hastinapur with 
the surviving Yadavas — men and women. But his good genius having 
left him he had lost the power of his hitherto mighty arm and his 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


343 


APPENDIX I 343 

unrivalled skill as an archer. A number of Ahiras, armed only with lathis, 
attacked his party and carried off many of the women, and he reached 
Hastinapur only with a small remnant. After Arjuna’s departure the sea 
engulfed Dwaraka, and nothing was left to speak of the Yadavas, their 
glories, their domestic broils and their revels. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd 


MK SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


344 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


345 


r % - • 


345 

Specimen of Dr. Ambedkar’s handwriting from the Riddle No. 22 
entitled ‘Brahma is not Dharma’. 

M. cLUU^ ^ ^ ^ 

V* ^ * *> ^ 

vV- KvoM fc 

0- ?o ' K °^- d ^ 

tUsJinO. (til. >k ^ 

X'lL; 

^fc -o 

V ■ wt* 

"uw f n^Xj 

Ov^L CCwb ' txAis . 

ISvAv*. X-uX \. a)e^^^i 
C»(4 t (L«Jr~ 
DcX-,^ -C, XX VN 

?^At) ✓ — o£> 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


346 


346 




iLl v, ^0Uz iwc A U * jWA 

'H J Cl Ld 

. . If 

l 'fa&ck *- 

,J^ — Ckuj Lr^-L^ 

^4' ^MXw ^ \ Jb^TL*\J) 

L h^ir L. oZz>JduZ) k l^v-e- i =u 

: >wtv crv\ /u-t^rnA^) CL - /iv^T?*. - 

^"K 4Tr /rti. „ ^ — 



^ ts^Jr- L#sz5 

>VO &Cc/l£. 

• 1^1 r 7vj\- iiL- /CvZi-1^ 

4 a^S" 

-4 GoO 

'y^M~ ctk/I^ 4wf~ Cv '^-^ 

^dtT ~>Nh>^LX^ . 


4 




4 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


347 


347 


?' 



CO 'X-O 




<5-0 twj 


^ J, ^ ^ 

Wyt ruxlwi^ fc - S »^ V ^ 
j- n-^-- Ccu^*{a^J(v#^ 
)v4> lo l^k^~ 

^k-oOA- /ufL*o K-6U/0 Kv^3 / C' 

^Le^Viic <5- ^-£-^c4v^ • *^>^0 ^ 

^ ^ / Wf fu^l4, . 1V“V^ ^jTTt 

0 

i0^14-A^ua^v^ OvJ\"“ 

hx~ ovjv cwc — y - ^ 

CtovtX' Sv^r^t4~ tA *ZJ^'*oJjL. 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


348 


348 




1V4- ^ ^ 

u '(Ljr *«. ^v<. ^ 

<L' K^e 


a. Wuyk, uJe^kJ' ^vA.' Cx*k-® < 

Cav*YVvv*J*^> Jfa&tsO . ■ 

b- *■ ‘p.t jlUc nLu^i^a. 

CJL.aX — h^-VY^Z - 


Itc 1-ca.clLivJZ «Y 

^ -fcu_^T- ^UhX. 


to fU*J<L OuZj ~7kaX' vl- ^vra/c<5 
CLW. Som^ — , 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


349 


349 




&4L j/llc 

(k. QuaJL) ' 

?wcJL> 

Oh ^]f 






it GU - ^, ° 


<'■=><* — fei 



(U He *<> ^~ 

^ G-to- . m. -tsM 

^S" ^'tyvyi^^ CL O ^kr~ C&uT 


|,VV-«^ /V - 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd 


MK SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


350 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


351 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The hooks and journals listed here include the works 
cited by the author. The details about the publications have 
been sorted out from the Asiatic and the Bombay University 
libraries. Further details could not be sought for want of 
time before the release of this book. — Ed. 

Abhayadevasuri : Commentary on Bhagavati Sutra 

Aufrecht, Prof. : Katyayana’s Srauta Sutras : Reading of the Veda in 
one’s own Sakhas 

Avalon, Arthur : inciples of Tantra 

Bohtlingk, Otto and Roth, Rudolph : Sanskrit Worterbuch : (St. 
Petersburg, Buchdruckerei Der Kaiserlvehen Akademie Der Wissens 
Chaften, 1865) 

Belvalkar, Shripad Krishna : Vedanta Philosophy (Basu-Mallik Lectures, 
University of Calcutta; Poona 1929) 

Bhava Raju, Vyankat Krishna Rao : Early Dynasties of Andhra Desha 

Blacquiere, W. C. : Asiatic Researches Volume 

Colebrooke : Miscellaneous Essays, Vols. I-II (Madras, Higginbotham 
& Co. 1872) 

Dandekar, Prof. : Vishnu in the Vedas 

Dewey, John : Democracy and Education (New York, Macmillan 1916) 

Dutt, R. C. : Civilization in Ancient India (1888 Chronology of Ancient 
India) 

Eggeling, Julius : Satapatha Brahmana, Part I-V (London Sacred 
Books of the East, Oxford 1885) 

Hopkins, E. Washerman : The Great Epics of India (New York, Charles 
Scribner’s Son, 1901) 

Jaiswal : Hindu Polity 

Kane, P. V. : Paper on Kali Varjya : History of Dharma Shastra 
(Ancient and Medieval Religious and Civil Law) Vol. I 

Law, B. C. : The Magadha in Ancient India (The Royal Asiatic Society, 
London 1946); Kshatriya Clan in, Buddhist India with a foreword by 
the Hon’ble Sir Asutosh Mookerji (Calcutta 1922) 

Max Muller : The Satapatha Brahmanas, Parts 1-5 tr. by J. Eggeling, 
Sacred Books of the East Series Vols. 12, 26, 43 & 48 ed. by F. Max 
Muller (Oxford 1885, 1894, 1897, 1900) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


352 


352 

Mayne : Hindu Law and Usage 

Medhatithi : Commentary on Manu Ed. by V. N. Mandlik (Bombay 
1886) 

Mitra Rajendralal : Indo Aryans : Constitutions towards the elucidation 
of their ancient and medieval history (W. Newman & Co., Calcutta 1881) 

Moore, Edward : Hindu pantheon (London W. O. Simpson, 1810) 

Muir, J. : Original Sanskrit Texts (Vol. I-IV, London Trubner & Co., 
57 & 59 Ludgate Hall, 1873 — II Ed.) 

Mukerjee, Radha Kumud : Ancient Indian Education (Brahmanical & 
Buddhist) (London, Macmillan & Co. 1947) 

Rangacharya, Mr. : The Yugas, A Question of Hindu Chronology 

Sham Shastri : Drapsa. The Vedic Cycle of Eclipses 

Weber, Albrecht : Indische Studien, (Berlin 1868-69) 

Wilson : Vishnu Pur an (Essays on Sanskrit Literature). A system of 
Hindu mythology and tradition, ed. Fitz Edward Hall, Vol. 1-5, (London, 
Trubner & Co., 1864) 

• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


353 


INDEX 


Abednego : 7, 174-75 
Abhaya Deva Suri : 290 
Abhimanyu : 297 
Abhiras : 223 

Aditi : 29, 99, 134, 192, 197, 200, 238, 
243, 246 

Aditya Purana : 318, 322 
Adityas : 29, 43, 81, 90, 95, 134, 192-94, 
238, 240, 243, 277, 312 
Agamas : 60 
Agastya Rishi : 332 
Aghasur : 335 

Agni :17, 20-22, 24, 29-30, 42-43, 58, 75,82- 
86, 100, 129-31, 133-35, 140, 147, 170, 
172, 190, 193-94, 239-40, 302-03 
Agnihotra : 38, 156, 195, 209, 241, 254, 271 
Ahilya (wife of Gautama Rishi) : 301 
Ahimsa : 5, 111, 113, 123, 126 
Airavat : 90 

Aitareya Brahmana : 20, 28, 129, 290, 316 

Aiyer, Gopal : 291 

Akrurasura : 78, 171, 337 

Akuti : 275, 310 

Alexander, the Great : 223 

Altekar, A. S. : 55-57 

Ambastha : 223 

Ambrosia : 118 

Anala : 197, 243 

Angiras : 19, 64, 128, 153, 184, 196-97, 201, 
242-43, 246, 279 
Angiras Ghor : 88 
Angis : 64 

Anukramanis : 28-29, 133-34, Names of : 133 

Anuloma : 66, 155, 216-17, 220 

Anuloma marriage : 230 

Anusasana Parvan : 92, 94 

Anusuya : 166-67 

Apararka : 57 

Apastambha Dharma Sutra : 26-27, 55, 
112, 145-46 

Apsaras : 46, 196, 242, 325, 331 
Aranas : 213-14, 265 

Aranyakas : 53, 63-64, 146-47, 152-53, 214 
Aristanemy : 197, 243 
Aristocracy : 281 

Arjuna : 88, 90, 93, 101-02, 110, 269, 297-98, 
339-40, 342 


Arsh marriage : 226-27 
Arsheya Brahmins : 28 
Artavas : 192, 238 

Aryans : 44, 99, 108-09, 142-43, 163, 215-16, 
220, 294-95, 299, 301-05 
Ashram Dharma : 205, 207, 214, 252-56, 261 
Ashvalayan Grihya Sutra : 125, 164, 302 
Ashok Vana : 331 

Ashvamedha Yajna : 39, 44, 157, 295 
Ashvapati : 67, 158 
Ashvatthama : 95, 340-41 
Ashvins : 29, 96, 100, 134, 197, 243, 265, 
277, 312 

Asura marriage : 227 

Asuras : 41, 43, 77, 92, 95, 100-02, 105-07, 
140, 170, 196, 199, 241-44, 334 
Atharvangiras : 147, 153 
Atharva-Veda : 19, 22-24, 28, 44, 50, 64- 
65, 130-33, 147, 153-54, 192, 200, 202, 
224. 239 
Atreyi : 28, 133 

Atri Rishi : 57, 166-67, 196-97, 200, 242-43, 
279, 312 
Auddalaki : 40 
Aushanas : 217, 222 
Auttami : 276, 311 
A vadan : 303 
Ayodhya : 323-24, 328, 332 
Ayonija : 300-01 
Ayur Veda : 31 
Ayus : 201, 247, 250 
Ayyar Mr. : 76 

Babu Hemachandrakar : 124 
Babylon : 6-7, 173-74 
Badarayana : 67-70, 157-60 
Bakasur : 335 

Balarama : 114, 333, 336-42 
Balhikas : 292 
Bania (Caste) : 14 

Baudhayana Dharma Sutra : 26-27, 55, 66, 
112, 144-46, 217, 222 
Bava Malangsha : 5 
Belvalkar, S. K. : 157 
Betal : 117 
Bhadra : 328, 338-39 
Bhagavatacharya Ram Shastri : 115 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


354 


INDEX 


354 

Bhagvat Gita : 63, 90, 153, 251 
Bhagvat Puran : 23, 59, 74, 85-86, 131, 149, 
169, 203, 247, 249, 334-38 
Bhairava : 117-18, 120-21 
Bhairavar : 117 
Bhairavi : 120-21 
Bhakti Marg : 60 

Bharadvaja Rishi : 51, 64, 199, 244-45, 312 

Bharat (Sage) : 323-24, 331 

Bhasmasura : 78, 171 

Bhat, Mr. : 153 

Bhikshus : 266 

Bhim : 339-40 

Bhishma : 94-95, 340 

Bhomasur : 335 

Bhrigu Rishi : 86-87, 90, 196, 199, 242, 
244-45, 279 
Bhurisrava : 340 
Bibhishan : 327 
Black Yajur-Veda : 191 
Blunt, E. A. H. : 14 

Brahaspati : 57, 135, 155-57, 192, 238-39 
Brahma : 18, 22-24, 32, 58-60, 71-75, 79, 
84-89, 92-97, 100-03, 106-07, 131-33, 
154, 161, 163, 166-72, 176-79, 194-203, 
239, 241, 244, 246, 248, 284-87, 296-98, 
310, 325 

Brahmacharyashram : 205, 207-08, 213-14, 
252-56, 262-65 
Brahma marriage : 227 
Brahma Savarni : 278, 313 
Brahma Sutras : 67, 157, 213 
Brahma Vaivarta Purana : 59, 149, 224, 336 
Brahma Vratikas : 172 
Brahman (Supreme Soul) : 58, 64-66, 116, 
149, 152-55, 194, 200, 202-03, 245-46, 
259-60, 264, 270, 279 
Brahmaism : 284-85 
Brahmanaspati : 191, 238 
Brahmins : 5-9, 14-15, 16-18, 24-25, 28, 31- 
32, 36-37, 52-61, 66, 80, 86, 92, 97-98, 
106-10, 112, 115-17, 119-20, 127, 135-36, 
140, 143, 146-50, 154-57, 163-64, 166-70, 
172-73, 175, 182-84, 189-96, 199, 201, 
203-04, 206, 208-12, 215-16, 222-25, 228, 
230-31, 237, 242-50, 255, 258, 261, 264, 
266-68, 277, 279, 286, 290, 293-300, 306, 
315, 317-18, 320-22, 332,339, 341 
Brahminism : 284, 286-87, 318 
Bramhanas (Scriptures) : 20, 27, 53-55,60, 
64, 129, 145-48, 186, 195,202 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad : 130, 154-55, 
158 

Brihat-Sarvanukramani : 133 


British : 55 

Buddha (the Lord) : 266, 283 
Buddha Ramayana : 325 
Buddhist Literature : 83 
Budha (Rishi) : 200, 246-47 

Candala : 65, 154, 225 

Candika : 105, 117-18, 120 

Chakchusha : 276, 311 

Chaldeans : 6, 174 

Chandragupta Maurya : 223 

Charaniya Brahmins : 28, 133 

Charvaka : 37-39, 155, 157 

Chaturvarnya : 36, 58, 163, 200, 204-215, 225, 

245, 251, 285 

Chhandogya Upanishad : 65, 88, 130, 153- 
54, 158 

Chhaya : 277-78, 312-13 

Christianity : 286 

Christians : 13-15, 99 

Chulla Niddessa : 83-85. 161, 163, 173 

Creeds : 83, 161-63 

Criminal Tribes : 286 

Cults : 83-84, 162-63 

Dadhichi : 163 
Dadhyanchya : 193 

Daityas : 93, 99, 196-99, 201, 242, 244-46, 302 
Daiva Karma : 56 
Daiva marriage : 226 
Dakinis : 181 

Daksha : 197, 243, 249, 276, 297, 310 
Daksha Prajapati : 85-87, 102, 163, 200-03, 

246, 248, 298 
Daksha Savarni : 278, 313 
Dakshayani : 197, 243, 250 
Dakshinacharim : 60 
Dama Rishi : 300 

Danavas : 93, 97, 163, 199, 244, 302, 315 
Dandekar, Prof. : 164, 166 
Danu : 197, 243 

Dasharatha (King) : 73-74, 96-98, 323-25, 330 

Dasyus : 215, 220 

Dattatreya : 166-67 

Dictatorship : 281 

Democracy : 281-84, 286 

Devaki : 88, 333 

Devambhatta : 56 

Devas : 77, 99, 163, 170, 296, 301-03 
Devatas : 77, 99 
Devi Bhagvat Puran : 89 
Dewey, John : 281-82 
Dhanvantari : 201, 247 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


355 


INDEX 


Dharma-Savarni : 278, 313 
Dharma Sutras : 25, 56, 60, 76, 108, 112, 144- 
45, 207, 263-64, 305 Period of : 27 
Dhautya : 278 
Dhritarashtra : 88 
Diptimat : 278 
Dirghatamas : 201, 300, 304 
Diti : 99, 197, 243 
Draupadi : 110, 295, 300-01, 304 
Dristadyumna : 341 
Drona : 340-41 
Drona Parvan : 93 
Drumila : 333 

Durga (Goddess) : 60, 101-07, 119, 124, 179-80 

Duryodhana : 300, 341 

Dwarka : 337-38, 341, 343 

Dwapar Yuga : 17, 108, 289-91, 293, 295 

Eggeling. Julius : 290 
Equality : 283 

Fraternity : 283-84 
French Revolution : 283 
Galva Sage : 278, 298-99 
Gandharva marriage : 227 
Gandharvas : 18, 22-24, 32, 97, 140, 196, 199, 
242, 244, 302, 315, 325 
Ganga : 77, 170, 329 
Gargacharya : 202, 248, 292 
Gauri : 100-01 

Gautama (Founder of Nyaya) : 31, 134, 301, 312 
Gautama Dharma Sutra : 25, 27, 55, 63, 112, 
144-45, 153, 207, 254, 263-64 
Gautama Samhita : 191, 237 
Gautami : 300 
Gaya (Rishi) : 29, 202, 248 
Gayatri (Savitri) : 22, 24, 46, 86, 91, 116, 131-32 
Govardhana : 335 

Grahasthashram : 205, 207-08, 213-14, 252-54, 
262, 265 
Greeks : 80, 292 
Gritsamada : 201-03, 247-50 
Guha, the king : 224 
Gunas : 201-251 
Gurukul 111 

Hanuman : 324-27 
Hardatta (Commentator) : 63, 153 
Hari Vamsha Purana : 23, 132, 201, 204, 247, 
250, 298, 302, 334, 336, 341 
Himsa : 5 


355 

Hindu Civilization : 5 
Hindu Literature : 189 
Hindu Pantheon : 177-78 
Hindu Theology : 71 

Hinduism : 14-15, 161, 177-78, 181-82, 189, 
284, 291 

Hindus : 5, 13-16, 25, 53, 55, 62, 66, 76-81, 99, 
108-111, 128, 133, 135, 151, 155, 189, 205, 
252, 256, 284-85, 293, 314, 329 
Hiranyagarbha : 23, 132, 165, 296 
Hoam : 321 

Ikshvaku : 200, 246 

Ila (Manu’s Daughter) : 178, 200-01, 247 
Imam Shah : 14 

Indra : 5, 19, 29-30, 40, 43, 79, 82-86, 93-96, 
100, 103, 110, 128, 133-35, 163, 165, 173, 
190, 192, 194, 197. 238-40, 254, 275-78, 
296-98, 301-02, 311, 313, 335-36, 338 
Indrajit : 327 
Isana : 194, 240 
Islam : 13 

Itihas : 22, 53, 65. 146-47, 154 
Iyengar, Mr. : 317 

Jaimini : 32-34, 37, 40, 67-70, 136-37, 157-59 

Jainism : 290 

Jamadagni : 312 

Jambavan : 338 

Jambavati : 338 

Jamuna (see Yamuna) 

Janaka (of Mithila) : 13-14, 97 

Janaka (of Videha) : 68, 158, 224, 325, 327 

Jangam (Cult) : 115 

Janhavi : 296 

Janhu : 296 

Janmejaya : 202, 248, 299 
Jara, a hunter : 342 
Jarasandha : 224, 337-39 
Jatil Gautami : 300 
Jats : 14 
Jayadratha : 340 
Jesus Christ : 13, 99 
Jews : 6-7, 99, 174 

Jnana Marg (Kanda) : 38, 60, 67-69, 156, 
158, 160 
Jyotistoma : 38 

Kabara (Demon) : 47 
Kaikeyi : 323-24 
Kailash : 77, 87, 100-01 
Kalaka : 197, 243 
Kalayavana : 337-38 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


356 


INDEX 


356 

Kali (Goddess) : 13, 60, 102, 105-06, 117-18, 
124-27, 179, 181. Names of : 179-80 
Kali Purana : 117, 123-24 
Kali River : 171 

Kali Yuga : 17, 108, 288-95, 303-09, 314- 
18, 322-23 
Kalindi : 338 
Kaliya : 335 
Kalpa : 17-18 

Kalluk Bhatta : 16-18, 60, 115, 230 

Kamakhya Devi : 115-19, 121 

Kamalakar : 55 

Kandarpa : 102 

Kane, P. V. : 58, 66, 155, 317 

Kanin : 227 

Kansa : 333-37 

Kanvas : 134 

Kapila (Founder of Sankhya) : 31, 90, 202, 
250 

Karma Marg (Kand) : 38, 67-69, 156-60 

Karma Sutras : 157 

Kama : 224 

Karusha : 200, 246 

Kashyapa : 51, 98, 197, 203, 243 

Katha Upanishad : 66, 154 

Kathaka Samhita : 191, 237 

Katyayana : 28, 133 

Kaula (Sect) : 114 

Kauravas : 90, 317, 333, 340 

Kausalya : 323-24 

Kaushitaki Brahmana : 20, 129 

Kaushitaki Br. Upanishad : 66, 155 

Kaushitaki Grihya Sutra : 109, 295 

Keshin : 335 

Kinnars : 196, 242, 325 

Kishkindha : 326 

Koran 14 

Kratu : 196-97, 242-43, 279 
Kripacharya : 218 

Krishna : 13, 71, 81, 84-85, 88-96, 102, 110, 
169, 179, 251, 291, 296, 303-04, 333-42 
Krita Yuga : 17, 108, 289-93, 295, 304, 
308-09, 314-16 

Kshatriyas : 66, 92, 109-110, 116, 155, 169, 
173, 189-99, 203-06, 215-16, 220-25, 228, 
230-31, 237, 241-50, 252, 255, 295-96, 
315, 318, 339 
Kubja : 337 
Kumarila Bhatta : 57 
Kunti : 109, 299 
Kusha (son of Rama) : 330 
Kuvera : 96 


Lanka : 323-30 

Lava (son of Rama) : 330 

Laxman : 323-29, 338-39 

Laxmi : 13, 97, 101, 106, 165, 179 

Liberty : 283 

Linga Puja (Phallus worship); 164, 166, 294 
Linga Purana : 102 

Madhavi : 298-99 
Madhuparka : 111-12 
Madhavacharya : 38, 115, 155-56 
Madhavika : 113 
Madhyandin Brahmins : 28, 133 
Magadhas : 223-24, 337 
Mahabharata : 91, 93, 101, 109-10, 196-98, 
200, 204, 243, 250, 291-92, 296-300, 302, 
304, 306, 314, 333-34, 339-40 
Mahabharata war : 291-317 
Mahasala Saunak : 64 
Mahavidyas : 180 
Maha Yuga : 17, 306, 314 
Mahesha : 15, 58, 60, 71-81, 84-97, 100-03, 
115, 117, 124, 125-27, 161, 163-64, 166- 
72, 176-79, 181, 246, 277, 312 
Mahidhara (Commentator) : 295 
Maitreyani Samhita : 237, 251, 291 
Maitreyi : 201, 247, 283 
Makars : 113, 181 
Malati Madhava : 33, 136 
Malkanas : 14 
Mamata : 300 

Mandara (Mountain) : 77, 170 
Mant Mauli : 14 
Mantras : 54-55, 147-48 
Manu : 17, 55, 115-16, 123, 148, 186, 193, 
198, 200, 243-44, 246, 249, 259, 297, 
312, 314, 316 

Manu (Daksha’s Daughter) : 197, 243, 250 
Manu Prajapati : 92 
Manu Savarni : 313 
Manu Sivi : 276 

Manu Smriti : 16, 22, 55, 60, 115, 131, 195- 
96, 200-03, 205-08, 213-16, 218, 220-25, 
228-31, 241, 245, 247, 250, 253-58, 260- 
67, 279-80, 317 
Manu Susanti : 276, 311 
Manu Swarochista : 276, 311 
Manu Swayambhu : 275-76, 279-80, 310-11 
Manu Vaivasvata : 277-78, 311-12 
Manvantara : 17, 275, 277-80, 307-314 
Marichi : 75, 90, 196-97, 242-43, 279, 297 
Markandeya Purana : 102, 105, 107, 112, 
131, 303-04 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


357 


INDEX 


Marriages : 226-231 

Martanda Rishi : 197 

Maruts : 44, 90, 193, 239-40 

Mathura : 333, 337 

Matia Kunbis : 16 

Matrikas Bheda Tantra : 115 

Matrikas : 180 

Matrusavarnya : 230, 232 

Matsya Purana : 59, 149 

Matsyagandha (Satyavati) : 300 

Max Muller : 28, 54, 62-64, 81, 133, 147, 151-52 

Mayavati : 304 

Mayavi : 337 

Mayne Mr. : 226 

Medhatithi : 230 

Megasthenes : 223 

Meru (Mountain) : 90 

Meshachas : 7, 174-75 

Mimansa Sutras : 67 

Mimansa System : 59, 149, 157 

Mimansakas : 27, 32, 34, 137-38, 145 

Mitra : 41, 44, 99, 140, 200, 246 

Mitra Rajendralal : 62, 114, 124 

Mitramisha : 55-57 

Mlenchhas : 196, 242 

Momans : 14 

Monarchy : 281 

Monotheism : 79 

Mookerjee, R. K. : 265 

Much Kunda : 337 

Muir Prof. : 37, 39, 142 

Mundaka Upanishad : 63-64, 152-53 

Muslims : 6, 13-15, 111 

Nabhaga : 200 

Nagas : 163, 196, 199. 242, 244, 335 
Nahusha : 247 

Naiyayikas : 32-33, 35, 136, 139 
Nala (King) : 108, 295, 304 
Nanda : 88, 333-37 
Nanda Pandit : 230 

Narada : 65, 90, 154, 165, 196-97, 242, 279, 
298, 324, 332-33, 341 

Naramedha Yajna (Human Sacrifice) : 124, 
126, 294 

Narayana : 96, 165, 169, 195, 241 

Narayaniya Upanishad : 152 

Nebuchadnezzar : 6-7, 173-74 

Nigamas : 60 

Nirukta : 165 

Nishadas : 224 

Nishtigri : 100 

Nishumbha : 102-05 


357 


Niyoga : 227, 299, 305 
Non-Aryan Castes : 163-64, 215, 220 
Non-Brahmins : 109, 296 
Non-Vedic : 164 

Nyaya System : 31, 33, 39, 59, 138, 149 

Om : 62, 97, 131-32, 152 

Paishacha marriage : 227 
Pancha Dravida : 110-11 
Pancha Gauda : 110-11 
Pandavas : 91, 108, 224, 291, 295, 300, 317 
333, 340 

Pandu : 88, 109, 299, 300 
Panini : 224 
Parameshti : 238 
Parashara : 201, 247, 300 
Parashurama : 73-74, 78 
Parikshita : 133, 291, 317 
Paris : 13, 15 

Parvati : 13, 86-87, 115, 165 Names of : 100 

Pashupata : 115 

Patna Potestas : 232 

Pauranik Dharma : 176-77, 181 

Pishachas : 94, 163, 196, 199, 242 

Pitra Savarnva : 230-32 

Pitri Karman : 56 

Plato : 286 

Pliny, the Elder : 223 

Polyandry : 299 

Polygamy : 299 

Polytheism : 79 

Prachetas : 196-97, 242-43, 279 
Pradyumnya : 304 

Prajapati : 20-24, 71, 85-86, 94, 96, 129-32, 
146-47, 169, 191, 193-94, 199, 203, 208, 

240, 243-44, 249, 263, 266 
Prajapatya marriage : 226-27 
Pratiloma : 66, 155 
Pratiloma marriage : 230 
Primitive Tribes : 286 
Prishni : 100 

Prithvi : 81, 99 

Proletariat, Dictatorship of : 279 
Pulaha : 196-97, 242-43, 279 
Pulakeshi : 317 

Pulastya (Rishi) : 113, 196-97, 242-43, 279 
Puranas : 22-23, 53, 58-61, 65, 71-72, 75, 
130-31, 146-50, 154, 166-69, 200, 204. 
245, 250, 291, 317-18, 340 Names of : 106 
Pururavas : 201, 250 

Purusha : 19, 24, 76-77, 189-90, 195. 236-37, 

241. 249-51 

Purusha Purana : 128-29, 133 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


358 


INDEX 


358 


Purusha Sukta : 8, 19, 128, 190-92. 195, 
198, 237-39, 251 

Purva Mimansa : 32, 39-40, 56, 136-37, 213 
Pushan : 44, 87, 192, 194, 238, 240, 297, 302 
Putna : 334 
Putreshti Yajna : 323 

Radha : 179, 336 
Raivata : 276, 311 

Rajasuya Yajna : 112, 194, 201, 290. 339 
Rajput : 14 

Rakshasas : 41, 43, 46, 90, 140, 163, 326 
Rama : 13, 73-74, 81, 84-85, 88-89, 96-98, 
110, 179, 224, 296, 323-32 
Ramanujacharya : 115 

Ramayana : 73, 96, 110, 112, 196-98, 204, 
224, 243, 250, 296, 323, 325, 328, 330 
Rambha (Apsara) : 103 
Rangacharya : 289 
Rasa-Lila : 336 
Ravana : 96, 323-28 

Rig-Veda : 17, 19-24, 28, 30, 40-44, 50, 65, 
81, 99, 109, 129-35, 143, 147, 153-54, 
183-85, 190-93, 195-96, 200-04, 236-39, 
245, 251, 254, 289, 296, 302, 314-15, 336 
Rishyasringa : 300, 323-24 
Rohini : 296, 333 
Romans : 80, 232 
Rudhira Adhyaya : 117 
Rudra : 71, 76, 81, 90, 94, 96, 100, 125-26, 
163- 64, 169, 192-93, 194, 197, 201, 238-40, 
243, 246-47, 312, 339 
Rudra Savarni : 278, 313 
Rukmini : 336, 338 

Sachi (Indrani) : 44, 50, 100, 110, 296, 314 
Sadacara : 56 

Sadhyas : 190, 196, 237, 242 
Sahadeva : 339-40 
Saivas : 76-78, 115, 171 
Sakas : 292 
Sakhi Sarwar : 14 
Sakinis : 181 
Saktas : 60 
Salisuk Maurya : 292 
Sama-Veda : 17, 19-24, 28, 65, 90, 129-33, 
147, 154, 184-85, 190-92, 195, 200, 202, 
237, 241, 245, 335 
Samba (son of Krishna) : 304, 342 
Sambai (Rishi) : 304 
Samhitas : 53, 63, 146-47, 153 
Sanat Kumara : 65, 154 
Sandhya : 293-94, 306-09 
Sandhyamsa : 293-94, 306-09 


Sanjaya : 296 

Sankara Castes : 215-17, 220 
Sankaracharya : 59, 67-69, 152, 157, 159, 
213, 287 
Sankasur : 335 

Sankhya System : 31, 197, 201, 243, 251 
Sanskrit Literature : 156 
Sanyas : 69, 159, 205, 208, 212-13, 252-56, 
258, 260-67, 321-22 
Saptapadi : 303 

Sarasvati : 97, 101, 106, 165, 169 
Sarva Darshan Sangraha : 155 
Sarvanukramani : 28 
Sati (Custom) : 57 

Satpatha Brahmanas : 20-22, 81-82, 84, 129, 
146, 183, 185, 193, 247, 336 
Satyaki : 340 

Satyabhama : 110, 296, 304, 338 
Satyavati : 88 

Saunaka : 28, 127, 133, 153, 201-03, 247-50 
Sauptika Parvan : 95 
Sautramani : 111 
Savitri (see Gayatri) 

Sects : 161 
Seshanaga : 342 
Shadrach : 7, 174-75 
Shaktas : 115 

Shakti (worship of) : 177-81 
Shaktism : 177-80 
Sham Shastri. Dr. : 289-92 
Shambuka : 332 
Shastri, Ram Mishra : 115 
Shastri, Shivakumar : 115 
Shastri, Subramanya : 115 
Shatrughna : 323 
Shatrupa : 296-97, 310 
Shiesha : 77 
Shisthas : 145 
Shruti : 55, 59 

Shudras : 60, 86, 109, 112, 189-99, 203-04, 
207, 215-16, 222-25, 228, 230-31. 237, 241- 
50, 252, 255, 295, 306, 315, 318, 320, 332 
Shvetaketu : 299, 304 
Sishupal : 88. 338-40 

Sita : 73, 96-97, 110, 179, 224, 296, 301, 323-31 
Siva Linga : 164 
Skambha : 19, 24, 128, 133 
Skanda : 90 

Skanda Purana : 72, 171, 289 
Smarth Dharma : 176 
Smriticandrika : 56 

Smritis : 27, 53, 55-61, 176, 186, 195, 206, 208, 
210, 222, 225, 250, 265. 321 
Shraman : 65, 154 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vo!4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


359 


INDEX 


Srauta Dharma : 176-77, 181 
Sri Devi : 89, 92, 100, 120, 172 
Soma : 21, 43-44, 82, 97, 100, 109, 130, 
192, 194, 200-02, 238, 240, 243, 246, 
249, 298, 302 
Soma (wine) : 295-96, 318 
Sthanu : 197, 243 
Subhadra : 88, 339 
Sudama : 337 
Sudyumna : 200, 246 
Sugriva : 324, 27 
Sumanta : 329 
Sumitra : 323 

Sura (wine) : 109, 114, 295-96 
Surya : 17, 20-24, 34, 39, 42, 44, 58, 75, 82- 
85, 93, 100, 129-33, 170, 173, 296 
Suta Samhita : 217-18, 222-23 
Sutras : 53-55, 146-48, 150 

Taiteriya Aranyaka : 152 
Taiteriya Brahmana : 20-21, 129-30, 164, 
191, 194, 237-38, 251, 316 
Taiteriya Upanishad : 64, 152 
Tamas : 276 

Tantras : 59-61, 113-15, 123 Forms of : 60 
Relation to Vedas : 60 Teachings of : 60 
Tantraison : 113-15 
Tantrik Dharma : 177, 181 
Tara (wife of Brahaspati) : 201, 246 
Tarakratna, Jadaveswara : 114 
Tilottama (Apasara) : 103 
Treta Yuga : 17, 102, 108, 289-95, 304, 
308-09, 314-16 
Trikandesa : 63 
Trimurti : 169, 172-73, 175-76 
Uchhaisrava : 90 
Uddalak : 299 
Uddyog Parvan 110 
Ugrasen : 333, 337 
Uima : 100 
Untouchables : 111 
Upamanyu : 95 
Upangas : 149 

Upanishads : 53-54, 60-70, 88, 130, 146-47, 
151-55, 159-60, 204, 258, 264 
Urvashi : 247, 297-98 
Usha : 100, 296 
Ushanas : 91, 201, 240. 246 
Uttanka : 299 
Utathya : 300 
Uttara : 297 
Uttarkand : 110 


359 


Vach : 20-21, 24, 75, 129-30,133,135,146,169 
Vaidehaka : 223-24 
Vaikuntha : 170 

Vaivasvata : 197, 200, 243, 246, 250, 276, 
291, 293, 297, 312-13 
Vaishampayana : 202, 248 
Vaisheshika : 31, 39 
Vaishnavas : 76-78, 115, 170 
Vaishyas : 109, 189-95, 197-99, 203-05, 215, 
222-25, 228, 230-31, 237, 241-50, 252, 255, 
295, 315, 318 

Vajaseniya Samhita : 191, 237-39, 295, 316 
Vali : 326-27 
Valmiki : 197, 323-32 
Vamacharis : 60, 124 

Vanaprastha : 205, 208-14, 252-54, 256, 260-67 

Varaha Purana : 100-01 

Varna System (Dharma) : 189-93, 200, 205. 

236, 237-38, 241, 249-51, 252 
Varnas : 193, 197-99, 203-06, 229-31, 237, 
247, 279, 284, 318. 321 
Varuna : 41, 43-44, 47, 82, 90, 96, 99, 100, 
140, 192, 194, 238, 240, 246, 302 
Varunani : 100 
Vashatkaras : 184 

Vasishtha : 73, 97, 196, 242, 276, 279, 296, 
311-12 

Vasishtha Dharma Sutra : 26-27, 112, 144-45, 
207, 254, 263 

Vasishtha Smriti : 217-18, 222, 341 
Vasu Ritadaman : 96 
Vasudeva : 88, 91-93, 333, 337 
Vasuki : 90 

Vasus : 81, 90, 192, 194, 238-40, 243, 277, 312 
Vayu : 17, 20, 24, 42, 58, 82, 129-33, 173, 190, 
192, 194, 198, 238, 240, 244, 302 
Vayu Purana : 59, 149, 203, 249, 250 
Vedangas : 59 
Vedic hymns : 

Composers of : 29-30 

Vedanta : 62-63, 67-69, 91 151-60. 212, 270, 
284-85 

Vedanta Sutras : 69-70, 157, 160 
Vedantins : 68 
Vedantists : 155, 157-58 
Vedas : 7-8, 14-41, 44, 52, 53, 55-70, 82, 86, 
90-91, 97, 112, 115-16, 128-60, 164, 183- 
86, 193, 196-209, 212, 236. 245-49, 252-54, 
260-65, 270, 285, 299, 315-16 
As Apaurusheya : 28-32, 133-37 
As Infallible : 25, 28, 37, 52, 140, 144, 150 
As Sanatan : 16-18, 31, 36 
Authority of : 136-40 
Origin of : 19-24, 128-35 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


360 


INDEX 


360 

Critics of : 37-39 
Morality in : 41 
Vibhandaka : 300 
Videha : 67 
Vidur : 88 
Vipaschit : 276 
Viraj : 190, 195, 236, 241 
Vishnu : 15, 58, 60, 71-79, 81, 84-90, 94-97, 
100-01, 103, 106-07, 161, 163-71, 176-80, 
202-03, 248-49, 276-77, 293, 311, 315, 
325, 336 

Vishnu Dharma Sutra : 112 
Vishnu Purana : 23, 131, 200-02, 223, 245- 
50, 275, 277, 280, 293, 306, 308-14, 336 
Visvakarma : 74, 312 
Visvamitra : 56, 98, 299, 312 
Vraja : 335-36 
Vratrasur : 335 

Vratyas : 191, 215, 220, 224-25, 238, 249 
Vrindavan : 335-36 
Vritra : 30, 135 
Vyas : 300, 333 

Weber, Albrecht : 289 
White Yajur-Veda : 191 
Wilson, Prof. : 143 


Yadavas : 303, 337, 342-43 
Yajna : 87, 159, 163, 203, 270, 301, 302, 330 
Yajnavalkya Smriti : 55, 217-18, 222 
Yajur Veda : 17, 19-24, 28, 40, 44, 65, 86, 
110, 128-33, 147, 154, 164, 183, 185, 
190, 192, 200-04, 237, 239, 241, 245, 251, 
294-96, 315 

Yakshas : 90, 93, 196, 199, 242, 244, 315, 325 
Yama : 41-44, 90, 140-41, 177, 194, 198, 
240, 243-44, 277, 297, 302, 312 
Yama Vaivasvata : 197 
Yami : 41-44, 140-41, 277, 297, 312 
Yamuna : 335 
Yashoda : 333-34 

Yaska (Author of Nirukta) : 40-41, 142, 
172, 333-34 
Yati : 254 
Yavanas : 224, 292 
Yayati : 298-99 
Yoginis : 180 
Yonija : 301 

Yudhisthira : 94, 339-41 
Yugas : 288-89, 304, 308-09, 316 

Zoraster : 13 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


361 


ERRATA 


Page 

Line 

Incorrect 

Correct 

9 

2 

destory 

destroy 

13 

1 

conjeries 

congeries 

16 

7 

means 

mean 

29 

7 

these 

thee 


15 

are 

art 


25 

Raghuanas 

Rahuganas 

35 

29 

help 

held 

38 

13 

ascetic 

ascetic’s 


23 

stages 

staves 

42 

24 

exbrances 

embraces 

45 

1 

lightening 

lightning 

46 

4 

serpants 

serpents 

65 

39 

Pulkasa 

Paulakasa 

69 

2 

Bramhanand 

Brahmadnan 

77 

37 

serpant 

serpent 

81 

27 

Dyasus 

Dyaus 

85 

33 

abundently 

abundantly 

86 

4 

ignorane 

ignorance 


8 

inasmuchas 

in-as-much as 

87 

4 

commended 

commanded 

92 

14 

moveable 

movable 

94 

21 

possesing 

possessing 

98 

15 

destory 

destroy 

99 

13 

Usha 

Ushas 

103 

38 

messangers 

messengers 

112 

30 

Markendey 

Markandeya 

113 

8 

consists 

consist 

114 

4 

molasess 

molasses 

120 

5 

earthern-jar 

earthen- jar 


10 

earthern 

earthen 


25 

entelope 

antelope 

123 

22 

vessle 

vessel 

126 

7 

estern 

eastern 

131 

34 

expiration 

expiation 

132 

19 

emboidied 

embodied 


37 

smiriti 

smriti 

133 

3 

of scrapped 

or scraped 

134 

31 

chaunter 

chanter 

135 

31 

well-accounted 

well-accourted 


33 

life 

like 

136 

1 

praised 

praises 


7 

extravagent 

extravagant 

138 

17-18 

into dadhya atra, the original letter 
being altered into by 

into dadhy atra, the original letter 
T being altered into ‘y’ by 

140 

41 

saysest 

sayest 

141 

15 

that 

than 


39 

separate 

separates 

145 

33 

these 

those 

147 

14 

aphorims 

aphorism 

148 

11 

cannon 

canon 

151 

17 

cannonical 

canonical 


31 

modofications 

modifications 

152 

6 

treatises 

treatise 

153 

21 

cannon 

canon 


26 

cannonical 

canonical 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-04\vol4-06.indd MK 


SJ+DK 23-9-2013/YS-9-11-2013 


362 


ERRATA — contd. 


Page 

Line 

Incorrect 

Correct 

156 

15 

rahaspati 

Brahaspati 

161 

23 

Nigautha 

Nigantha 

165 

34 

ephithets 

epithets 

172 

18 

Shiva 

delete 

183 

1 

the 

The 

195 

17 

what the 

what explanation. The 

213 

21 

be 

he 

228 

3 

irrebutable 

irrebuttable 


5 

suspicious 

suspicion, 

229 

29 

Dwaya 

Dwayapayana 


30 

Payan 

delete 

233 

13 

first 

first). 

235 

19 

of into 

or into 

276 

39 

rules 

rulers 

277 

2 

each 

each, 

278 

38 

manu’s 

Manu’s 

279 

6 

Kanishthas 

Kanishthas, 

283 

36-37 

fellow-felling. What 

fellow-feeling what 

284 

10 

built 

build 


28 

familar 

familiar 


32 

designaged 

designated 

286 

1 

Tatvanmsi 

Tatvamasi 


14 

and realize 

and to realize 

288 

20 

asertain 

ascertain 

298 

42 

Galawa. 

delete 

303 

24 

irrebutable 

irrebuttable 

307 

19 

(forty- eighty 

(forty- eight 

308 

22 

Sandhyasana 

Sandhyamsa 

311 

4 

the 

then 


32 

vibhu 

Vibhu 

318 

15 

modified 

codified 

322 

21 

technics 

technique, 

323 

12 

Shrung at the sacrifice who 
prepared 

Shrung to perform the sacrifice. 
The sage Shrung at the sacrifice 
prepared” 

324 

41 

of which 

delete 

326 

34 & 
36 

dual 

duel 


37 

daul 

duel 

329 

32 & 
39 

Sumanta 

Sumantra 

332 

3 

Valmiki 

Valmiki 1 

Foot-Note i 1 “On Rama-Rajya 
and the Slave — mentality of our 
Orthodox — An Expostulatory Letter 
to the Greatest Hindu of the Age 
from a Critical Co-religionsist” by 
Shri S. D. Nadkarni, Published by 
Samaj Samata Sangh, Bombay, 
1932 — p. (as instructed in the 
handwritten MS). 

351 

9 

inciples. 

Principles 


Corrected from the handwritten MS. — Ed. 


