D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05 -12-2013 


1 



Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 


Courtesy : Artist Prof. Pramod Ramteke, Chitrakala Mahavidyalya, Nagpur 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05 -12-2013 


2 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


3 


Significance of the Hindu Code 

No law passed by the Indian Legislature in the past or likely to 
be passed in the future can be compared to it (Hindu Code) in point 
of its significance. To leave inequality between class and class, 
between sex and sex which is the soul of Hindu society, untouched 
and to go on passing legislation relating to economic problems 
is to make a farce of our Constitution and to build a palace on a 
dung heap. This is the significance I attached to the Hindu Code. 


— Dr. Ambedkar on ‘Hindu Code’ 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05 -12-2013 


4 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


5 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vol. 14 

PART ONE 

(Sections I to III) 


Edited 

by 

Vasant Moon 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05 -12-2013 


6 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 14 (Part-1) 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : 6 December, 1995 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 

Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : ? 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05 -12-2013 


7 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 



Kumari Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when these 
were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on the 
base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 


(Kumari Selja) 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


8 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 


Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 

Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 

Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


1 


PREFACE 

Maharashtra has been fortunate in having a long tradition of 
social reforms. Just as in Europe, Christianity inaugurated the 
Era of equality by preaching that a prince and a pauper are equal 
in the eyes of God, saints like Dnyaneshwar, Namdeo, Tukaram, 
Gora Kumbhar and Chokhamela brought about a great social 
change by preaching the Gospel of compassion, equality and lib- 
erty of worship. Caste barriers were annihilated. The rise of the 
Maratha power under Shivaji the Great demonstrated that a popu- 
lar hero could be crowned as a King. Shivaji heralded the dawn of 
political equality. These saints of Maharashtra preached the Gos- 
pel of democracy in religion, breaking down the barriers of classes 
and castes. The Warkari cult did not recognise caste. Members of 
the Warkari cult in procession, marched together eating the same 
food in the spirit of the true brotherhood. They shared the com- 
mon quest for God. The Bhakti movement of the Warkaris broad- 
ened and deepened the freedom of worship. 

Article 25 of the Constitution permits such freedom. The 
reforms introduced by Dr. Ambedkar in Hindu Law have been 
accepted by and large. He laid the foundation of the common 
Civil Code for the Hindus and the principle is capable of 
extension to other sections of the Indian society. However, reforms 
in religious beliefs and practices are slow and voluntary. It is hoped 
that the guidance given by Dr. Ambedkar in this respect will 
be availed of by leaders of different communities and they will 
initiate a dialogue within the country so as to facilitate reforms in 
laws. Reforms, religious and social, had stirred the Maharashtrian 
society. The soil was fertile for further changes within the frame- 
work of the Hindu Law. Over the years, the Hindu Law under- 
went transformation, opening the channels of communication. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


2 


(vi) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar, by codifying the Hindu Law in respect of marriage, 
divorce and succession, rationalised and restored it to its glory. 
Dr. A m bedkar has preserved marriage as sacrament and promoted 
the growth of family values. Consistent with the Constitution, the 
Hindu Law as modified permits people to practice and profess their 
religion. But as Dr. Ambedkar categorically stated, “the state has 
retained all along the right to interfere in the personal law of any 
community in this country”, and therefore, there is a sound basis 
for liberalisation of personal laws so as to broaden the freedom of 
the individual and the unity of the country based on such freedom. 



(MANOHAR JOSHI) 

Bombay : Chief Minister, 

November 28, 1995. Maharashtra State. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


3 


EDITORIAL 

Present volume contains speeches of Dr. Ambedkar in the 
codification of the Hindu Law. The Bill to amend and codify 
certain branches of the Hindu Law was referred to the Select 
Committee consisting of eminent jurists and parliamentarians 
viz. Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, 
Shri H. V. Kamat, Smt. G. Durgabai and many others. The list 
of the members of the Select Committee reads like the directory 
of eminent Indians. 

Before the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and the Hindu 
Marriage Act 1955 of which the Bill is a precurser, the Hindu 
Law was uncodified in a large measure, though certain branches 
of it were the subject of legislative intervention viz. Hindu 
Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937. Scattered to innumerable 
decisions of the Indian High Courts and also of the Privy Council, 
it was a source of legislation and therefore, it was necessary to 
give a definite shape and form to the Hindu Law by consolidation 
and codification. The principles of codification covered (1) right 
to property, (2) order of succession to the property, (3) 
maintenance, marriage, divorce, adoption, minority and 
guardianship. The two schools of Hindu Law viz. Mitakshara 
and Dayabhag, created and sustained inequality. The 
Mitakshara school treated the property of the Hindu as 
belonging to a co-parcenary in which by reason of birth sons, 
grand-sons and great-grand sons had interest. The property 
passed by survivorship under Mitakshara whereas Dayabhag 
recognised the rule of personal interest and capacity to dispose 
of the property having interest in it. Further the Bill had the 
object of making the widow, the daughter and the widow of a 
pre-deceased son eligible to inherit property. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


4 


(viii) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


It is not fair to reproduce the reasons for introduction of the 
Bill nor it is necessary to refer to the provisions of the law 
relating to marriage and divorce as the reader will find them 
competently explained in the speeches of the distinguished 
members who along with Dr. Ambedkar contributed to the 
enfranchisement of women in the Indian sub-continent. 

Dr. Ambedkar himself had explained lucidly the reasons for 
consolidation and codification. The chaotic condition of the 
Hindu Law was reduced to neat propositions in the form of 
judicial prenouncements and codification was the legislative 
recognition of the judge made law. ‘Law must be stable and yet 
it must change to answer the felt needs of changing times’, to 
paraphrase the words of Benjamin Nathan Cardoze in his 
‘Nature of judicial process’. The unanimous approval of the 
Constituent Assembly to the principles of the Bill is as much a 
tribute to the forensic skills of Dr. Ambedkar as to the training 
and temperament of those who were the members of the 
Constituent Assembly. The principles of the Bill are in harmony 
with the constitutional philosophy of equality of men and 
women. 

Needless to add that the Bill was a part of social engineering 
via law. It was by the standard of the time a revolutionary 
measure. The debates in the Constituent Assembly provoked 
sharp reactions. However, by providing such sharp reactions, 
freedom of speech fulfilled its high purpose viz. to invite 
discussions and to raise disputes. Now that the dispute is over 
and women have become as assertive as men, if not more, 
younger generation may find delightful reading and may well 
imagine what blessings of freedom they enjoy under our noble 
Constitution. 

Though the proposal for consolidation and codification of the 
Hindu Law passed through opposition, eventually it came to be 
approved and applauded. 

This could be possible as there was sustained attempt to 
educate public opinion and to ameliorate the condition of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


5 


EDITORIAL 


fix) 


women. A list of the Acts modifying the Hindu Law relating to 
women would be instructive : — 

(1) The Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850. 

(2) The Hindu Widow Remarriage Act, 1856. 

(3) The Indian Succession Act, 1925. 

(4) The Native Convert’s Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866. 

(5) The Transfer of Property Act IV of 1882 as amended by 
Act XX of 1929. 

(6) The Indian Majority Act, 1875. 

(7) The Guardian and Wards Act, 1890. 

(8) The Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act 
XXI of 1929. This Act amends the Madras Act of 1914 and 1921 
and the Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 which related 
to transfers and bequests in favour of unborn person. 

(9) The Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930. This Act makes 
all acquisitions by means of learning the separate property of 
the acquirer. 

(10) The Hindu Women’s Rights to Property Act XVIII of 1937. 

So also it may be noted that the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, 
supersedes the rules of the Hindu Law of Evidence. The Indian 
Penal Code, 1859 supersedes the whole of the Hindu Criminal 
Law. 

The passing of the measure by the Parliament was, therefore, 
the slow but sure effect of these legislative measures and was 
part of the social engineering which found its fulfilment in the 
Indian Constitution. 

This volume comprises complete debate on the Hindu Code 
Bill introduced by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in the Constituent 
Assembly on 11th April 1947. The Bill was moved for referring 
to the Select Committee on 9th April 1948. This was followed 
by debate which continued for more than 4 years and still 
remained inconclusive. In the words of Dr. Ambedkar, it was 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


6 


(x) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

killed and died unusept and unsung. This was probably the 
longest discussion on any single Bill in the free India’s 
Parliament. Dr. Ambedkar felt that the Government and the 
party in power i.e. Congress were not eager to clear the Hindu 
Code. He, therefore, tendered his resignation on 27th September 
1951 to the Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru but 
continued to participate in the Parliamentary debates till 10th 
October 1951 on the request of the Prime Minister. In his letter 
he expressed that he attached greatest importance to the Hindu 
Code Bill and would be prepared to undergo any strain on his 
health to get the Bill through. He wanted the Bill to be taken- 
up on top priority basis on 16th August and be finished by the 
1st of September 1951. However, the opponents of the Hindu 
Code continued obstructive tactics and delayed the passing of 
the Bill. Dr. Ambedkar ultimately submitted his statement of 
resignation on 10th October and left the House in anguish. 

The whole discussion on the Hindu Code right from its 
introduction in the Constituent Assembly till 10th October 1951 
is divided into 4 sections in this Book. Section I consists of the 
introduction of the Bill for referring it to the Select Committee. 
Dr. Ambedkar’s speech explaining the salient features and the 
speeches of Dr. Pattabhi Sitarammaya, Naziruddin Ahmad, Smt. 
Hansa Mehta, Shri Ram Sahay, Dr. B. V. Keskar, Begum Aizaz 
Rasul and Shri R. K. Chaudhary are also included. This part 
covers discussion between 17th November 1947 to 9th April 
1948. 

Second section of this volume is the draft Hindu Code as 
prepared by Dr. Ambedkar and the then existing Hindu Code 
as amended by the Select Committee. This is presented here 
with a view to have a glimpse of Dr. Ambedkar’s original idea 
about the reform of the basic structure of the Hindu Law. 

Third Section comprises general discussion on the Hindu 
Code. Some members questioned the authority of the 
Constituent Assembly to pass this radical legislation, some 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


7 


EDITORIAL 


(xi) 


objected to the reform of divorce and women’s right to inherit 
property and some discarded the Bill totally as interference in 
the religious matters of the Hindu Society. However, progressive 
elements in the Assembly supported the move and praised 
Dr. Ambedkar for his courageous measure. 

The fourth section covers the clausewise discussion on the 
Hindu Code Bill. 

Although the volume is part of Dr. Ambedkar’s writings, his 
attempt for reforming the Hindu Society through the 
introduction of Hindu Code is the most important event of his 
life. Discussion on the Hindu Code and Dr. Ambedkar’s role 
played through the debates thereon are very useful for the 
students of Socio-religious study of the Hindu Society. The 
members of the Committee therefore felt that the whole 
discussion should be brought out in this volume rather than 
mere speeches of Dr. Ambedkar alone. 

It is hoped that this compilation will be useful to the scholars, 
laymen and the historians alike to appreciate the freedom now 
available to different sections of the Hindu society. 

This note will be incomplete without placing on record my 
grateful thanks to: 

* Principal Manohar Joshi, the Chief Minister of Maharashtra 
and Shri Dattatraya Rane, Minister for Higher Education, 
Maharashtra State, who have shown keen interest in the 
thought of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar and encouraged this 
project; and 

* Shri Navjeevan Lakhanpal, Secretary, Higher and Technical 
Education, Government of Maharashtra, whose guidance and 
encouragement has been always of a great help ; 

The work of Editing of this volume has been made possible by 
the ready help, support and co-operation I have received : 

* From Shri P. S. Bhogal, Director and Shri E. R. D’Souza, 
Archivist of the State Archives Department, Bombay, as well 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 8 

(xii) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


as Shri D. S. Chavan, Librarian, Vidhan Bhavan Library, and 
Shri S. S. Rege and Shri Shrikant Talwatkar, Librarian 
Siddharth College, Bombay, who made me available the required 
books i.e. official copy of the Hindu Code to reproduce the 
relevant material for this volume ; 

* From Shri B. M. Ambhaikar, of Bombay and Shri D. C. Ahir 
of Delhi whose suggestions have immensely helped me in this 
volume ; Shri D. K. Ramteke, who spared his copy of Government 
of India’s Hindi Book on Hindu Code and Prof. Pramod Ramteke, 
who spared his painting of Dr. Ambedkar for this volume ; 

* From Shri P. S. More, Director ; Shri P. L. Purkar, Deputy 
Director and Shri A. C. Sayyad, Manager of the Government 
Printing and Stationery, Government of Maharashtra for their 
careful printing of this volume. 

* From Dr. Keshavrao Phalke and Shri T. B. Sen, Deputy 
Secretaries and Shri J. M. Abhyankar, Deputy Director of 
Education, Greater Bombay, for their help in administrative 
matter, and the staff working under me comprising of Shri 
Ravindra Sutar, Smt. Sumitra Nevrekar and Smt. Shalaka 
Tambe for their zeal and faithful assistance in typing, proof 
reading and other office work entrusted to them. 


A</' 


Bombay: 

November 28, 1995. 


(VASANT MOON) 
Officer on Special Duty. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


9 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Preface : Hon’ble Shri Manohar Joshi, Chief Minister of 
Maharashtra 

Editorial 


PART ONE 

Section I 

Hindu Code Bill referred to Select Committee ( 17th November 
1947 to 9th April 1948) 


Section II 

The Draft Hindu Code Bill by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar along with 
the then existing Hindu Code as amended by the Select 
Committee 


Section III 

Discussion on the Hindu Code after return of the Bill from 
the Select Committee (11th February 1949 to 14th 
December 1950) 


PART TWO 

Section TV 

Hindu Code Bill (Clause by Clause Discussion) 


Annexure I 

Statement by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in Parliament in explanation 
of his resignation from the Cabinet 


Annexure II 

Hindu Code Bill and its purpose — By Dharmadeo 
Vidyavachaspati in Hindi 


Pages 

(v) 

(vii) 

1-42 

43-226 

227-786 

789-1312 

1315-1327 

1329-1373 


Index 


1375-1385 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\ PREFACE MK AMIT 9-10-13 S.K.-05-12-2013 


10 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


SECTION I 

HINDU CODE BILL REFERRED TO 
SELECT COMMITTEE 

17th NOVEMBER 1947 
TO 

9th APRIL 1948 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


2 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


3 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 3 


*Hindu Code 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): Sir, I 
move: 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu 

Law be continued.” 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law 

be continued.” 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): May I know the 
present stage of this very important Bill ? I understand there has been 
a considerable amount of agitation among our Hindu friends over it and 
it is better we have a picture of the stage at which the Bill is at present. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It was only introduced. No 
further stage was taken. 

Shri R. V. Dhulekar (U. P.: General): In the new set up we should 
have no Hindu Law and Muslim Law. We should have a general Law 
and therefore.... 

Mr. Speaker : Honourable Member is speaking on the merits. He 
will have an opportunity of saying it when the Bill comes before the 
House. At present the only question is whether the Bill should be 
continued or not continued. 

Shri R. V. Dhulekar : So, Sir, I oppose, it should not be continued. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law 

be continued.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*HINDU INTERCASTE MARRIAGE REGULATING AND 
VALIDATING BILL 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : (U. P. : General): Sir, since the Law 
Minister has informed me that he proposes to make a motion for 
reference of the Hindu Code to a Select Committee during the present 
session, I do not want to move this motion. 

Mr. Speaker : Do I understand that the Honourable Member does 
not want to make a motion now, but he wishes to keep it alive? 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Yes, Sir, In case the Law Minister does 
not bring in his motion, I may have to move mine. 


* Constituent Assembly of India (Legislative) Debates [Hereinafter called C.A. (Leg.) 
D.J, Vol. I, 17th November 1947, p. 41. 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. I, 11th February 1948, p. 599. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 4 

4 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

♦HINDU MARRIAGES VALIDITY BILL 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General); Sir, I beg 
to move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide that marriages between 
Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and their different castes and sub-castes are valid. 
Mr. Speaker : The question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide that marriages 
between Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and their different castes and sub-castes are 
valid.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

♦HINDU CODE 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law) : I beg 
to move: 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 
be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Shri Alladi Krishnaswami 
Ayyar, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Shri M. Anantthasayanam Ayyangar, 
Shrimati G. Durgabai, Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi, Shri U. Srinivasa 
Mallayya Shri Mihir Lai Chattopadhvay, Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, Shrimati 
Renuka Ray, Dr. P. K. Sen, Babu Ramnarayan Singh, Shri Kishorimohan 
Tripathi, Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan, Pandit Balkrishna Sharma, Shri 
Khursheed Lai, Shri Brajeshwar Prasad, Shri B. Shiva Rao, Shri Baldeo 
Swarup, Shri V. C. Kesava Rao and the Mover, with instructions to report 
not later than the last day of the first week of the next session of the 
Assembly and that the number of members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

Sir, it is a matter of great pity and also of great regret both for 
myself and I believe also for the members of the House that so 
important a measure as the codification of Hindu Law should 
have come for discussion before the House almost at the 
fag end of the session. We have, according to the arrangement 
announced by the Honourable speaker this morning, to conclude the 
debate on this motion by 7 O’clock from now, with an interval of 
half an hour. I think it my duty that within the limitations in which 
we are placed I should give more time to Members of the Legislature 
to express their views on the various points raised by this Bill and I 
should like to contribute my own mite to the fulfilment of this wish 
which I have expressed. The only way by which I could do it is to set 
an example by myself to make my opening speech as brief as 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 26th February 1948, p. 1288. 
*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3628-33. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


5 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 5 


I can possibly make. I regret it very much to have been required to 
come to that decision because this Bill is of such a vast character 
that if one were to expound it fully and thoroughly, and to explain 
its provisions as against the background of the existing Hindu Law, 
I have not the slightest doubt that such an effort would take not 
less than four or five hours. But that is impossible, and the House 
therefore, will forgive me if I confine myself to placing before it the 
most salient points which mark a departure from the existing law 

as we know it today. 

Sir, this Bill, the aim of which is to codify the rules of Hindu Law 

which are scattered in innumerable decisions of the High Courts and 

of the Privy Council, which form a bewildering motley to the common 
man and give rise to constant litigation, seeks to codify the law 

relating to seven different matters. Firstly, it seeks to codify the law 
relating to the rights of property of a deceased Hindu who has died 
intestate without making a will, both female and male. Secondly, it 
prescribes a somewhat altered form of the order of succession among 
the different heirs to the property of a deceased dying intestate. The 
next topic it deals with is the law of maintenance, marriage, divorce, 
adoption, minority and guardianship. The House will see what is the 
ambit and the periphery of this Bill. To begin with the question of 
inheritance. Under this head the Bill enacts a new principle, at least 
for certain parts of British India. As many members who are lawyers 
in this House will know, so far as inheritance is concerned, the Hindus 
are governed by two different systems of law. One system is known 
as Mitakashara and the other is known as Dayabhag. The two systems 
have a fundamental difference. According to Mitakshara, the property 
of a Hindu is not his individual property. It is property which belongs 
to what is called a coparcenary, which consists of father, son, 
grandson and great grandson. All these people have a birth-right in 
that property and the property on the death of anyone member of 
this coparcenary passes by what is called survivorship to the members 
who remain behind, and does not pass to the heirs of the deceased. 
The Hindu Code contained in this Bill adopts the Dayabhag rule, 
under which the property is held by the heir as his personal property 
with an absolute right to dispose it of either by gift or by will or 
any other manner that he chooses. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


That is one fundamental change which this Bill seeks to make. In 
other words, it universalises the law of inheritance by extending the 
Dayabhag rule to the territory in which the rule of the Mitakshara now 
operates. 

Coming to the question of the order of succession among the heirs, 
there is also fundamental difference of a general character between the 
rule of the Mitakshara and the rule of the Dayabhag. Under the 
Mitakshara rule the agnates of a deceased are preferred to his cognates; 
under the Dayabhag rule the basis of heirship is blood relationship to 

the deceased and not the relationship based on cognatic or agnatic 
relationship. That is one change that the Bill makes; in other words, 
here also it adopts the rule of the Dayabhag in preference to the rule 
of the Mitakshara. 

In addition to this general change in the order of succession to a 
deceased Hindu, the Bill also seeks to make four changes. One change 
is that the widow, the daughter, the widow of a pre-deceased son, all 
are given the same rank as the son in the matter of inheritance. In 

addition to that, the daughter also is given a share in her father’s 
property; her share is prescribed as half of that of the son. Here again, 
I should like to point out that the only new change which this Bill seeks 
to make, so far as the female heirs are concerned is confined to daughter; 
the other female heirs have already been recognised by the Hindu 
Women’s Right to Property Act of 1937. Therefore, so far as that part 
of the Bill is concerned, there is really no change in the Bill at all; the 
Bill merely carries the provisions contained in the Act to which I have 
made reference. 

The second change which the Bill makes so far as the female heirs 
are concerned is that the number of female heirs recognised now is much 
larger than under either the Mitakshara or the Dayabhag. 

The third change made by the (Bill is this that under the old law, 

whether the Mitakshara or the Dayabhag, a discrimination was made 
among female heirs, as to whether a particular female was rich or poor 

in circumstances at the death of the testator, whether she was married 

or unmarried, or whether she was with issue or without issue. All 
these consideration which led to discrimination in the female heirs are 

now abolished by this Bill. A woman who has a right to inherit 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


7 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 7 


gets it by reason of the fact that she is declared to be an heir irrespective 
of any other considerations. 

The last change that is made relates to the rule of inheritance in 
the Dayabhag. Under the Dayabhag the father succeeds before in 
preference to the mother; under the present Bill the position is altered 
so that the mother comes before the father. 

So much for the order of succession of heirs to a deceased male Hindu. 
I now come to the provisions in the Bill which relates to intestate 
succession to females. As Members of the House who are familiar with 
Hindu Law will know, under the existing law the property held by a 
Hindu female falls into two categories; one is called her stridhan, and 
the other is called “woman’s property”. Taking first the question of 
stridhan, under the existing law stridhan falls into several categories; 
it is not one single category, and the order of succession to the stridhan 
of a female under the existing law varies according to the category of 
the stridhan; one category of stridhan has a different law of succession 
than another category and these rules are alike both as to Mitakshara 
as they are to the Dayabhag. So far as stridhan is concerned the present 
Bill makes two changes. The one change it makes is that it consolidates 
the different categories of stridhan into one single category of property 
and lays down a uniform rule of succession; there is no variety of heirs 
to the stridhan in accordance with the different categories of the 
stridhan — all stridhan is one and there is one rule of succession. 

The second change which the Bill seeks to make with regard to the 
heirs is that the son also is now given a right to inherit the stridhan 
and he is given half the share which the daughter takes. Members will 
realise that in formulating this Bill and making changes in rules of 
succession, it is provided that while the daughter is getting half the 
share in the father’s property, the son is also getting half the share 
in the mother’s property so that in a certain sense the Bill seeks to 
maintain an equality of position between the son and the daughter. 

Coming to the question of the “woman’s estate”, as members of the 
House will know under the Hindu Law where a woman inherits 
properly she gets only what is called a ‘life estate’ She can enjoy the 
income of the property, but she cannot deal with the corpus of the 
property except for legal necessity; the property must pass after 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the death of the woman to the reversioners of her husband. The Bill, 
here again, introduces two changes. It converts this limited estate into 
an absolute estate just as the male when he inherits gets an absolute 
estate in the property that he inherits and secondly, it abolishes the 

right of the reversioners to claim the property after the widow. 

An important provision which is ancillary to the rights of women to 
inherit property contained in this Bill is a provision which relates to 

Dowry. All members of the House know what a scandalous affair this 
dowry is; how, for instance, girls who bring enormous lot of property 
from their parents either by way of dowry or stridhan or gift are treated, 
nonetheless, with utter contempt, tyranny and oppression. The Bill 
provides in my judgment one of the most salutary provisions, namely, 
that this properly which is given as dowry to a girl on the occasion of 
her marriage shall be treated as a trust property, the use of which will 
inure to the woman and she is entitled to claim that property when 

she comes to the age of 18, so that neither her husband nor the relations 
of her husband will have any interest in that property; nor will they 

have any opportunity to waste that property and make her helpless for 
the rest of her life. 

Coming to the provisions relating to maintenance, there is mostly 

nothing new in this part of the Bill. The Bill prescribes that the 

dependents of a deceased shall be entitled to claim maintenance from 
those who inherit his property either under the rules of intestate 
succession or who inherit the property under his will. There are 11 

different kinds of dependants, enumerated in this Bill. I believe, at least 
speaking for myself, it is an unfortunate thing that even a concubine 

is included in the category of dependants, but there it is; it is a matter 
for consideration. The liability to maintenance is cast upon those who 
take the estate of the deceased. As I said, there is nothing very new 
in this part of the Bill. 

There is another part of the Bill which is important and it relates 
to the rights of a wife to claim separate maintenance when she lives 
separate from her husband. Generally, under the provisions of the Hindu 
law, a wife is not entitled to claim maintenance from her husband if 
she does not live with him in his house. The Bill, however, recognises 
that there are undoubtedly circumstances where if the wife has lived 
away from the husband, it must be for causes beyond her control and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


9 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 9 


it would be wrong not to recognise the causes and not to give her separate 
maintenance. Consequently the Bill provides that a wife shall be entitled 
to claim separate maintenance from her husband if he is (1) suffering 
from a loathsome disease, (2) if he keeps a concubine, (3) if he is guilty 
of cruelty, (4) if he has abandoned her for two years, (5) if he has 
converted to another religion and (6) any other cause justifying her living 
separately. 

The next topic to which I wish to make a reference concerns the 
question of marriage. The Code recognises two forms of marriages. One 
is called “sacramental” marriage and the other is called “civil” marriage. 
As members will know, this is a departure from the existing law. The 
existing Hindu law recognises only what is called “sacramental” mar- 
riage, but it does not recognise what we call a “civil” marriage. When 
one considers the conditions for a valid sacramental marriage and a valid 
registered marriage, under the Code there is really very little difference 
between the two. There are five conditions for a sacramental marriage. 
Firstly, the bridegroom must be 18 years old, and the bride must be 
14 years old. Secondly, neither party must have a spouse living at the 
time of marriage. Thirdly, parties must not be within prohibited degree 
of relationship. Fourthly, parties must not be sapindas of each other. 
Fifthly, neither must be an idiot or a lunatic. Except for the fact that 
similarity of sapindaship is not a bar to a registered marriage, so far 
as other conditions are concerned, there is no difference between the 
sacramental marriage and the civil marriage. The only other difference 
is that the registered marriage must be registered in accordance with 
the provisions in the Bill while a sacramental marriage may be registered 
if parties desire to do so. Comparing the rules of marriage contained 
in the Bill and the existing law, it may be noticed that there are three 
differences which the Bill makes. One is this, that while the existing 
law requires identity of caste and sub-caste for a valid sacramental 
marriage, the Bill dispenses with this condition. Marriage under the Bill 
will be valid irrespective of the caste or sub-caste of the parties entering 
into the marriage. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab General) If the 
marriage is between persons belonging to different castes, will it be 
valid? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Let me proceed with my 
speech. If the Honourable Member puts the question while making his 
speech, I shall reply to it. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


10 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The second provision in this Bill is that identity of gotrapravara is 
not a bar to a marriage while it is under the existing law. The third 
distinctive feature is this, that under the old law, polygamy was 
permissible. Under the new law it is monogomy which is prescribed. The 
sacramental marriage was a marriage which was indissoluble. There 
could be no divorce. The present Bill makes a new departure by 
introducing into the law provisions for the dissolution of marriage. Any 
party which marries under the new code has three remedies to get out 
of the contract of marriage. One is to have the marriage declared null 
and void; secondly, to have the marriage declared invalid; and thirdly, 
to have it dissolved. Now, the grounds for invalidation of marriage are 
two: One, if one party to the marriage had a spouse living at the time 

of marriage, then such a marriage will be null and void. Secondly, if 

the relationship of the parties fell within what is called the ambit of 
prohibited-degrees, the marriage could be declared null and void. The 
grounds for invalidation of the marriage are four. First, impotency. 

Second, parties being sapinda. Third, parties being either idiotic or 
lunatic. Fourth, guardian’s consent obtained by force or fraud. In order 
not to keep the sword of dissolution hanging on the head, the Bill, in 
my judgment very wisely, has provided a limit to an action for 
invalidation. It provides that a suit for the invalidation of marriage must 
be filed within three years from the date of the marriage; otherwise the 
suit will be barred and the marriage will continue as though there was 
no ground for invalidity. The Bill also provides that even though the 
marriage may be invalidated and may be declared invalid by a court 
of Law, the invalidation of marriage will not affect the legitimacy of 

the children born and they would continue to be legitimate just the same. 

Then coming to the question of divorce, there are seven grounds on 
which divorce could be obtained. (1) desertion, (2) conversion to another 
religion, (3) keeping a concubine or becoming a concubine, (4) incurably 
unsound mind, (5) virulent and incurable form of leprosy, (6) venereal 
diseases in communicable form and (7) cruelty. 

Coming to the question of adoption, there again, most of the rules 
embodied in the Bill are in no way different from the rules obtaining 
under the present law. There are two new provisions in this part 
dealing with adoption. Firstly, under the Code, it will be necessary 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


11 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 11 


for the husband if he wants to make an adoption to obtain the consent 
of his wife and if there are more than one, at least the consent of one 
of them. Secondly, it also lays down that if the widow wants to adopt, 
she can only adopt if there are positive instructions left by the husband 
authorising her to adopt and in order to prevent litigation as to whether 
the husband has, as a matter of fact, left instructions to his wife, the 
code provides that the evidence of such instructions shall be either by 
registered deed or by a provision in the will. No oral evidence would 
be admissible, so that chances of litigation are considerably mitigated. 

The Code also provides that the adoption may also be evidenced by 
registration. One of the most fruitful sources of litigation in this country 
is the question of adoption. All sorts of oral evidence is manufactured, 
concocted; witnesses are suborned; widows are fooled; they one day 
declare that they have made one adoption and subsequently they make 
an avowal that they have not adopted and in order that all this litigation 
may be put a stop to, the Code makes a salutary provision that there 
may be registration of adoption by a Hindu. 

Then there is the question of minority and guardianship, the last 

subject which the Bill seeks to codify. There is nothing new in this part 
of the Code and, therefore, I do not propose to say anything so far as 
that part in the Bill is concerned. 

As members will realize, the points which arise out of this Bill for 
consideration and which are new are these: First, the abolition of birth- 
right and to take property by survivorship. The second point that arises 
for consideration is the giving of half-share to the daughter. Thirdly, 

the conversion of the women’s limited estate into an absolute 
estate. Fourthly, the abolition of caste in the matter of marriage and 
adoption. Fifthly, the principle of monogamy and sixthly the principle 
of divorce. I have sought to enumerate these points separately and 

categorically because I felt that in view of the limited time we have 
at our disposal, it would be of help to the Members of this House if 
I could point out what are the points of debate on which attention 
may be concentrated. These departures which are made in this Bill 
undoubtedly requires justification, but I think it would be a waste of 
time if at this stage undertook any defence of the departures enacted 
by this Bill. I propose to hear Honourable Members as to what they 
have to say on the points which I have enumerated and if I find that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


it is necessary for me to enter upon a justification, I propose to do so 
in the course of my reply. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 
be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Shri Alladi Krishnaswami 
Ayyar, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Shri M. Anantthasayanam Ayyangar, 
Shrimati G. Durgabai, Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi, Shri U. Srinivasa 
Mallayya, Shri Mihir Lai Chattopadhyay, Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, Shrimati 
Renuka Ray, Dr. P. K. Sen, Babu Ramnarayan Singh, Shri Kishorimohan 
Tripathi, Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan, Pandit Balkrishna Sharma, Shri 
Khurshed Lai, Shri Brajeshwar Prasad, Shri B. Shiva Rao, Shri Baldeo 
Swamp, Shri V. C. Kesava Rao and the Mover, with instructions to report 
not later than the last day of the first week of the next session of the 
Assembly and that the number of members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

* Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya (Madras : General): Mr. Chairman, 
Sir, I rise at an early moment in order to catch your eye in the hope 
that I shall have the ear of the House while having the eye of the 
Chairman. This is a very interesting piece of legislation which has been 
presented to this House, a piece of legislation for which the country has 
been whiting for long. This country having passed under the rule of 
foreigners for nearly a thousand years has not been able to effect that 
social progress which is incidental to changes in society in the world 
and which takes place imperceptibly by force of everchanging custom. 
Custom is a force which is generally patronized, appreciated and 
recognized by the rulers. Unfortunately, this country has had no kings 
for a long time to whose inspiring example the subjects could look up 
for any changes in society. In the West, even today, if a social change 
is required all that is to be done is for the King to initiate that change 
and all the people will follow as a matter of course. You might have 
heard the story of Edward the Eighth, who, when he was Prince of Wales, 
went to a far distant island and having heard from the people that their 
occupation was gone because of the change of fashions, asked what the 
fashion was which had ruined the occupation. They said formerly they 
were manufactures of straw hats and now straw hats had given place 
to felt hats and therefore, they had lost their occupation. The next day 
he appeared in public on a ceremonial occasion with a straw hat and 


* C.A. (Leg.) D„ Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3633-39. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


13 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 13 


the straw hat industry was at once revived. That is the power of the 
king; he is not merely the political head of a State, but head of society, 
the exemplar, the mentor and the monitor. As such he evaluates the 
customs age long, traditional and hoary — sanctified by age and it lies 
in his power to change that custom one way or the other. But what 
has been our fate since the British rule had come into existence? So 
long as the Muslims were ruling this country, they copied our customs 
and we copied their customs; there was an inter-mixture and inter- 
currency of customs and therefore, some measures of social progress. 
But after the British came, when they came to be looked upon as 
untouchables and even unapproachables by the vast majority of the 
population of this country, the situation was that they were afraid to 
touch the customs of this country with the longest pole. They were afraid 
of any interference with the socio-religious structure which was a delicate 
structure almost like a chemical balance and bore the repercussions of 
the smallest change coming from abroad and from adventitious sources. 
They were afraid that such repercussions would be ruinous to the 
stability of their empire in this country and therefore, they adopted 
the plausible and seemingly reasonable altitude of not interfering 
with the religion or the custom of the land. In this manner the Judges 
of the High Courts always helped to register the custom as it had 
existed for long centuries behind, and never registered a change in 
the custom as marking a progress in society. Thus custom became 
petrified and when custom became petrified, progress became impeded 
altogether, and for a hundred and fifty years our society has not been 
able to make any progress. If social evils had been pointed out by 
missionaries at one stage they were so pointed out in a spirit of 
carping criticism rather than in a spirit of progressive helpfulness. 
And as time advanced and English education took root and as 
democracy spread its tentacles and got firm hold upon the affections 
of the people another change came into being. The very missionaries 
and clergymen who were so keen on educated Indians throwing off 
the trammels of their orthodoxy became suddenly conservative and 
critical of the drastic changes which the English educated people were 
taking to with a certain amount of irresponsible case. They began 
to inquire whether after all these people who were so readily taking 
to these changes meant to take to these changes or whether they were 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


simply throwing away by way of relaxation the rigid customs of age and 
of society. They did not like it because the spirit of reform is always 
destructive of their own power. In the encouraging of reform themselves 
they saw the dangers to their rule and the missionary saw at once that 
he was encouraging a certain amount of rebellious spirit in the nation. 
Now Brahmoism was looked upon as the saving factor in this country, 
but Brahmoism was thereupon condemned by the missionary because 
it provided a hailing house for the reform spirit of the nation. Thus the 
misssionary himself became conservative. Englishmen became conserva- 
tive, custom became rigid, society became petrified and congealed and 
coagulated, as it were, in a chamber which was not wide or expansive, 
thus, we have suffered, so much so that the issue of a post-puberty 
marriage in the Punjab was declared illegitimate by the High Court. 
This was the last straw that broke the back of progressive society. 
Immediately, there was an attempt to break the bones of custom, by 
trying to reform the marriage law. Act 3 of 1870, popularly known as 
the Brahmo Marriage Act, required, however, a certain denial statement, 
“I repudiate that I am a Hindu or a Muslim or a Christian or a Parsee 
or a Jain or a Jew.” This obnoxious declaration was associated with the 
provisions of that Act. Therefore, it did not become popular. Later on 
the Sarda Act came into being; fortunately it has set the seal of authority 
upon that piece of social reform which the heads of orthodoxy were 
imposing and were impeding. A new era has begun. The Indian National 
Congress which had started in 1885 had till 1919 associated with it as 
an ancillary and an auxiliary a social reform organisation which dealt 
with the social evils of the country and suggested various legislative 
measures also. But there was a non willingness on the part of the British 
Government to effect those legislative changes and as time progressed 
there was also an unwillingness on the part of society to accept the social 
reform at the hands of foreigners in this country. 

Fortunately, Sir, today we have survived those times, I am glad 
I am alive to see the age when on the initiative of the National 
Government a progressive measure of reform, comprehensive in 
outlook, far-reaching in its result, medical in its nature, is being put 
forward, which embraces the rights of women in regard to inheritance, 
in regard to marriage, in regard to property, in regard to divorce, in 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


15 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 15 

regard to personal freedom. And I hope, as time advances we shall have 
more and more of reforms in this direction to which this measure points 
today. 

Let us start with the full rights that have been conferred upon the 
woman after the death of her husband. In our Shastras it has been briefly 
described that the woman is the bond slave of her father when she is 
young, to her husband when she is middle aged and to her son when 
she is a mother. Of course all epigrams, aphorisms, proverbs, platitubes 
and truisms are half truths. There is a core of truth about them. We 
sometimes find it useful to quote these things but there is a core of 

untruth also about them and we should try to understand the full 
significance of all these. 

According to the measures before us, a woman will have property in 
her own right and be able to dispose of her property. I have been trying 
to see whether the Law Minister would explain when these rights would 
come into force. Suppossing after the passing of this measure a man 

dies and his widow inherits his property: what are her rights compared 
with the rights of a widow whose husband died one year ago? The latter 
possesses limited estates. What is the change sought to be introduced? 
Can widows with only limited estates convert those limited estates into 
full right estates with the right to give away, to mortgage, to sell and 
so on, irrespective of whether there is legal necessity in the interests 
of the family or not? That is a point which I have been trying to 

understand by turning up the pages of the measure before me but I 
have not been able to understand it. I dare say, in his reply the Mover 
of the Bill will be so good as to elucidate the point. 

The ‘rights’ of the daughter is a matter on which I have been feeling 
very keenly. When speaking to English people or when discussing 
Indian conditions and society with savants and scholars coming from 
abroad, I have never been tired of praising my own system. If you 
wish to understand the basis of a system, or appraise any of its social 
customs or practices, you must not lake it in its present degenerate 
condition. But you must take it in all its pristine purity and 
glory. I look upon child marriage as a splendid institution as our 
ancients conceived it because they conceived it good for the average 
man and the average woman to be married. And this marriage is a 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


good thing because the child has to be grafted into another family and 
grafting should take place while the plant is young and not when the 
plant has become old. But then, the conception itself has changed. Now 
we live in an age when it is much more happy to be bachelors and 
criticise others’ wives than to marry and beget children. Therefore, our 
ideals have changed and therefore, the principle of child marriage may 
not be binding upon us. Each one is at liberty to live his or her own 
life according to her or his pleasure and there is no obligation imposed 
by society and social conditions have changed. Under the circumstances 
we should not indeed be the victims of past tradition, past customs, past 
events. 

But how shall we deal with the facts which exist at the present day: 
so many daughters and so many sisters are not merely vegetating but 
they are rotting in their homes. While we praise our systems to others, 
we cannot shut from our own eyes the fact that our sisters and daughters 
and other relations are rotting in their own homes unable to get any 
relief. Latterly I have suggested a love strike for our women. That is 
the only remedy which I have thought out and I have been able to think 
it out as a remedy directed against this custom. I read a book called 
“The Impregnable Women” while I was in the Ahmednagar Fort. There 
was a war in England and all the women wanted to resist the war. 
How could they resist? The men are greedy. The men are pugnacious 
and blood-thirsty. They want to fight. They want to measure the strength 
of the tiger and ape it them with the strength of the ape and tiger in 
others. Therefore, the women said : let us have a love strike. No young 
maiden would speak to her lover; no wife would speak to her husband; 
no mother would speak to her son. The men were boycotted. There was 
no social life between men and women until the war about to be declared 
was cancelled. They said they would not mix with these people. But, 
I will not push the matter further. I suggest that if in a village, or town, 
or mohalla, there is ill-treatment of a single woman, all our wives had 
better have a club and go away from our houses and live there for 
24 hours and very soon the recalcitrant husband will be brought to his 
senses. All the men will bring their moral influence to bear upon this man 
and they will tell him: “What the hell are you doing? All our homes are 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


17 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 17 


broken up and they will remain broken unless you take back your 
wife.” 

You may laugh now. But what else are you going to do? Are you going 
to prosecute the man? He will bring up his charges. Are you going to 
prosecute the wife? She will bring a number of charges. You should not 
enter into the quarrels between husband and wife. Once I found a 
husband beating his wife. I went and interfered. The woman turned 
round and came down on me like a wolf on the fold. She said: “It is 
my husband who is beating me. Who the hell are you to interfere?” 
Therefore, it is not possible for you easily to interfere in domestic affairs. 
After all the Kowravas and Pandawas when they fought, they used to 
say : “we are 100 against 5 but against a third party they said we are 
100 plus 5” So in these domestic quarrels both are against us when 
we meddle in their affairs. So if the daughter is to be happy she must 
be able to inherit property in her own right I find that the position 
of a wife is most obsequious. Her sister’s son comes. Her brother comes. 
She wants to give them a good present. But the wife has to wait upon 
the goodwill of her husband in order to get even Rs. 5. After all this 
man has his moods. And he may be in a good mood or a bad mood. 
So she must have some properly which she can call her own. Would 
you wish her to get rid of some of her jewels? The idea is fantastic. 
No woman will sell away her jewellery even after her husband’s death 
because after her husband’s death that jewellery stands as the symbol 
of the unity of herself and her deceased spouse. I know it. I have spoken 
to many women. 

Mr. Chairman : Does the Honourable Member want to speak for a 
longer time? 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : I am sorry. I was not looking at 
the time. I would like to continue. 

Mr. Chairman : The House will now adjourn for half an hour and 
reassemble at Half Past Five of the Clock. 

The Assembly then adjourned till Half Past Five of the Clock in the 
afternoon. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Assembly re-assemblecL at Half Past Five of the Clock with 
Mr. Speaker (The Honourable Mr. G. V. Mavalankar) in the Chair. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Mr. Speaker, I was dealing with the 
question of a share for the daughter from the patrimony. I am in the 
habit of twitting my lady friends by asking them “Why do you want 
a share ? You are going to become the queens of another home. My 
wife has become the queen of my home and she is the unquestioned 
head of the family. She is getting the keys of her own safe and so will 
you get the keys of the safe of another home.” But that is not enough. 
It is not enough to be at the mercy of a husband, however dear that 
husband may be. A woman must have her own right and when she has 
her own right she is better respected by the husband and although the 
doctrine of self-effacement on the part of the woman has been carried 
on in our country and society for ages long, yet the fact remains that 

in the modern day the conception of self-respect has completely altered 

the position. One must be able to say that she has a little money to 
deal with in her own right. 

Hitherto I have had a little doubt as to whether we are not depriving 
all the sons of the share to which they are legitimately entitled if the 
daughter also comes in for her share. Now the Bill before us gives a 
share in the stridhana to the sons to the same extent to which the 
daughter is given a share in the father’s property. That largely equalises 
things and warns all parents that they should have an equal number 
of sons and daughters. That is the only condition that is imposed upon 

us and that will be able to balance our economy. We must also balance 

our progeny. 

But there is another difficulty. After all as things stand, it looks as 
though we cannot say hereafter in marriage invitations that my daughter 
is being given in marriage to so and so, there will be a new language 
adopted. My daughter and so and so will marry each other. That is the 
new language adopted. Still the fact remains that except in Malabar, 
where the husbands go to their wives’ houses, here our daughters 
generally go to their husbands’ houses. Of course the position in 
Malabar is entirely the reverse of our conditions and it will take hours 
to deal with the question. I am not going to stray into that very 
interesting topic. Yet the fact remains when the daughter goes away 
from her father’s home, the wonder is whether she is able to enjoy 
the property that is given to her by her parents. I have asked my 
Muslim sisters and brothers as to whether the age-long custom 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


19 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 19 


of giving a half share to a daughter, half of the son’s, is really practically, 
enjoyed. They said that except in towns it is not enjoyed. Somehow or 
other the brother does the sister in the eye and knocks off her property 
and gives her some compensation. That may or may not be so but the 
fact remains that there is that supreme danger and the greatest danger 
in this matter is that when you recognise the fact that 80 per cent of 
pattadara are able to pay only Rs. 10 as tax on 2!4 acres of wet land 
or four or five acres of dry land, where on earth is there a chance for 
them to give a share to the daughter, which she can carry with her 
or which she can enjoy. I doubt very much from the practical side but 
on the theoretical side at any rate the thing is unquestionably quite 
correct. 

When thus you have raised the status of women in society and when 
you have conferred upon her the right to absolute property then you 
must also give her certain rights which self-respect engenders in her 
naturally. The conditions of marriage are not conditions of slavery. It 
is all very well to say that marriages are made in heaven and that once 
a husband always a husband or once a wife always a wife. It is a very 
good rule but at the same time there are conditions like drunkenness, 
persistent cruelly, immoral character on the part of the husband, diseases 
like leprosy, impotency and various other conditions which are enumer- 
ated by the Law Minister which justify a separation of the husband from 
the wife. If a man feels free and has the right to stray abroad and to 
whatever he wants to do, if he can marry a second time when the first 
wife is alive, then of course it must be equally open for the wife also 
to marry a second husband while the first one is alive. Imagine that 
condition. I sometimes ask friends when I see a young man dressed in 
hat, boot and suit and by the side goes a nicely clad Hindu lady dressed 
in all the beautiful folds of the Hindu saree “Will you kindly reverse 
your dresses? Will the husband wear a dhothi and the wife a hat and 
skirt of a European woman, how will it look?” It will look absurd, as 
absurd as when you sign your name in your mother tongue over an 
English document. Once an officer asked me not to sign in Telugu over 
an English document. Then I said that the reverse situation of an English 
signature over a Telugu document is equally incongruous. Therefore, we 
must give full freedom to our sisters, mothers and daughters and enable 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


them to have judicial separation, if necessary and divorce. But I trust 
and hope that the distinguished ladies who are here and who have been 
labouring for years in the cause of rights for women will preach and 
propagate the fact and the doctrine that divorce is a reserve fund not 
to be drawn upon for current expenses, that divorce should be the 
ultimate resort for causes which are otherwise irremediable. Public 
opinion, personal influence, family persuasion, all these are there. You 
must remember that the quarrels between a husband and wife during 
the day are generally closed up in the night and therefore, there is not 
much chance of perpetuating these quarrels. We should not make much 
of them. In America there is a State called Indianopolis, where the porter 
cries “Indianopolis Station, Twenty minutes for divorce.” The divorce 
court is in the railway station itself. Any husband and wife having a 
quarrel in the train, could apply for divorce and get it before the train 
departs. That should not be our position. Our divorce must be a kind 
of reserve fund like the jewellery on a woman’s person, always to be 
drawn upon under conditions of the greatest necessity and never to be 
lightly utilised. 

The question of adoption is a very difficult question, the Honourable 
Law Minister has assimilated the Mitakashara practice to that of the 
Dayabhaga. I suppose Dayabhaga obtains in Bengal and Mitakashara 
in South India and in Bombay there is a law called Mayuka, according 
to which amongst the non-Brahmins it is not necessary for the husband 
to give permission and the widow can adopt a child. I had read a 
judgment of the Privy Council some ten or twelve years ago. I want 
that law to be copied in other parts, where such adoption is not 
permissible according to Mitakshara. After all why does a family adopt 
a boy ? To perpetuate the family. Is it not the right of the widow 
to perpetuate the family as much as of the deceased husband? Is it 
only the exclusive right of the man who is deceased to perpetuate 
the family. If a boy could inherit the property, why should it not 
be open to the mother to adopt the boy in her own right apart from 
the written or the registered permission of her husband either by 
a document or by a will. In English law oral wills are permissible; 
whereas written wills require two signatures, oral wills require no 
such thing. After all, by oral wills properties worth lakhs and crores 
are alienated. “All to wife” on a newspaper bit is held to be a valid 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


21 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 21 


will. Then why should it not be permissible in law for a husband to 
give permission orally to his wife in order that she can adopt. These 
are points which the Select Committee will have to give its consideration 
to. {An Honourable Member: “Why permission at all?”) That is my 
contention. If permission is necessary why not oral permission? Relax 
the law regulating adoption as much as possible. 

Then there is the question of monogamy. I am very sorry to note that 
young girls in their blooming youth do not understand all the conditions 
that must be observed in regard to the proper selection of match for 
marriage. We have an ancient saying which when rendered into English 
says : You must consider the prosperity, good looks, tradition, pedigree, 
culture — all these things you must consider before you select a husband. 
But now it has become rather common — and a very distinguished 
authority has confirmed the statement — that educated girls have the 
habit of picking readymade husbands who have already got a wife and 
five or six children. Why does this happen? It is due to the want of 
education during their college days about these matters. Somehow these 
things are considered taboo and everybody shrinks from talking about 
them although a lot of private talk is inevitably done in regard to these 
matters. The forbidden fruit has never remained untasted. Therefore, 
it is necessary that we provide teaching in regard to these matters. I 
once spoke to a certain friend of mine — he has given freedom to his 
daughter with regard to the selection of his son-in-law — and in the course 
of his conversation he told me a story which I later related to his 
daughter and son-in-law much to their amusement. She was asked by 
him, “Do you wish to marry so and so, a boy who is handsome, good- 
looking, is well educated, passed B.L., or is in the profession, is the son 
of a rich man and has an upstair house” and she said “No, father, has 
he got no motor car and elctric lights? If he has got a motor car and 
electric lights, no matter to whom you give me in marriage I am willing 
to marry him”. Such are the temperaments, tendencies and trends of 
untutored youth and therefore, it is very necessary that we should teach 
them about all these matters. It is not enough to make laws: but it 
is necessary to propagate these laws and propagandize these laws in 
order to educate our young girls in the direction of monogamy. That 
is very necessary. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I welcome every aspect of this Bill. If there are defects which are 
obvious here and there I daresay they will be remedied by all the 
distinguished personalities whose names have been mentioned in con- 
nection with the formation of the Select Committee. I have taken a little 
more time than necessary. Perhaps, I can hold forth for hours together. 
I have got the experience of 68 years covering a careful study of all 
kinds of conditions and I would have liked very much to continue except 
for the fact that today’s time is limited and we must apply the guillotine 
at 7 O’clock and some of our sisters and brothers are very anxious to 
speak and I am also anxious to hear them. 

* Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal : Muslim): Sir, I am in the 
most unfortunate position of having been charged with the communi- 
cation of certain views which have been entrusted to me by some of 
my friends. They are some criticisms of the Bill. I must however assure 
the House that personally I would fully support the Bill. Its provisions 
are largely in accord with the laws which prevail in my own community 

and the Bill tries to do absolute justice to all regardless of practical 

results. It is however, with some amount of nervousness that I have 

risen to speak. When I find that sturdy members of the House who would 
have spoken against the Bill have quailed before a powerful array of 
five distinguished members of the fair sex, ready to stand to their guns, 
little courage can I muster in giving out the views which I am charged 
to communicate. 

Sir, the Honourable the Law Minister has not told us anything about 
the opinions that have been collected and printed in the pamphlets which 
have been circulated to us. They were made available to us at a very 
late stage. If it was desired that Honourable Members should read them, 
analyse them and tell the House the result of their analysis I think 

the time is too short. There is a pamphlet the Report of the Hindu Law 
Committee which contains a large number of opinions. I am sorry this 
was not circulated amongst the members. (An Honourable Member : “It 
was circulated”). It was not. This book was not circulated. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It was kept in the Library 
for a very long time. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3639-42. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


23 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 23 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It was not kept in the Library for a very 
long time. It has been placed in the Library very recently. I had to buy 
it from the market. It is only recently that some copies were kept in 
the Liberary. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga (Madras : General): What is it? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : When an Honourable Member like 
Professor Ranga asks ‘what is this?’ it only shows. . . 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : I asked what is it you are referring to. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: The Report of the Hindu Law Committee. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga: That is, the Rao Committee. Its Report has been 
before the public for a year. 

Mr. Speaker: Whatever it be, the Honourable Member may proceed. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: The Report has been published only 
recently. I submit that in this Report there is a dissentient minute of 
the late Justice D. N. Mitter. He has collected a large number of opinions 
against the Bill. I do not wish to read them. He has classified them 
province by province and subject by subject. There is no time to deal 
with them, but he has said that the principles of the Bill are opposed 
by the entire Hindu community, that is the orthodox section of the 

community. 

I have studied as carefully as it was possible for me within the 

short time available, the recent opinions on the Bill obtained by the 
Government and circulated to us. I find there is a volume of opinion 
against the Bill. In fact, at the time when the Committee was hearing 
evidence the evidence in Bengal was also all one way. Now in the 

opinions circulated I find the opinion in West Bengal is all one way. 
It is clearly against the Bill. What is remarkable is that there is 
an opinion by the Secretary of the Government of Bengal in the 

Ministry of Law. That opinion is to be found in paper No. 4, opinion 
No. 17. That opinion is against the Bill. It says that this is not a 
proper time to take the Bill. (An Honourable Member : ‘When was 
that ’?) It bears no date. It has been circulated only recently — five or 
six days ago. In fact it says that the Bill is of far-reaching importance 
and enough consideration has not been given to the opinions expressed. 
The House will be pleased to consider the different categories of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


objections. One is that, this Bill should not be considered by a mixed 
Legislature consisting of members of various communities. It is for this 
reason that I am particularly anxious to speak as it was feared that 
men of different communities will rather support the Bill and spoil the 
cause of orthodox Hinduism. It is for this reason that I hasten to declare 
that I am not supporting the Bill as the Hindu community is much 
against it. 

One of the objections is that the introduction of women’s shares would 
introduce litigation. There are many opinions that this would lead to 
excessive fragmentation that it will lead ultimately to the destruction 
of that joint family system amongst the Hindus which has saved the 
community from the destructive effects of fragmentation from which the 
Muslims most terribly suffer. It is said also that the Hindu law — the 
Vedic literature and the post Vedic literature known as the “Srutis” and 
the “Smritis” have a divine origin. But the present Bill goes, it is said, 
against the very structure, the very religious basis and the very religious 
structure of the Hindus. It is on this ground that is seriously opposed. 
It is argued that you cannot regard all this religious law, all this sacred 
literature as so much nonsensical superstition. They have kept the Hindu 
society alive for ages though it is quite true that society cannot remain 
stagnant. It must move. But it must move cautiously and with 

experience. 

The present Bill makes a change with a sweeping stroke. Another 
point that has been made apparent in these objections is that the present 
Legislature was elected on one issue, namely the attainment of inde- 
pendence. The present Bill, which is really of a very sweeping and 

complicated character, and its principles have not been before the public 
and it would therefore, be better to wait to digest opinions and to pass 
a constitution and hold elections making this a definite issue before the 
public. It will then be seen whether the public at large really desire 

it. In fact it is said that the Bill was not properly circulated. Many 
associations got only a few days’ time or even a few hours time to consider 
and give their opinions. In these circumstances it is argued that the 

Bill should not be taken into consideration at this stage. 

Then there is another important aspect of the question. The Bill 
attempts to make the law applicable to Hindus uniformly throughout 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


25 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 25 


India, but it has been pointed out that the effect of uniformity will not 
be attained in view of the shortness of time. It is well known that 
agricultural land is beyond the purview of this House. It is a provincial 
subject. Whatever law we may pass will affect only non-agricultural land, 
whatever that expression may mean. That expression is also vague. It 
has been defined in the Income Tax Act for the purpose of taxation and 
this Bill as well as many other Acts have taken that as the basis. There 
may be lands which lie midway between agricultural and non-agricul- 
tural lands. In fact, apart from this distinction, a large proportion of 
our property — about 80 per cent — consists of culturable land. Thus it 
is perfectly clear that the Provinces will have to deal with them and 
they may deal with them in a different manner and some provinces may 
not deal with them at all. And then again we have the acceded States. 
Though Hindu Law is to be the same — and it is attempted to make it 
uniform — the States people may legislate or may not legislate, and in 
case they legislate they may make different provisions. In fact the 
Provincial Governments and the States will be largely guided by local 
custom and local opinion and I believe it will be extremely difficult for 
the West Bengal Legislature to pass a law which is so much against 
the opinion of that Province. It will therefore come to this that if we 
pass this law the result would be that in the case of a man having 
two classes of properties — a house or building and certain agricultural 
land — one set of law will apply to non-agricultural land and another set 
of law will apply to agricultural land. Whatever law you pass, it should 
be uniform and it would be far better to collect opinions from the 
Provincial Governments and to ask for their consent to give jurisdiction 
to this House to pass a comprehensive legislation as we have done in 
some cases. If comprehensiveness and completeness is the objective, it 
is better that the Central Legislature should be armed with their consent 
and deal with it on an all-India basis, and it would also be a proper 
tiling to ask the States to co-operate in this matter. These are some 
of the difficulties. As we are working against time, it is impossible, as 
the Honourable the Law Minister has pointed out, to deal with even 
some of the salient features of the Bill. It is also impossible to deal 
with some of the objections except from the border point of view. One 
thing that strikes me is that the opinions have not been very carefully 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


studied. We have not got any analysis of these opinions collected point 
by point and supplied to the members to enable them to deal with them. 
It is very difficult for private Members to read the opinions at a high 
speed and to analyse them, store them in different compartments of 
their brains and use them in a classified form. On a matter of such 
great importance as this, it would have been extremely desirable for 
the Honourable Minister’s Department to classify the opinions, as was 
done before in such cases, and circulate them to enable members to 
consider each point in the light of the objections or support in respect 
of each of them. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati (Madras : General): It is there in 
the Report of the Law Committee, classified, analysed and all that. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am grateful for the remark, but the 
opinions of which I am speaking have been received and circulated after 
the report. In fact the opinions which have been circulated by the 
Department were received only recently and they are on the Bill as it 
is. But the opinions collected in the Report of the Hindu Law Committee 
were collected before the drafting of the Bill, that is during the enquiry 
stage. The Honourable Member has missed the point that the opinions 
I am speaking of are not those publised in the Report. They were 
separately printed and circulated. These are the opinions which I talk 
of. I think these should have been carefully analysed and printed along 
with the various points. Sir, I do not wish to labour the matter. 
Personally I am in favour of the Bill, but these are some of the objections 
which I have been asked to put forward by certain of my friends. That 
is the reason why I have put them before the House. There are a large 
number of other points, but they are of a minor nature. In view of the 
shortness of the time at our disposal I think I should cut short my speech. 
Then again legislation should rather follow public opinion. It should 
follow rather than create or override public opinion, and I am giving 
a quotation from a famous authority, the father of modern politics, 
Edmond Burke. He said on a famous occasion: 

“To follow, not to force the public inclinations, to give direction, a form 

and technical dress and a specific sanction to the general sense of the 

community is the true end of legislation.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


27 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 27 


But it has been pointed in the objections that there is no public opinion 
behind this Bill. It is pointed out in some of the objections that only 
some of the educated section and some of the ultra-modern section are 
behind it, but the masses, most of whom are ignorant, are indifferent 
to it and it has not been fully circulated in the way a subject of this 
importance should have been. In these circumstances, I submit this for 
the consideration of the House that it would have been better if the 
House gave directions to the Select Committee in matters of a disputed 
nature, but in this case we are sending the Bill without any directions. 
I should seek a little clarification from the Honourable Minister for Law. 
With these few words, Sir, I hope the points raised in the objections 
would be carefully considered and due decisions would be reached. 

With regard to the personnel of the Select Committee, nothing could 
be said. The ablest, the most authorititave and most well-informed of 
the Members have been taken in it and I hope and believe that they 
will do full justice to the objections raised against the Bill. 

* Shrimati Hansa Mehta (Bombay : General): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I 
congratulate the Honourable Minister for bringing this Bill even at 

this late hour of the Session. I also congratulate or 

6-00 P.M. 

rather I express my sense of gratitude to Sir B. N. 
Rau and his colleagues for the great labour they have bestowed on 
the Report on which these recommendations are based. This Bill to 
codify the Hindu Law is a revolutionary Bill and though we are not 
quite satisfied with it, it will be a great landmark in the social history 
of the Hindus. But since this Bill was drafted many things have 
happened and one of the biggest things that has happened is the 
achievement of our political freedom. Our new Constitution is in the 
making; we have already agreed upon the fundamental principles on 
which this new Constitution is to be drafted. The new State is going 
to be a democratic State and democracy is based on the equality of 
individuals. It is from this point of view that we have now to approach 
the problems of inheritance and marriage etc. that are before us. The 
Select Committee will therefore, have to see that the new Bill is 
drafted on these principles. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3642-44. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


It is true that the Code has abolished the six discrimination with 
regard to inheritance. A woman is recognised as an heir and she is also 
entitled to enjoy her property in her full rights; that is, the Code has 
abolished the limited estate of the woman. Even then we feel that it 
does not go far enough. A daughter who is recognised an heir inherits 
the property, but she inherits half the share of the son. This violates 
the principle of equality on which we have again and again said that 
our new Constitution is going to be based — a Constitution which aims 
to secure for the people of this country justice, social, political and 
economic. We, therefore, feel that the daughter should get an equal share 
in the property of her father with the son and the son also should get 
an equal share in the property of his mother with the daughter. It is 
also argued that a daughter gets her share from her father as well as 
from her husband, while the man does not get anything from his wife. 
We have already proposed, that is the Women’s Organisations have said, 
that the husband can also inherit the property of his wife in the same 
way that the wife inherits the property of her husband. In the Indian 
Succession Act the provision for the inheritance of husband is already 
there and I think we shall do well to copy that provision. 

People have argued, and the honourable friend who spoke before me 
has said that if a daughter is given her share, especially in a landed 
property, there will be fragmentation of land. But why is this argument 
trotted out in the case of a daughter’s inheritance? The same thing 
applies if a man has more than one son; if he has, say, four or five 
sons the land has to be fragmented; why is the argument not trotted 
out then, and only trotted out when the question of daughters inheriting 
the property comes up? The better thing would be that there should 
be law against fragmentation and the property should be sold if it goes 
below the prescribed limit. Or there is another alternative and that is 
collectivisation of the land. 

Then with regard to the question of marriage. I am gratified, and 
the women of India will be very happy to know, that the principle 
of monogamy is recognised, and if the Code comes into being then 
the principle of monogamy will be established. Sir, we have felt that 
all civilised nations, all civilised communities have adopted the 
principle of monogamy. Disrespect for women and all the atrocities 
that we hear of perpetrated on women are I think due to the fact 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


29 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 29 


that this principle of polygamy exists. If we had monogamy, I do not 
think that women would have been abducted, married off or other things 
would have happened to them. This is a very wholesome principle and 
I hope the House will accept it. 

But with regard to some of the conditions of marriage there are one 
or two points that I would like to suggest. With regard to the marriage 
of the sapindas and the definition of sapinda, that requires a little 
revision; we are not quite satisfied with the definition that is given in 
the Code. Then again, we would like the age of marriage also to be 
a condition of a valid marriage. We have got the Sarda Act but that 
is not satisfactory; that has not satisfied the people because it has not 
been able to prevent child marriages; it is not effective. For that reason 
we would like the law to be more drastic. If we want sixteen to be the 
age of marriage, then it is very necessary that it should be included 
as one of the conditions of valid marriage and I would like the Select 
Committee to make that change. 

Then with regard to divorce, even that from the point of view of some 
does not go far enough. There is, however, one thing that I would like 
to bring to the notice of the members of the Select Committee and that 
is, the time given for desertion. If a man or a woman deserts his or 
her spouse, it has been provided, he or she can divorce her or him after 
five years. Five years is the period given in the Code. Even in “Narad 
Smriti” it is given that a childless woman should wait for three years. 
After three years she can marry again. So why not also bring that 
particular provision here that if a woman is childless, she need not wait 
till five years, but can divorce her husband after three years? If a woman 
has got children, then five years would be the right period, but for a 
childless woman three years would be a reasonable period. 

With regard to guardianship, here also the Code has not made any 
changes in the present law. Father is the natural guardian of the 
children. The mother does not come in. We would like the mother also 
to be a co-guardian of the children with the father. 

With regard to adoption, I think the whole chapter should be 
scrapped. We are a secular State. We want to be a secular State. 
Adoption in Hindu law is for religious purposes. Why should a secular 
State have anything to do with a religious custom? What we are 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


30 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


concerned with is whether adoption which is for religious purposes should 
be recognised by the State for purposes of inheritance. We say that it 
should not. If a child is adopted — whether it is a boy or a girl — we would 
like a daughter also to be adopted — if a child is adopted not for religious 
purpose, but for real purpose, i.e. that the parents want a child, then 
that child should have the same rights as the natural child. But, if there 
is adoption for religious purposes, only then I think that adoption should 
not be recognised for purposes of inheritance. 

These are some of the important points that I would like the Select 
Committee to consider. Speeches have been made, at least my Honourable 
friend Dr. Pattabhi has made a very long speech — praising all sorts of 
things about our past traditions. We have looked too much to the past. 
We must now look to the future. It is for the future generation that 
we are making this law. It is not for us, but for the future generation 
that is coming after us that this law will be applied. We have to look 
to the future conditions. After all, it is the conditions that determine 
the law. The law reflects the society. The law reflects the conditions 
in which the people live. We have to see that the future generation is 
not fettered by our own prejudices with regard to marriage or divorce 
or with regard to any other ideas that we may have today. I hope the 
Select Committee will consider that and produce a Bill which will be 
a great boon to the future Hindu society. 

* Shri Ram Sahai (Gwalior State): ( English translation of the Hindi 
speech) Mr. Speaker, Sir, I have nothing to say particularly in reference 
to the Bill. I appreciate the manner in which this Bill has been drafted 
after keeping in view the needs of the present day Hindu Society. But, 
I find in it one or two defects, and I think it necessary to explain them 
for the consideration of the Select Committee. 

It has been laid down in Section 3(6) of Part IV of the Bill that in 
case of minor girls, the consent of her guardian must be obtained for 
her marriage. But so far as the question of declaring the marriage as 
invalid is concerned, it has been stated in Section 5 that it shall 
not be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that such consent 
was not or had not been obtained. I fail to understand why it should 
not be deemed to be invalid when it has been expressely laid down 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., 9th April 1948, pp. 3646-47. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


31 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 31 


that the consent of the guardian must be obtained. If the consent of 
the guardian had been obtained by means of fraud or force, that marriage 
can be deemed to be invalid, but if the consent had not been obtained 
at all, then why should not the marriage be deemed to be invalid? On 
the contrary it has been laid down that the marriage will not be deemed 
to be invalid merely for this reason. This is the one defect which should 
be considered by the Select Committee. 

Another point which I have to mention is in regard to ‘Succession’ 

and which Mrs. Hansa Mehta has just referred to in her speech. But 

I do not see eye to eye with the views expressed by her and am of the 

opinion that the manner in which the order of succession has been 

prescribed ignores the fundamental tenets of Dharam Shastras (Hindu 
Code of Law). I do not mean that the women should not be given any 
rights. I am of the opinion that, they have been given more rights here 
than men. I may point out that while a daughter gets a share both in 
her patrimony and the property of her husband’s family, there does not 
exist any such provision in this Bill which gives a man a share in the 
property of his father-in-law in addition to his patrimony. The men are 
thus, being subjected to the same injustice which has uptil now been 

done to the women. On the contrary, it can be argued that the share 

which his wife will get in her patrimony will make up the deficiency. 
But after considering objects underlying the Bill and the worldly 

conditions which have necessitated it, it is felt that the real problem 
remains unsolved. The reason for this is that the property which a 

woman acquires out of her patrimony shall be treated as her Stridhana 
and her husband will have no right to that, therefore, he will not derive 
any particular benefit from this. In this way, I submit this second point 
for consideration by the Select Committee which is very essential. 

I have yet to say another thing. Whatever may be the differences 
between the tenets of Dharam shastra and the present day conditions, 
I feel that we must follow the fundamental principles propounded 

therein; and keeping these in view we should decide all the issues. 
We should make only those changes which are considered necessary 
in view of the present conditions and trend of the society. We should 
not resort to introduce any change merely under excitement or in 
imitation of the western civilisation which may obstruct the growth 
of our society and produce some sort of difficulties that may not be 
desirable. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Therefore, I would submit that those who are members of the Select 
Committee should consider these things and try to make necessary 
amendments. 

* Dr. B. V. Keskar (U.P.: General): Sir, I take this opportunity of 
congratulating the Honourable the Law Minister for bringing this Bill 
forward in spite of the inordinate delay that has taken place since this 
idea was first conceived. Sir there is no doubt that this is a very, very 
important Bill. As my Honourable friend, Dr. Pattabhi said, I do not 
think there has been any bill so radical and so revolutionary which is 
trying to change the very foundations of Hindu society, a society which 
has remained fossilized for the last thousand years. No doubt and it 
is to that that I want to draw the attention of this House and the 
members of the Select Committee, the very fact that this society has 
remained fossilized for the last thousand years and has developed such 
inertia, such lethargy, in the body politic that all manner and all kinds 
of forces will come forward to impede the passing of this Bill and passing 
of any Bill to change the existing structure of Hindu society. It is to 
this inertia, this lethargy of Hindu society which has probably become 
its bane, that the members of the Select Committee and the honourable 
the Law Minister will have to look to, because I have no doubt that 
until this Bill is passed, to the very last moment every sort of effort, 
will be made to see that this Bill does not become a law. The changes 
that are suggested are such that there is a fundamental change in Hindu 
law. I know mat orthodoxy will try in every way. My honourable friend, 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad was good enough to voice the alarm of a certain 
section of the orthodox society about the revolutionary nature of this 
Bill. No doubt, some of the changes suggested appear revolutionary. But 
as Dr. Pattabhi rightly observed the changes are really not revolutionary. 
They are due to the fact that for the last so many centuries, Hindu 
society has not been allowed to evolve. So we have to try to change 
in a few days what would have been done in centuries. I would, therefore, 
ask the Members of the Select Committee not to fall a prey to the 
pressure of what is called the so-called orthodox opinion which is really 
the opinion of the inertia of so many centuries which does not want 
anything to change, but after thinking over it for years and years, 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3647-48. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


33 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 33 


which really considers that any change is an attack on Hindu religion. 
I would ask them to guard against these and go forward in spite of 
all this pressure. 

There is no doubt that quite apart from the question of making any 
radical change in Hindu law, the necessity for consolidating the Hindu 
law was very urgent. Sir, the present day Hindu law is a maze; it is 
a jungle like the Tarai or Sunderbans in which all sorts of practices 
and traditions come up; in which all that puranic book and prevailing 
customs in many parts of India, in many regions and provinces, in many 
castes, sub-castes; sub-sub-castes come into play and which is naturally 
a paradise for lawyers. This to a certain extent might not have been 
undesirable, but it has grown to such an extent that the time has come 
when this maze of traditions and counter-traditions should be put an 
end to and we must rationalize and consolidate the law. This is quite 
apart from any question of changing the Hindu Law. So from both points 
of view, I consider that a bill of this kind is overdue. 

I rather would warn the members of the Select Committee to see that 
the Bill is not delayed too much. Already the first Committee was 
appointed in 1944. The idea and some of the proposals about the Bill 
have been circulating for the last so many years and even now we find 
before us proposals which will circulate it the more. Now, I would like 

them to try to curb this period of discussion as little as possible and 

to bring this Bill before the House, the latest before the next session. 
Sir, I welcome this Bill. 

* Begum Aizaz Rasul (U.P.: Muslim): Sir, I do not desire to take 
up much time of the House, because I know that the time is very 
limited, but I think I would be failing in my duty if I do not stand 
up and welcome the measure that has just been brought before the 

House by the Honourable the Law Minister. Sir, it is in the fitness 

of things that with the achievement of freedom in this country and 
the establishment of a National Government, a measure of this kind 
should have been brought before this House. I only hope that the 
Select Committee will not delay giving its report and that this House 
will have an opportunity of passing this measure into law and putting 
it on the statute book as early as possible. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, p. 3648. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13VVOL-14\V14-01 MK Ms 8-10-13 


S.K.-05- 12-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


There is no doubt, Sir, that the provisions of this Bill are extremely 
farreaching and the provisions about marriage, divorce, inheritance and 
adoption that are being brought forward are extremely redical measures. 
It is an extremely important matter and the codification of Hindu law 
will certainly be looked upon as one of the most momentous pieces of 
legislation that has ever been brought forward in this House. 

Sir, without going into the different clauses of this Bill, I welcome 
this measure. Sir, it is by the status of the women of a country that 
the society of that country is judged and there is no doubt that the 
Hindu women were very backward in India. The Muslims have taken 
pride in the fact that the Shariat law gives them great rights. I agree 
with my Honourable friend, Dr. Pattabhi when he said that although 
the Shariat has given many rights, they are not followed in the letter 
and I do know that there are many parts in India today where in 
spite of the fact that Muslim women do enjoy all the rights given 
to them by Shariat, they are not being followed in the letter at all. 
In the Punjab the customary law still prevails and the daughters are 
absolutely disinherited from the property of their fathers. In the same 
way in the U.P. although in some parts of the Province Shariat has 
prevailed, Muslim women do not share in the property amongst the 
talukdars and therefore, I am glad that this piece of legislation that 
is being brought forward will put the Hindu women on a par with 
Muslim women as far as their rights are concerned. As I said, Sir, 
I hope that no section of society will oppose this measure. There is 
no doubt that this being such a fundamental treasure and also 
connected in many ways with religion, there will be certain sections 
of society amongst the Hindus who will oppose it, but, Sir, it needs 
courageous minds to bring forward courageous measures and there- 
fore, I hope that orthodox opinion in the country which looks with 
disfavour upon this legislation will not stand in the way of its being 
passed and I hope that this Bill that is going now to the Select 
Committee will come out even in a more improved form and that 
this measure will not be delayed. Society should not be static and as 
we go forward on the road to progress, it is necessary that women should 
come into their own and unless the women of India stand on their own 
feet economically, it is absolutely impossible for India to go forward on 
the road to progress. With these few words, I give my whole-hearted 
support to this measure. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


35 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 35 


* Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri (Assam : General): Sir, I think 
I must congratulate the Honourable Minister-in-charge of this Bill. 
He must have greatly liked this hour of the day when he has received 
so much ovation from certain sections of the House. But, I think, 
I should not be considered to be criticising in a wrong spirit when 
I say that the title of this Bill is a misnomer; it is not a Hindu Code 
but it should more appropriately have been called a Hindu Women’s 
Code. Sir, I do not understand why only three or four days after we 
passed the Resolution about having a secular Government and 
stopping of communal organisations we should have gone out of our 
way to legislate in such a hasty manner only for a particular 
community. After having decided to eschew all communal organisations 
I should like to know why we should not have been given time to 
think out and draw up a piece of legislation which would include 
all subjects of the State, Hindu, Muslim, Christian, etc. If the 
Honourable Minister is not led away by fair influences in this House, 
I think it is not yet too late to withdraw this Bill and if he withdraws 
it with a promise to bring in a more comprehensive Bill at a later 
date, his action in so withdrawing would have greater merit than 
the withdrawal which he made a few minutes ago. I know that some 
women of our country are very anxious to snatch away a portion of 
inheritance from their brothers; I know some influential women of 
this country are anxious to put an end to marriages to which they 
were unwillingly led and which they have found unbearable. It is 
also perhaps a fact that some educated and progressive ladies of our 
country who cannot think of polygamy of any kind are now anxious 
to have legislation for the removal of these things. By enacting this 
Hindu Code you are revolutionising the whole structure of Hindu life 
and law and custom. But for whom are you doing it and who is going 
to be benefited by it? The large mass of people who depend on agriculture 
and agricultral property are outside the pale of this legislation. Are 
the poorer Hindus in our villages clamouring for divorce? Are they 
clamouring for properties to be got from their parents? Not at all. 
You want this legislation for what you call the enlightened section 
of our people, men and women. It is for the rich man who gave his 
daughter in marriage to a poor man who hoped to give his wife some 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3648-50. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


position but has not been able to give it and his daughter has become 
unhappy; and so he wants to get rid of this marriage. This legislation 
is going to help that kind of individual. 

Then, Sir, with reference to custom and usage, custom plays a 
very important part in Hindu law as administered in my province. 
I want to lay particular stress on our province because there is no 
one who represents us in the Select Committee. As all lawyers would 
know, the customs which have taken the place of Hindu law in Assam 
are very peculiar. I can cite the Privy Council case of “Maniram 
Katita” versus “Keri Kalitani” which has practically revolutionised 
Hindu law as administered among the Hindus. 

Then there is the question of tribal people. According to this Bill 
they would be considered Hindus and they are really Hindus if they 
have not adopted Islam or Christianity or Buddhism, etc. Are you 
going to thrust on them this piece of legislation? If you ask them 
to have this system of inheritance they will simply revolt against 
you. There are different kinds of custom in Assam. Amongst the 
Khasia people of Assam the youngest daughter inherits the property. 
Now you are giving it to the widow, the son’s widow, the widowed 
daughter, the son’s daughter-in-law and so forth. Will they tolerate 
it for a moment if you introduce this legislation among them? You 
have introduced sacramental marriage and civil marriage. Shall I tell 
you how the Cacharis get married? Some boy and girl come to know 
each other and the girl is forcibly taken away from the parents after 
which the ceremony of marriage takes place. Will you ask them to 
got to the Registrar’s Office and get married there? 

Then we are very much against dowry. These rich people who can 
afford to give dowry get their daughters married very quickly, even 
though they may be blind or ugly. If I had no money I would mortgage 
my house and everything that I possess in order to give a dowry 
and thus get rid of my daughter. But what will happen now? The 
daughter will inherit part of the property. So when I seek brides for 
my sons — fortunately I have five sons — I shall look forward to that 
family where the daughters will inherit something and not go to an 
ordinary person who will have to borrow or mortgage his property. 
Are you going to legislate for poor people in this way? Among the 
poor there is only agricultural property. If you include the tea gardens 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


37 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 37 


that is different, but there is no agricultural property among them. 
And there is no question of big inheritance and therefore, the poor 
man’s daughter, however beautiful and accomplished she may be has 
no chance. I think this measure requires very serious consideration, 
so far as customs and usage and other points are concerned and it 
is not proper to pass this legislation in such hurry. I should have 
said something more also, Sir, but in this House there are persons 
who are still unmarried; so it would not be fair on my part to disclose 
all my objections to this Bill. 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Speaker, my task 
is considerably lightened by the fact that the Bill has received such 
an ample measure of support from this House. I shall, therefore, 
confine myself to replying to some of the points which have been made 
by the speakers who have participated in this debate. 

I would begin with the observations made by my honourable friend, 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. Sir, I thought that the Legislature was not 
a court and that a Member of this House who is a lawyer certainly 
does not come here either to practise or to plead. But somehow my 
friend either for fee or out of pure generosity, undertook the task 
of representing the views of some of his clients who probably had 
not the courage to say what they had in their mind. I shall, however, 
not raise any technical objections but deal with the points that he 
has made. 

Sir, his complaint was that the Bill had no sufficient publicity and 
that the public was not given as ample an opportunity as the 
importance of the measure required. I should have thought that the 
clients of my honourable friend had rather misinformed him on this 
point. This Bill had its origin in a legislation which took effect in 
the year 1937. Ever since that year the provisions of this Bill have 
been bandied from one side to the other, from committee to committee. 
For instance in the year 1941, the Home Department appointed a 
Committee to consider some of the difficulties that arose out of the Women’s 
Rights to Property Act of 1937, to report upon the difficulties and to 
suggest remedies. This Committee which is known as the Rau Committee 
made its report on the 19th June 1941. My Honourable friend, if he had 
referred to this report would have seen the immense amount of publicity 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IV, 9th April 1948, pp. 3650-53. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that Committee gave to its proposals, the number of questionnaires 
that it issued, the statements that it received, the witnesses that 
it examined and the peregrinations it undertook from province to 
province in order to ascertain local public opinion. Again in 1942 this 
very Committee submitted two draft Bills, one on succession and the 
other on marriage. The Hindu Succession Bill was introduced in the 

Assembly in 1943. That was referred to a joint Committee of both 

Houses. That joint committee again invited public opinion and a 
volume of them were collected and circulated to the then legislature 
in existence. Having regard to all these, I am sure that the statement 
made by my honourable friend that the Government had not given 
sufficient publicity cannot be accepted as truth. 

He also referred to the report, the Minority Report of Justice 
Mitter, where also he has analysed the pros and cons of the various 
points contained in this Bill. Sir, I do not like to say anything 
derogatory of a member of a Committee, who has done such useful 
work, but I cannot help saying that this member really ran away 
from his own opinion. If my honourable friend, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
were to read the report of the majority he will find that all the 

propositions contained in that Bill which give rights to women were 
really based upon a publication of this member of the Committee in 
the year 1930. In that book he had propounded the view that the 

case law which had limited the rights of the women had no 
foundation. Ultimately for reasons best known to him he did no 
submit that there is no point in this argument. 

My honourable friend also referred to the fact that this Bill is after 
all confined to property other than agricultural land. The conclusion 
he drew from that fact was that this codification was only a partial 
codification, because a large part of the property which is the subject 
matter of inheritance is felt untouched by the provisions of this Bill. 
Sir, there are two explanations for the non-inclusion of agricultural 
property*. My honourable friend, if he refers to the Schedules to the 
Government of India Act, where the subject matter of legislation for 
Centre and the Provinces have been set out will find that land is put in 
the “Provincial List”. As a result of the judicial interpretation given by 
the Federal Court it was held that the word “land” or item “land”, 

* Misprinted as ‘ non-agricultural property, in the Debates at p. 3651. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


39 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 39 


which is included in the “Provincial List” not merely covered tenancy 
land but also covered succession to land and consequently any 
provision with regard to the succession to land made by the Central 
Legislature would be ultra vires. In order that this may not happen, 
the Committee very deliberately exempted agricultural land from the 
provisions of this Bill. But what I would like to say is something 
different. I should have thought that the omission of land from this 
Bill far from being a flaw or a fault in the Bill was probably an 
advantage because I believe there is no necessity that a uniform law 
of inheritance should apply to all sorts of property. Property varies 
in its nature, varies in its importance in the social life of the 

community and consequently it may be a matter of no mean 
advantage for society to have one set of law of inheritance for 

agricultural property and another set of law for non-agricultural 
property. It may be that on a better consideration of the situation, 
Indian or Hindu society may come to the conclusion that land which 
is the foundation of its economic life had better be governed by the 
law of primogeniture so that neither the junior sons nor females may 
take part in the inheritance. As I said, the question having been left 
open it is to the advantage of the society that it may consider the 
matter de novo and afresh. I do not, therefore, regard that the 

comment made by my honourable friend on the part of this Bill is 

really a matter to be apologised for. 

Coming to my friend, Mr. Chaudhuri, he considers, this piece of 
legislation as a communal legislation. I agree that in as much as 
it refers to Hindu society, which is one of the many communities 
inhabiting this country, it might well in a logical sense be called a 
communal piece of legislation. But what is the alternative? If my 
honourable friend’s alternative was that there ought not to be communal 
laws of inheritance and communal laws of marriage but there ought 
to be a common civil code, applying to all sections all communities, all 
persons: in fact applying to citizens without discrimination as to religion, 
creed or caste, I am certainly one with him. Certainly, that is not his 
conclusion. His conclusion is, if I understand him, that this legislation 
by reason of the fact that the other day a view was expressed that 
the future society here stated would be secular had no right to 
legislate for a secular community: that would be a most disastrous 
conclusion. This country is inhabited by very many communities. Each 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


one has its special laws and merely because the State desired to 
assume a secular character it should withdraw itself from regulating 
the lives of the various communities, undoubtedly would result in 
nothing but chaos and anarchy. I certainly myself am not prepared 
to subscribe to that sort of a proposition. 

His second comment was that the Bill had not taken into 
consideration the customary law. He cited some ruling of the Privy 
Council. I should have thought that at this hour of the day it was 
unnecessary to cite the authority of the Privy Council because it has 
been well established by a long course of decisions, that so far as 
the Hindus are concerned custom would override the text of the 

“Smriti’. We all know this. But what are we doing? What are we 
doing is this. We are shutting down the growth of new customs. We 
are not destroying existing customs. The existing customs we are 
recognising because the rules of law which are prevalent in Hindu 
society are the result of customs. They are born out of custom and 
we feel that they have now grown so sturdy that we can indeed give 
them flesh and life in the body politic by our legislation. 

He also said that we had not taken into consideration the question 
of the tribal people, whose life is undoubtedly governed in a large 
measure by customary law. If my friend had read the definition in 

this code as to who is a Hindu and who is not and to whom this 
Code applied, he would have seen that there is a clause which merely 
said that persons who are not Muslims, Parsis or Christians shall 

be presumed to be Hindus: not that they are Hindus. The result is 
that if a tribal individual chooses to say that he is not a Hindu it 
would be perfectly open to him under this Code to give evidence in 
support of his contention that he is not a Hindu and if that conclusion 
is accepted by the Court he certainly would not be obliged by anything 
contained in this Bill. 

Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri : My point is that he did not 
like to be called a Hindu and still wanted to retain all the customs 
of the Hindu ! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The position taken is this : 
that once a person chooses to call himself a Hindu, he must accept 

the generality of law which is prescribed for the Hindu. We do not 
want this anarchy. A Hindu is a Hindu for all purposes. If a tribal 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


41 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 41 


person does not want to be a Hindu the way is open to him to prove 
that he is not and the Bill will not apply to him. 

Then my friend, Dr. Sitaramayya asked me to tell him whether 
the rule of law contained in this Bill, whereby the women will acquire 
absolute estate in the property which they inherit, will apply to 
widows who have already taken the estate before the passing of the 
Act. I am afraid I must say that the Bill has no retrospective effect. 

Nor would it be possible to give retrospective effect to the principles 
of the absolute property of women for the simple reason that long 
before this Bill will come into existence, vested rights would have 
been created in that estate and it would not be right and proper to 
divest them however much our suympathy may be with the widow. 

Mrs. Hansa Mehta raised several questions indicating that the 
women and particularly herself were not satisfied with some of the 
provisions contained in the Bill relating to the rights of women. It 
may be that in an ideal sense the Bill does not come up to 
expectations. But I would like to tell her that she must remember 
that this society is an inert society. The Hindu Society has always 
believed that law-making is the function either of God or the “Smriti’ 
and that Hindu Society has no right to change the law. That being 
so, the law in Hindu Society has remained what it was for generations 
to come. Society has never accepted its own power and its own 
responsibility in moulding its social, economic and legal life. It is 
for the first time that we are persuading Hindu Society to take this 
big step and I have not the slightest doubt in my mind that a society 
which has bucked up courage enough to tolerate the large step that 
we are asking it to take by reason of this Bill, will not hesitate to 
march on the path that remains to be trodden and reach the goal 
that she has in mind. 

Sir, much has been made of the fact that there is a great deal 
of public opinion which is opposed to this Bill. I have certainly not 
weighed the opinions that we have received but I do like to say this, 
that this is hardly a question which we can decide by counting heads. 
This is not a question which we can decide in accordance with the 
opinion of the majority. When society is in a transitory stage, leaving 
the past, going to the future, there are bound to be opposing 
considerations: one pulling towards the past and one pulling towards 
the future and the test that we can apply is no other than the test 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of one’s conscience. I have not the slightest doubt in my mind that 
the provisions of this Bill are in perfect consonance with the 
conscience of the community, and I have therefore, no hesitation in 
putting forth this measure although it may be as a matter of fact 
that a large majority of our countrymen do not accept it. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu 
Law, be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Shri Alladi 
Krishnaswami Ayyar, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Shri M Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar, Shrimati G. Durgabai, Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi, 
Shri U. Srinivasa Mallayya, Shri Mihir Lai Chattopadhyay, Dr. P.S. 
Deshmukh, Shrimati Renuka Ray, Dr. P. K. Sen, Babu Ramnarayan 
Singh, Shri Kishorimohan Tripathi, Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan, 
Pandit Balkrishna Sharma, Shri Khurshed Lai, Shri Brajeshwar 
Prasad, Shri B. Shiva Rao, Shri Baldeo Swarup, Shri V. C. Kesava 
Rao and the Mover with instructions to report not later than the last 
day of the first week of the next session of me Assembly and that 
the number of members whose presence shall be necessary to 
constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be Five.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: This brings to a close our long session which 
commenced on the 28th of January and I heartily thank all the Members 
for the sincere co-operation, which I have always had from them. 

(The Assembly then adjourned sine die.) 


□ □ 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


43 


SECTION II 

THE DRAFT HINDU CODE BILL 

BY 

DR. B.R. AMBEDKAR ALONG WITH 
THE THEN EXISTING HINDU CODE AS 
AMENDED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE 





THE HINDU CODE 


BY 

Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR 



DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


46 



DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


47 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 47 


NOTE 

In order to give a clear picture of the 
amendments which the Government propose 
to move, the Code as proposed to be further 
amended is set out in this book on the left- 
hand side. For the sake of convenience the 
existing provisions of the draft Code as 
amended by the Select Committee are printed 
on the right-hand side. The actual 
amendments which are to be moved are shown 
on the left-hand side by having them either 
underlined or sidelined. Portions omitted are 
shown by asterisks; and where any page on 
either side of the book appears blank, it 
means either that there is no corresponding 
provision in the Select Committee’s Code or 
that a portion of the Select Committee’s Code has 
been omitted. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


[AS PROPOSED TO BE FURTHER AMENDED] 

(Changes to be made are underlined or side-lined and portions to be 
omitted are shown by asterisks ) 


A 

Bill 

to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


Be it enacted by Parliament as follows : — 

PART I— PRELIMINARY 

1. Short title and extent * * *. — (1) This Act may be called the Hindu 
Code, 1950 

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


49 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 49 


[AS PROPOSED TO THE SELECT COMMITTEE] 

A 

BILL 

to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law 

Whereas it is expedient to amend and codify certain branches of 
the Hindu Law as now in force in the Provinces of India; 

It is hereby enacted as follows ; — 

PART I— PRELIMINARY 

1. Short title, extent and commencement. — (1) This 
Act may be called the Hindu Code, 1948. 

(2) It extends to all the Provinces of India. 

(3) It shall come into force on the first of January, 195 . 


Part I, 
See. I, 
Page I. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


*( 2 ) 

2. Application of Code. — (1) This Code applies — 

(a) to all * * * * persons who are Hindus by religion in any of its 
forms or developments, including Virashaivas or Lingayatas and members 
of the Brahmo, the Prarthana or the Arya Samaj; 

(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion; 

(c) (i) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate both of whose parents 
are Hindus within the meaning of this section. 

(ii) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is 
a Hindu within the meaning of this section: provided that such child 
is brought up as a member of the community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; and 

(d) to a convert to the Hindu, Budhist. Jain or Sikh religion. 

(2) This Code also applies to any other person, who is not a Muslim, 

Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion : 

Provided that if it is proved that such person would not have been 

governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that 
law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Code had 

not been passed, then, this Code shall not apply to that person in respect 

of those matters. 

(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Code shall be 
construed as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion 
is, nevertheless governed by the provisions of this Code. 


(3) 

3. Definitions. — In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires. — 

(i) “Alivasantana law” means the system of law applicable to persons 
who, if this Code had not been passed would have been governed by 
the Madras Alivasantana Act. 1949 (Madras Act IX of 1949): 

(ii) the expressions “custom” and “usage” signify any rule which having 
been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained 
the force of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe, community, 
group or family: 

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed 
to public policy; and 


* Original page numbers of the Government of India publication are put above and 
below the respective portions in bracket. 





D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


51 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 51 


2. Application of Code. — (1) This Code applies — 

(a) to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing 
the Hindu religion in any of its forms or developments, 
including Virashaivas or Lingayatas and members of the 
Brahmo, the Prarthana or the Arya Samaj; 

(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion; 

(c) (i) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are 
Hindus within the meaning of this section. 

(ii) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a 
Hindu within the meaning of this section; provided that such child is 
brought up as a member of the community group or family to which such 
parent belongs or belonged; and 

(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion. 

(2) This Code also applies to any other person, who is Part 

section 2 

not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion : naee l ’ 


Part I, 
section 2, 
page 1. 


Provided that if it is proved that such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that 
law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Code had 
not been passed, then, this Code shall not apply to that person in respect 
of those matters. 


(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Code shall be construed 
as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion is, 
nevertheless, governed by the provisions of this Code. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to all 
Hindus whose marriages have been solemnized under the 
provisions of that Act prior to the commencement of this Code. 


Part I, 
section 6, 
page 2 and 
schedule I, 
page 30. 


( 2 ) 

3. Definitions. — In this Code, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context, — 


Part I, 
secs. 4 and 
5, page 2. 


(i) the expressions “custom” and “usage” signify any rule which having been 

continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force 
of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe, community, group or family: 

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to 
public policy: and 

Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family 
it has not been discontinued by the family; 

(ii) the expression “district court” means the principal civil Part I, 
court of original jurisdiction and except in sections 44 sec - (i) * * * 5 W> 
and 49, includes the High Court in the exercise of its P a g e 2 - 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction; 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family 
it has not been discontinued by the family; 

(iv) “full blood” and “half blood” — two persons are said to be related 
to each other by full blood when they are descended from a common 
ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestor but by different wives; 

(v) “uterine blood”. — two persons are said to be related to each other 
by uterine blood when they are descended from a common ancestress 
but by different husbands; 

Explanation. — In Clauses (iv) and (v) “ancestor” includes the father 
and “ancestress” the mother; 

(vi) “Marumakkattayam law” means the system of law applicable 
to persons: — 

(a) who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been governed 
by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXII of 1933), 
the Travancore Nair Act II of 1100, the Travancore Ezhava Act, III 
of 1100, the Nanjinad Vellala Act, 1101, the Travancore Kashatriya Act, 
1108, the Travancore Krishnavaka — Marumukkathayam Act, 1115. the 
Cochin Thiyya Act VIII of 1107, the Cohin Nayar Act, XXIX of 1113, 
or the Cochin Marumakkathayam Act, XXXIII of 1113; or 

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely 
domiciled in the State of Travancore-Cochin or Madras and who, if this 
Code had not been passed would have been governed by any system 
of inheritance in which descent is traced through the female line; 

but does not include the Aliyasantana law; 

(vii) “Nambudri law” means the law applicable to persons who, if this 
Code had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Nambudri Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXI of 1933), the Cochin Nambudri 
Act (XVII of 1114) or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act of 1106 
(Regulation III of 1106); 

(viii) “Part” means a Part of this Code; 

(ix) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code; 

(x) “related” means related by legitimate kinship: 

Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to 
their mother and to one another and their legitimate descendants shall 
be deemed to be related to them and to one another; and any word 
expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be construed 
accordingly; 

(xi) “son” includes an adopted son, whether adopted before or after 
the commencement of this Code, but does not include an illegitimate son. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


53 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 53 


(iii) “full blood” and “half blood” — two persons are said Sec. 5(e) 
to be related to each other by full blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor by the same wife and 

by half blood when they are descended from a common 
ancestor but by different wives; 

(iv) “uterine blood” — two persons are said to be related Sec. 5(e) 
to each other by uterine blood when they are descended 

from a common ancestress but by different husbands; 

Explanation . — In this Clause “ancestor” includes the father and 
“ancestress” the mother; 

(v) “Part” means any Part of this Code; Sec. 5(h) 

(vi) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code; 

(vii) “related” means related by legitimate kinship: Sec. 5(i) 

Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to 
their mother and to one another and their legitimate descendants shall 
be deemed to be related to them and to one another; and any word 
expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be construed 
accordingly; 

(viii) “son” includes an adopted son, whether adopted Part II, 
before or after the commencement of this Code, but does sec. 2(c), 
not include an illegitimate son. page 3. 


( 3 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(4) 

4. Overriding effect of Code. — Save as otherwise expressly provided 
in this Code, — 

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or 
usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code shall 
cease to have effect with respect to any of the matters dealt with in 
this Code; and 

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Code shall cease to have effect in so far as it is inconsistent with 
any of the provisions contained in this Code. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


55 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 55 


4. Overriding effect of Code. — Save as otherwise Part I, 
expressly provided in this Code, any text, rule or sec. 3, 
interpretation of Hindu law, or any custom or usage or page 1. 
any other law in force immediately prior to the 
commencement of this Code shall cease to have effect as 
respect any of the matters dealt with in this Code. 

(4) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 5 ) 

PART II.— MARRIAGE AND ANNULMENT OF MARRIAGE 

CHAPTER I 
Marriage 

5. Interpretation. — In this Part, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 

(a) “district court” includes any court subordinate to the district 
court which may be specified in this behalf by the State Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette; 

(b) “Sapinda relationship” — a man is a sapinda of any of the persons 
mentioned in the first column of the First Division of the Third 
Schedule and a woman is a sapinda of any of the persons mentioned 
in the second column of the said Division; 

(c) “degrees of prohibited relationship” — a man and any of the 
persons mentioned in the first column of the Second Division of the 
Third Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in 
the second column of the said Division are within the degrees of 
prohibited relationship. 

Explanation . — For the purposes of clauses (b) and (c) relationship 
includes, — 

(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood; 

(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate; 

(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; 

and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed 
accordingly*. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


57 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 57 


PART II.— MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 

CHAPTER I 
Marriage 

Part VI, 

5. Interpretation. — In this Part, unless there is anything sec . j, 
repugnant in the subject or context, — page 14. 

(a) (i) “sapinda relationship” with reference to any person extends as 
far as the third generation (inclusive) in the line of ascent through the 
mother and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of ascent through the father 
the line being traced upwards in each case from the person concerned, 
who is to be counted as the first generation: 

(ii) two persons are said to be “sapindas” of each other if one is a lineal 
ascendant of the other with the limits of sapinda relationship or if they 
have a common lineal ascendant who is within the limits of sapinda 
relationship with reference to each of them. 

(b) “degrees of prohibited relationship”. — two persons are said to be within 
“the degrees of prohibited relationship” if one is a lineal ascendant of the 
other or was the wife or husband of a lineal ascendant or descendant of the 
other or if the two are brother and sister, uncle and niece, aunt and nephew 
or the children of two brothers or two sisters. 

Explanation. — For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b) relationship includes. — 

(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood; 

(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate; 

(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; 

and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed 
accordingly. 

Illustrations 

(i) C, the common ancestor is the father’s mother’s fathers’s father of 
A and the mother’s father of B. As C is the fifth generation from A in 
A’s father’s line and the third generation from B in B’s mother’s line, A 
and B are Sapindas of each other. 

(ii) A and B are consanguine brother and sister. Their descendants 
within the limits of sapinda relationship, will be sapindas of each other. 
The descendants of their father and his ancestors will also be sapindas 
of A and B and their descendants within the limits of sapinda relationship. 
But the maternal grandfather of A will not necessarily be a sapinda of 
the maternal grandfather of B, nor will a son of the former maternal 
grandfather necessarily he a sapinda of a son of the latter. 

(iii) A and B are uterine brother and sister. Their descendants, within 
the limits of sapinda relationship, will be sapinda of each other. The 
descendants of their mother and her ancestors will also be spindas of A 
and B and their descendants within the limits of sapinda relationship. 
But the paternal grandfather of A will not necessarily be a sapinda of 
the paternal grandfather of B, nor will a son of the former paternal 
grandfather necessarily be a sapinda of a son of the latter. 

( 5 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 6 ) 

6. Forms of Hindu marriage. — Save as otherwise expresly 
provided herein, no marriage between Hindus shall be recognised 
as valid unless it is solemnized — 

(a) as a Dharmik marriage, or 

(b) as a civil marriage, or 

(c) in accordance with the provisions of section 24A in cases to 
which that section applies. 

(7) 

General provisions for a Dharmik marriage 

7. Essentials for a valid Dharmik marriage. — A Marriage 
between any two Hindus solemnized in the Dharmik form shall be 
a valid marriage, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 

(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; 

(ii) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of the 

marriage; 

(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of eighteen years and 

the bride the age of fifteen years at the time of the marriage; 

(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship; 

(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other unless the custom 
or usage governing each of them permits of a Dharmik marriage 
between the two; 

(vi) where the bride has not completed her sixteenth year, the 

consent of her guardian in marriage has been obtained for the 
marriage. 

( 8 ) 

General provisions for a Civil marriage 

8. Essentials for a valid Civil marriage. — A Marriage between 
any two Hindus solemnized in the Civil form shall be a valid 
marriage, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 

(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; 

(ii) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of the 

marriage; 

(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of eighteen years and 
the bride the age of fifteen years at the time of the marriage; 

(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship; 

(v) each party has, if he or she has not completed the age of twenty 
one years at the time of the marriage, obtained the consent of his 
or her guardian in marriage: 

Provided that no such consent shall be required if the bride is a widow. 





D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


59 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 59 


6. Forms of Hindu marriage. — Save as otherwise Part IV, 
expresly provided herein, no marriage between Hindus sec. 1, 
shall be recognised as valid unless it is solemnized page 15. 
either as a sacramental marriage or as a civil marriage 
in accordance with the provisions of this Part. 

( 6 ) 


Sacramental marriage 

7. Conditions relating to a sacramental marriage. — Part IV, 

A marriage between any two Hindus may be solemnized sec. 3, page 
in the sacremental form, if the following conditions are 15. 
fulfilled, namely: — 


(1) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; 


(2) neither party is an idiot or lunatic at the time of the marriage; 


(3) the bridegroom has completed the age of eighteen years and 
the bride the age of fourteen years at the time of the marriage; 


(4) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship; 

(5) the parties are not sapindas of each other unless the custom 
or usage governing each of them permits of a sacramental marriage 
between the two; 


(6) where the bride has not completed her 
consent of her guardian has been obtained for 


sixteenth year the 
the marriage. 


(7) 


Part IV, 
sec, 7, 
page 16. 

10. Conditions relating to a civil marriage. — For a civil 
marriage between any two Hindus, the following conditions must be 
fulfilled, namely: — 

(1) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; 

(2) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of the marriage; 

(3) the bridegroom has completed the age of eighteen years and 
the bride the age of fourteen years at the time of the marriage; 

(4) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship; 

(5) each party has, if he or she has not completed the age of twenty 
one years, obtained the consent of his or her guardian in marriage: 

Provided that no such consent shall be required in the case of a widow. 

( 8 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(9) 

Formalities for a Dharmik marriage 

9. Ceremonies. — (1) A Dharmik marriage shall not be complete 
and binding on the parties unless it is solemnized in accordance with 
such customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto as are 
essential for such marriage. 

(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Savtavadi (that 
is, the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom and the bride jointly 
before the sacred fire) the marriage becomes complete and binding 
when the seventh step is taken. 

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no marriage 
solemnized in the Dharmik form shall, after the solemnization 
thereof, be deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any irregularity 
in the performance of any of the customary rites and ceremonies 
of either party thereto. 

(10) 

10. Registration of Dharmik marriage. — (1) For the purpose of 
facilitating the proof of any Dharmik marriage the State Government 
may by rules, provide that — 

(a) particulars relating to such marriage shall be entered in such 
manner and under such circumstances as it thinks fit in the Hindu 
Dharmik m arriage Register kept for this purpose; and 

(b) the making of such entries shall be compulsory in the State 
or in such areas or such cases as may be specified in the rules. 

(2) In making any rules under sub-section (1) the State Government 
may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 

( 11 ) 

Formalities for a Civil Marriase 

11. Marriage Registrars. — The State Government may appoint 
one or more persons to be Registrars of Hindu Marriages, in this 
Part referred to as “the Registrar”, for the State or any part thereof 
and the area for which any such Registrar has been appointed shall 
be called his district. 

(12) 

12. Notice of marriage to Registrar. — When a civil marriage is 
intended to be solemnized under this Part, the parties to the marriage 
shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Fourth 
Scheduled to the Registrar of the district in which at least one of 
the parties to the marriage has resided for a period of not less than 
thirty days preceding the date on which such notice is given. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


61 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 61 


8. Ceremonies required — (1) A sacramental marriage Part IV, 
shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless sec ‘ 

it is solemnized in accordance with such customary rites page 
and ceremonies of either party thereto as are essential 
for such marriage. 

(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that 
is, the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom and the bride jointly 
before the sacred fire) the marriage becomes complete and binding 
when the seventh step is taken. 

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no marriage 
solemnized in the sacramental form shall, after the solemnization thereof, be 
deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any irregularity in the performance 
of any of the customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto. 

(9) 

9. Registration of Sacramental marriages. — (1) For 

the purpose of facilitating the proof of any Sacramental 
marriage the Provincial Government may by rules, provide 
that — 

(a) particulars relating to such marriage shall be entered in the 

Hindu Sacramental marriage Register kept for this purpose in such 

manner and under such circumstances as it thinks fit; and 

(b) the making of such entries shall be compulsory the such 

cases or in such areas as may be specified in the rules. 

(2) In making any rules under sub-section (1) the Provincial 
Government may provide that a contravention thereof shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 

( 10 ) 

11. Marriage Registrars. — The Provincial Government 
may appoint one or more persons to be Registrars of Hindu 
Marriages, in this Part referred to as “the Registrar”, for 
the Province or any part thereof and the area for which 
any such Registrar has been appointed shall be called his 
district. 

( 11 ) 

12. Notice of marriage to Registrar. — When a civil 
marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Part, 
the parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in 
writing in the form specified in the Third Scheduled to 
the Registrar of the district in which at least one of 
the parties to the marriage has resided for a period of 
not less than thirty days preceding the date on which 
such notice is given. 


Part IV, 
sec. 8, 
page 16. 


Part IV, 
sec. 9, 
page 16. 


Part IV, 
sec. 6, 
page 15. 


( 12 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


62 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(13) 

13. Marriage Notice Book and publication. — (1) The Registrar 
shall keep all notices given under section 12 with the records of his 
office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice 
in a book furnished to him for that purpose by the State Government 
to be called the “Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Book” and such book 
shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times, without fee by 
every person desirous of inspecting the same. 

(2) The Registrar shall also publish every such notice in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 

(14) 

14. Objection to marriage. — (1) After the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been given 
under section 12, the marriage may be solemnized unless it has been 
objected to under sub-section (2). 

(2) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the 
giving of any notice of an intended marriage, object to the marriage 
on the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions 
specified in section 8 . 

(3) The nature of the objection made shall be recorded in writing 
by the Registrar in the Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Book, and shall, 
if necessary, be read over and explained to the person making the 
objection and shall be signed by him or on his behalf. 

(15) 

15. Procedure on receipt of objection. — (1) If an objection is 
made under section 14 to an intended marriage, the Registrar shall 
not allow the marriage to be solemnized until the expiration of thirty 
days from the receipt of such objection, if there is a court of competent 
jurisdiction open at the time or if no such court is open at the time, 
until the expiration of thirty days from the opening of such a court. 

(2) The person objecting to the intended marriage may file a suit 
in the district court having local jurisdiction, * * * for a declaration 
that such marriage contravenes one or more of the conditions 
specified in section 8 and the court in which such suit is filed shall 
thereupon give the person presenting it a certificate to the effect 
that such suit has been field. 

(3) If the certificate referred to in sub-section (2) is lodged with the 
Registrar within thirty days from the receipt by him of the objection, if there 
is a court of competent jurisdiction open at the time or if no such court 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


63 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 63 

13. Marriage Notice Book and publication. — (1) The Part IV, 

Registrar shall keep all notices given under section 12 sec ' ^ 
with the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter page 
a true copy of every such notice in a book furnished to 
him for that purpose by the Provincial Government to be 
called the “Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Book” and such 
book shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times, 
without fee by every person desirous of inspecting the 
same. 

(2) The Registrar shall also publish every such notice in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 

(13) 

14. Objection to marriage. — (1) After the expiration Part 

of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended page 16 
marriage has been given under section 12, the marriage 
may be solemnized unless it has been objected to under 
sub-section (2). 

(2) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the 

giving of any notice of an intended marriage, object to the marriage 
on the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions 
prescribed in clauses (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 10. 

(3) The nature of the objection made shall be recorded in writing by 

the Registrar in the Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Book, and shall, if 

necessary, be read over and explained to the person making the 
objection, and shall be signed by him or on his behalf. 

(14) 

15. Procedure on receipt of objection. — (1) If an 

objection is made under section 14 to an intended 
marriage, the Registrar shall not allow the marriage to 

be solemnized until the expiration of thirty days from the 
receipt of such objection, if there is a court of competent 
jurisdiction open at the time, or, if no such court is open 
at the time, until the expiration of thirty days from the 
opening of such a court. 

(2) The person objecting to the intended marriage may file a suit in 
the District Court having local jurisdiction (or in any other Court 
empowered in this behalf by the Provincial Government and having such 
jurisdiction)* for a declaration that such marriage contravenes one or 
more of the conditions prescribed in clauses (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of 
section 10 and the court in which such suit is filed shall thereupon 
give the person presenting it a certificate to the effect that such suit 
has been filed. 

*Dr. Ambedkar’s remarks in his personal copy by blue pencil — ‘omitted, unnecessary. 
See new definition of District Court. — Ed. 


Part IV, 
sec. 12, 
page 17. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is open at the time within thirty days from the opening of such a 
Court, the marriage shall not be solemnized until the decision of such 
court has been given and the period allowed by law for appeal from 
such decision has elapsed, or, if there is an appeal from such decision, 
until the decision of the appellate court has been given. 

(4) If such certificate is not lodged in the manner and within the 
period laid down in sub-section (3), or if the decision of the court 
is that the marriage does not contravene any of the conditions 
specified in section 8 . the marriage may be solemnized by the 
Registrar to whom the notice of marriage has been given. 

(5) If the decision of the court is that the marriage contravenes any 
of the conditions specified in section 8 . the marriage shall not be solemnized. 


(16) 

16. Power of court to fine when objection not reasonable. — 

If it appears to the court before which the suit is filed that the 
objection was not reasonable and bona fide, it may impose on the 
person objecting a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees and award 
it or any part thereof to the parties to the intended marriage. 


(17) 

17. Declaration by parties and witnesses. — (1) Before the marriage 
is solemnized, the parties and three witnesses, shall, in the presence 
of the Registrar, sign a declaration in the form specified in the Fifth 
Schedule and where either party has not completed the age of twenty- 
one years, the declaration shall also be signed by his or her guardian, 
except in the case of a widow. 

(2) Every declaration made under sub-section (1) shall be countersigned 
by the Registrar. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


65 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 65 


(3) If the certificate referred to in sub-section (2) is lodged with the 

Registrar within thirty days from the receipt by him of the objection, 
if there is a court of competent jurisdiction open at the time or if no 
such court is open at the time within thirty days from the opening of 
such a Court, the marriage shall not be solemnized until the decision 

of such Court has been given and the period allowed by law for appeal 

from such decision has elapsed or if there is an appeal from such 
decision, until the decision of the appellate court has been given. 

(4) If such certificate is not lodged in the manner and within the 

period laid down in sub-section (3), or if the decision of the court is 
that the marriage does not contravene any of the conditions prescribed 
in clauses (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 10, the marriage may be 

solemnized by the Registrar to whom the notice of marriage has been 

given. 

(5) If the decision of the court is that the marriage contravenes any 
of the conditions prescribed in clauses (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 
10, the marriage shall not be solemnized. 

(15) 


16. Power of court to fine when objection not Part IV, 
reasonable. — If it appears to the court before which the sec ‘ ^ 
suit is filed that the objection was not reasonable and page 
bonafide, it may impose on the person objecting a fine 
not exceeding one thousand rupees and award it or any 
part thereof to the parties to the intended marriage. 

(16) 


17. Declaration by parties and witnesses. — (1) Part IV, 

Before the marriage is solemnized, the parties and three S ^' e 
witnesses, shall, in the presence of the Registrar, sign a page 
declaration in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule 
and where either party has not completed the age of 
twenty-one years, the declaration shall also be signed by 
his or her guardian, except in the case of a widow. 

(2) Every declaration made under sub-section (1) shall be countersigned 
by the Registrar. 


( 17 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(18) 

18. Place and form of solemnization. — (1) The marriage may be 
solemnized, — 

(a) at the office of the Registrar, or 

(b) at such other place within reasonable distance therefrom as 
the parties may desire, upon such conditions and on the payment 
of such additional fees as may be prescribed. 

(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form: 

Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties 
unless each party says to the other in the presence of the Registrar 
and the three witnesses, I (A) take thee, (B), to be my lawful wife 
(or husband). 

(3) The marriage shall be solemnized in the presence of the Registrar 
and the three witnesses. 


(19) 

19. Certificate of marriage — (1) When the marriage has been 
solemnized, the Registrar shall enter a certificate thereof, in the form 
specified in the Sixth Schedule in a book to be kept by him for that 
purpose and to be called the “Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate Book” 
and such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and 
the three witnesses. 

(2) On a certificate being entered in the Hindu Civil Marriage 
Certificate Book by the Registrar, the certificate shall be deemed to be 
conclusive evidence of the fact that a civil marriage has been solemnized 
and that all formalities as respects the signatures of witnesses to the 
marriage have been complied with.* 

( 20 ) 

20 When marriage not solemnized within three months after 
notice, new notice required. — Whenever a marriage is not solemnized 
within three calendar months after notice thereof has been given to the 
Registrar, as required by section 12 or where the person objecting to 
the intended marriage has filed a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction 
and the decision of such court has been given, within three calendar 
months of the date on which the period allowed by law for appeal from 
such decision expires, or if there is an appeal from such decision, within 
three calendar months from the date of decision of the appellate court, 
the notice and all other proceedings thereon shall be deemed to have 
lapsed and no Registrar shall allow the marriage to be solemnized 
until a new notice has been given in the manner prescribed in this 
Chapter. 

*(Under this section 19 Dr. Ambedkar’s remarks in pencil in his personal copy are 
as under, ‘It is not enough to say that formalities have been gone through. It 
carries us nowhere, conclusive evidence must be of solemnization and not of 
formalities.,’ — Ed.) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


67 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 67 


18. Place and form of solemnization. — (1) The 

marriage may be solemnized, — 

(a) at the office of the Registrar, or 


Part IV, 
sec. 15, 
page 17. 


(b) at such other place within reasonable distance therefrom as the 
parties may desire, upon such conditions and on the payment of such 
additional fees as may be prescribed. 

(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form: 


Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties 
unless each party says to the other in the presence of the Registrar 
and the three witnesses, I (A) take thee, (B), to be my lawful wife (or 
husband). 


(3) The marriage shall be solemnized in the presence of the Registrar 
and the three witnesses. 


(18) 

19. Certificate of marriage. — (1) When the. Marriage has 
been solemnized, the Registrar shall enter a certificate thereof, 
in the form specified in the Fifth Schedule in a book to be 
kept by him for that purpose and to be called the “Hindu Civil 
Marriage Certificate Book” and such certificate shall be signed 
by the parties to the marriage and the three witnesses. 

(2) On a certificate being entered in the Hindu Civil Marriage 
Certificate Book by the Registrar, the certificate shall be deemed to be 
conclusive evidence of the fact that all formalities as respects the 
signatures of witnesses to a Civil marriage have been complied with. 

(19) 

20 When marriage not solemnized within three (New) 
months after notice, new notice required. — Whenever 
a marriage is not solemnized within three calendar months 
after notice thereof has been given to the Registrar, as 
required by section 12 or where the person objecting to the 
intended marriage has filed a suit in a court of competent 
jurisdiction and the decision of such court has been given, 
within three calendar months of the date on which the period 
allowed by law for appeal from such decision expires, or if 
there is an appeal from such decision, within three calendar 
months from the date of decision of the appellate court, the 
notice and all other proceedings thereon shall be deemed 
to have lapsed and no Registrar shall allow the marriage 
to be solemnized until a new notice has been given in the 
manner prescribed in this Chapter. 


Part IV, 
sec. 17, 
page 18. 


( 20 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 21 ) 

Registration of Dharmik marriages as civil marriages 
21. Procedure for registration of certain Dharmik Marriages. — (1) 
Where any two Hindus have gone through a Dharmik form of marriage, — 

(a) before the commencement of this Code, and doubts are entertained 
as respects the validity of any such marriage by reason of the 
provisions of any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any 
usage or custom in force at the time of the marriage, or 

(b) after the commencement of this Code and such marriage is 
invalid by reason of the fact that it is in contravention of the 
provisions contained in clause (v) of section 7. 

such persons may, at any time apply to the Registrar of the district 
in which either of them has resided for not less than thirty days 
immediately preceding the application to have their marriage registered 
as if it were a civil marriage solemnized before the Registrar. 

(2) Upon receipt of any such application, the Registrar shall give 
public notice thereof in such manner as may be prescribed and after 
allowing a period of thirty days for objection and after hearing any 
objections received within that period the Registrar, if he is satisfied — 

(a) that the ceremony of marriage was performed on the date 
mentioned in the application and that the parties have been living 
together as husband and wife ever since; 

(b) that the conditions specified in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of 
section 8 a re satisfied as between the parties to the marriage on the 
date of the application; and 

(c) that, where either party not being a widow at the time of the 
marriage has not on the date of the application completed the age 
of twenty one years, the consent of his or her guardian in marriage 
has been obtained to the registration of the marriage as a civil 
marriage. 

shall enter a certificate of the marriage in the Hindu Dharmik 
Marriage Register in the form specified in the Seventh Schedule and 
such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage as well 
as by three witnesses. 

(3) Upon the entry of any such certificate as is specified in sub-section 
(2), the marriage shall be deemed to have been valid for all purposes 
and all children born after the date on which the parties went through 
the Dharmik form of marriage (whose names shall also be entered in 
the Certificate and the Hindu Dharmik Marriage Register) shall, in all 
respects, be deemed to be and always to have been the legitimate 
children of their parents. 

(4) Any party to such marriage aggrieved by any order passed under 
this section may appeal against that order to the district court as defined 
in section 3 within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Registrar 
exercises jurisdiction and the decision of the district court on such appeal 
shall be final. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


69 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 69 


21. Procedure for registration of certain P art IV, 
Sacramental Marriages. — (1) Where any two Hindus sec ‘ 
have gone through a sacramental form of marriage, — P a S e 

(a) before the commencement of this Code and doubts are 

entertained as respects the validity of any such marriage by reason 
of the provisions of any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law 

or any usage or custom in force at the time of the marriage, or 

(b) after the commencement of this Code and such marriage is 
invalid by reason of the fact that it is in contravention of the 
provisions contained in clause (5) of section 7. 

such persons may, at any time apply to the Registrar of the district 
in which either of them has resided for not less than thirty days 

immediately preceding the application, to have their marriage registered 
as if it were a civil marriage solemnized before the Registrar. 

(2) Upon receipt of any such application, the Registrar shall give 
public notice thereof in such manner as may be prescribed and after 
allowing a period of thirty days for objection and after hearing any 
objections received within that period the Registrar, if he is satisfied — 

(a) that the ceremony of marriage was performed on the date 

mentioned in the application and that the parties have been living 

together as husband and wife ever since; 

(b) that the conditions in clauses (1) to (4) of section 10 are satisfied 
as between the parties to the marriage on the date of the application; 
and 

(c) that, where either party not being a widow at the time of the 

marriage has not on the date of the application completed the age 
of twenty one years, the consent of his or her guardian in marriage 

has been obtained to the registration of the marriage as a civil 

marriage; 

shall enter a certificate of the marriage in the Hindu Sacramental 
Marriage Register in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule and such 

certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage as well as 

by three witnesses. 

(3) Upon the entry of any such certificate as is specified in sub- 
section (2) the marriage shall be deemed to have been valid for all 
purposes and all children born after the date on which the parties went 
through the Sacramental form of marriage (whose names shall also 
be entered in the Certificate and the Hindu Sacramental Marriage 
Register) shall, in all respects, be deemed to be, and always to have 
been, the legitimate children of their parents. 

(4) Any party to such marriage aggrieved by any order passed under 
this section may appeal against that order to the district court within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Registrar exercises jurisdiction, 
and the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final. 

( 21 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 22 ) 

Use of marriase records 

22. Marriage records to be open to inspection etc. — The Hindu 
Dharmik Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate 
Book shall, at all reasonable times, be open for inspection and shall 
be admissible as evidence of the truth of the statements therein 
contained. 

Certified extracts therefrom shall, on application be given by the 
Registrar on payment to him of the prescribed fee. 


(23) 

23. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records to 
the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages. — The 

Registrar shall send to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages for the State within which his district is situate at such 
intervals as may be prescribed, a true copy in the prescribed form and 
certified by him of all entries made by him in the Hindu Dharmik 
Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate Book since 
the last of such intervals. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


71 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 71 


22. Marriage records to be open to inspection Part 

SOCa 19^ 

etc. — The Hindu Sacramental Marriage Register and the pa ge 18. 
Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate Book shall, at all 
reasonable times, be open for inspection and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the truth of the statements 
therein contained. 

Certified extracts therefrom shall, on application be given by the 
Registrar on payment to him of the prescribed fee. 

( 22 ) 

23. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage 
records to the Registrar General of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages. — The Registrar shall send to the Registrar 
General of Births, Deaths and Marriages for the Province 
within which his district is situate, at such intervals as 
may be prescribed, a true copy in the prescribed form and 
certified by him of all entries made by him in the Hindu 
Sacramental Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil 
Marriage Certificate Book since the last of such intervals. 

( 23 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(24) 

Guardianship in marriage 

24. Priority among guardians in marriage. — (1) Subject to the 
provisions of Part IV, wherever the consent of a guardian in marriage 
is necessary under this Part the persons entitled to give such consent 
shall be the following in the order specified hereunder, namely, — 

(1) the father, 

(2) the mother, 

(3) the brother, 

(4) any other relative, the nearer being preferred to the more remote. 

Explanation . — In determining which of the two relatives is nearer for 
the purposes of entry (4) above, the test shall be, which of them is first 
entitled to inherit to the ward’s heritable properly according to the rules 
of intestate succession in Part VII. 

(2) No person shall be entitled to act as a guardian in marriage under 
the provisions of this section unless such person has himself completed 
his or her twenty first year. 

(3) Whether any person entitled to be the guardian in marriage under 
the foregoing provisions refuses or is by reason of absence, disability 
or other cause, unable or unfit, to act as such, the person next in order 
shall be entitled to be the guardian in marriage . 

(4) Nothing in this Part shall affect the jurisdiction of a court to prohibit 
by injunction and intended marriage arranged by the guardian in marriage. 
if in the interests of the minor, the court thinks it necessary to do so. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


73 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 73 


24. Guardianship in marriage. — (1) Subject to the 
provisions of Part IV, wherever the consent of a 
guardian in marriage is necessary under this Part the 
persons entitled to give such consent shall be the 
following in the order specified hereunder, namely, — 

(1) the father; 

(2) the mother, 

(3) the paternal grandfather. 

(4) The brother by full or half blood, a brother by full blood being 
preferred to one by half blood and as between brothers both by full 
or half blood, the elder being preferred; 

(5) the paternal uncle by full or half blood, subject to the like rules 
of preference as are set out in entry (4) above; 

(6) the maternal grandfather; 

(7) the maternal uncle, subject to the like rules of preference as 
are set out in entry (4) above. 

(8) any other relative, the nearer being preferred to the more 
remote and as between relatives related in the same way, subject 
to the like rules of preference as are set out in entry (4) above. 

Explanation . — In determining which of the two relatives is nearer 
for the purposes of entry (8) above the test shall be, which of them 
is first entided to inherit to the ward’s heritable property according 
to the rules of intestate succession in Part VII. 

(2) No person shall be entitled to act as a guardian in marriage 
under the provisions of this section unless such person has himself 
completed his or her twenty-first year. 

(3) Where any person entitled to be me guardian in marriage under 
the foregoing provisions refuses or is by reason of absence, disability 
or other cause, unable or unfit, to act as such, the person next in 
order shall be entitled to be the guardian. 

(4) Nothing in this Part shall affect the jurisdiction of a court to 
prohibit by injunction an intended marriage arranged by the guardian, 
if in the interests of the minor, the court thinks it necessary to do so. 


Part IV 
sec. 22, 
page 19. 


( 24 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(25) 

Special provisions for a valid marriage between Marumakkattavees. etc. 

24A. Conditions relating to marriage of Marumakkattayam or 
Aliyasantana female. — (1) A marriage solemnized after the commencement 
of this Code between a female who, if this Code had not been passed, 
would have been governed by the Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana law 
and a male Hindu, shall be a valid marriage if the conditions specified 
in section 7 are fulfilled; 

Provided that the condition specified in clause (v)* of the said section 
shall not apply to any such marriage. 

(2) Every marriage under this section shall be openly solemnized in 
accordance with the customary rites and ceremonies, if any, prevailing 
in the community to which the parties belong or either of them belongs; 

Provided that no such marriage shall be deemed to be invalid merely 
by reason of any irregularity in the performance of any of the rites and 
ceremonies aforesaid. 

(3) Notice of every marriage under this section shall be given by such 
person to such authority in such form and within such time as may be 
prescribed. 

(4) Where a marriage is solemnized under the provisions of this section 
between a female who, if this Code had not been passed, would have 
been governed by the Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana law, and a male 
Hindu who would not have been governed by such law, it shall be lawful 
for the parties to make a declaration in the notice given under sub-section 
(3) that they desire to be governed by the special provisions contained 
in this Part with respect to annulment of Marumakkattayam or 
Aliyasantana marriages, and unless any such declaration is made, — 

(a) nothing contained in any such special provision (except this 

section) shall apply to either of the parties; and 

(b) Chapters II and III of this Part shall apply to, or in relation 

to, such marriage as they apply to, or in relation to, a Dharmik marriage. 

(5) If any person fails to give notice of a marriage as required by sub- 
section (3), he shall be punishable with fine, which may extend to fifty 
rupees; 

Provided that the failure to give any such notice shall not invalidate 
the marriage or affect the legal rights of the parties to, or of the issue 
of, such marriage. 



DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


75 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 75 


( 25 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(26) 

Penalties, etc. 

*25. Bigamous marriage and punishment therefor. — Any person 
who during the lifetime of his or her spouse, if the marriage of such 
person with such spouse has not been annulled in accordance with 
the provisions of this Code, or. at any time before the commencement 
of this Code, in accordance with the law, custom or usage in force 
at the time, contracts any other marriage after the commencement 
of this Code, shall be subject to the penalties provided in sections 
494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) for the 
offence of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife. 


(27) 

26. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate. — Every 
person making, signing or attesting any declaration or certificate 
required under this Part, containing a statement which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe 
to be true, shall be * * * * guilty of the offence described in section 
199 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 


* Dr. Ambedkar’s note in pencil on his personal copy, ‘Recognises custom also 
to make matter clear’ — Ed. 





DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


77 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 77 


25. Bigamous marriage and punishment therefor. — 

Any person who during the lifetime of his or her spouse, 
if the marriage of such person with such spouse has not 
been dissolved by a Court of competent jurisdiction, 
contracts any other marriage after the commencement of 
this Code, shall be subject to the penalties provided in 
sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 (XLV 
of 1860) for the offence of marrying again during the 
lifetime of a husband or wife. 


Part V, 
sec. 24, 
page 19. 


(26) 


26. Penalty for signing false declaration or Part IV 
certificate. — Every person making, signing or attesting sec ‘ 22 ^ 
any declaration or certificate required under this Part, 
containing a statement which is false and which he either 
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be 
true, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence described 
in section 199 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 (XLV of 
1860). 


( 27 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(27) 

CHAPTER II 

Restitution of conjugal rishts and judicial separation 

27. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights. — When either the 
husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from 
the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to 
the district court for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on 
being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition and 
that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, 
may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly. 


(29) 

28. Answer to petition for restitution of conjugal rights. — 

Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition for restitution of 
conjugal rights which would not be a ground for judicial separation or 
for a decree of annulment of marriage. 


(29) 

29. Judicial separation. — Either party to a marriage, whether 
solemnized before or after the commencement of this Code, may present 
a petition to the district court praying for a decree for judicial separation 
on the ground that the other party — 

(a) has deserted the petitioner without cause for a period of not 
less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition: 

(b) has been guilty of such cruelty as to render it unsafe for the 
petitioner to live with the other party; or 

(c) has, for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding 
the resentation of the petition, been suffering from venereal disease 
in a communicable form and not contracted from the petitioner: 

(d) is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy; or 

(e) has been habitually of unsound mind since the date of the 
marriage; or 

(f) has committed adultery during the marriage. 

Explanation . — In this section, the expression “to desert” with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to desert the 
other party to a marriage without reasonable cause and without the 
consent or against the wish of such party. 





DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


79 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 79 


31. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights. — 

When either the husband or the wife has, without 
reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the 
other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the 
district court for restitution of conjugal rights and the 
court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements 
made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground 
why the application should not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly. 

(28) 

32. Answer to petition for restitution of conjugal 
rights. — Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition 
for restitution of conjugal rights which would not be a 
ground for judicial separation or for a decree of dissolution 
of marriage. 

(29) 

Judicial Separation 

33. Judicial separation. — Either party to a marriage, 
whether solemnized before or alter the commencement of 
this Code, may present a petition to the District Court 
praying for a decree for judicial separation on the ground 
that the other party — 

(a) has deserted the petitioner for a period of not less than two 
years; or 

(b) has been guilty of such cruelty as to render it unsafe for the 
petitioner to live with the other party; or 

(c) has been suffering from incurable venereal disease in a 
communicable form, not contracted from the petitioner for a period 
of not less than one year immediately preceding the presentation 
of the petition; or 

(d) is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy; or 

(e) has been habitually of unsound mind since the date of marriage; 
or 

(f) has committed adultery during the marriage. 

Explanation . — In this section, the expression “to desert” with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to desert the 
other party to a marriage without reasonable cause and without the 
consent or against the wish of such party. 


(New) 


(New) 


Part IV, 
sec. 30, 
page 21. 


( 30 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(31) 

CHAPTER III 

General provisions relatins to annulment of marriase 

30. No marriage to be annulled except by order of court. — 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, no marriage solemnized, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Code, shall be deemed 
to have been lawfully annulled except by a decree of a comnetent court 
passed in that behalf. 


(32) 

30A. Modes of annulment of marriage. — A marriage may be 
annulled by a decree of nullity, if it is void for any of the reasons set 
out in section 31, or by a decree of dissolution, if it is voidable for any 
of the reasons set out in section 32, or by a decree of divorce for any 
of the reasons set out in section 33, as the case may be. 


Nullity of Marriage s 

31. Grounds for a decree of nullity. — (1) Any marriage solemnized 
before the commencement of this Code may be annulled by a decree 
of nullity — 

(a) if by reason of the provisions of any law in force at the time 
of the marriage such marriage was invalid on the ground that either 
party had a spouse living at the time of the marriage or 

(b) if the parties at the time of the marriage were within the degrees 
of prohibited relationship as defined by clause (c) of section 5 : 

Provided that no such marriage shall be annulled under the provisions 
of clause (b) of this sub-section if it was valid under the provisions of 
any law in force at the time of the marriage. 

(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Code 
may be annulled by a decree of nullity — 

(a) if, purporting to be a Dharmik marriage , it contravenes any of 

the conditions specified in clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of section 7. 

(b) if, purporting to be a civil marriage, it contravenes any of the 

conditions specified in clauses (i) and (iv) of section 8: 

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any 
case falling within the prohibition contained in clause (v) of section 7. 
if. before the institution of any proceeding for the annulment of 
marriage, the marriage is registered as a civil marriage under section 

21 . 








DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


81 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 81 


34. No marriage to be avoided except by order of court. — 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, no marriage solemnized, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Code, and whether 
such marriage is void or voidable, shall be deemed to have been lawfully 
dissolved unless a decree has been pronounced by a Competent Court 
declaring that the marriage is dissolved either on a petition for 
dissolution or in any other proceeding in which the validity of the 
marriage is in issue. 

(31) 


(32) 

28. Void marriage. — (1) Any marriage solemnized be- 
fore the commencement of this Code shall be void — 


Part IV, 
sec. 29(2)(ii) 
page 2. 


(a) if by reason of the provisions of any law in force at the time of 
the marriage such marriage was invalid on the ground that either party 
had a spouse living at the time of the marriage; or 

(b) if the parties at the time of the marriage were within the degrees 
of prohibited relationship as defined by clause (b) of section 5; 

Provided that no such marriage shall be deemed to be void under 
the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1) if it was valid under the 
provisions of any law in force at the time of the marriage. 

(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Code 
shall be void — 


(a) if, purporting to be a sacramental marriage, it contravenes one 
or more of the conditions specified in clauses (1), (4) and (5) of 
section 7 ; 

(b) if, purporting to be a civil marriage, it contravenes any of the 
conditions specified in clauses (1) and (4) of section 10: 

Provided that in the case mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) the 
condition specified in clause (5) of section 7 shall not apply when the 
marriage is subsequently registered at any time as a civil marriage under 
section 21, before any petition for dissolution is presented to any Court. 


( 33 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(34) 

Dissolution of Marriase 

32. Grounds for a decree of dissolution. — (1) Any marriage solemnized 

before the commencement of this Code may be annulled by a decree 
of dissolution on the ground that either party to the marriage was an 
idiot or a lunatic at the time of the marriage. 

(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Code 
may be annulled by a decree of dissolution — 

(a) if, purporting to be a Dharmik marriage, it contravenes any of 
the conditions specified in clauses (ii). (iii) and (vi) of section 7 ; 

(b) if, purporting to be a civil marriage, it contravenes any of the 
conditions specified in clauses (ii). (iii) and (v) of section 8 : 

Provided that, unless there was force or fraud, a Dharmik m arriage 
shall not, after it has been completed, be deemed to be invalid or even 
to have been invalid merely on the ground that the consent of the bride’s 
guardian in marriage to the marriage was not or had not been obtained. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


83 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 83 


29. Voidable marriages. — (1) Any marriage solemnized P art IV, 
before the commencement of this Code shall be voidable sec ‘ 
if either party to the marriage was an idiot or lunatic page 
at the time of the marriage. 

(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Code 
shall be voidable — 

(a) if, purporting to be sacramental marriage, it contravenes any of 
the conditions specified in clauses (2), (3) and (6) of section 7; 

(b) if, purporting to be a civil marriage, it contravenes any of the 

conditions specified in clauses (2), (3) and (5) of section 10: 

Provided that unless there was force or fraud, a sacramental marriage 
shall not, after it has been completed, be deemed to be invalid or ever 
to have been invalid merely on the ground that the consent of the bride’s 
guardian to the marriage was not or had not been obtained. 

(3) Any marriage, whether solemnized before or after the 

commencement of this Code, shall be voidable on any of the grounds 

specified in section 30. 

(4) Where a period of limitation is prescribed for the presentation 

of any petition under this Part and no petition is presented within the 
time prescribed, the marriage shall be deemed to be valid and always 

to have been valid for all purposes. 

36. Dissolution of marriage. — (1) Subject to the provisions of section 
35, either party to a marriage may at any time present a petition for 
dissolution of marriage to the District Court on any of the grounds which 
makes a marriage void or voidable. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to authorise a Court 
to pass a decree — 

(i) in the case of marriage solemnized before the commencement of 
this Code which was valid at the time of solemnization, on the ground — 

(a) that a former wife of the male party was living at the time 

of the marriage; or 

(b) that the parties are within the degrees of prohibited relationship 

as defined by clause (b) of section 5; 

(ii) in the case of a voidable marriage, whether solemnized before 
or alter the commencement of this Code, on the ground that either party 
was an idiot or lunatic at the time of the marriage or that the respondent 
was impotent at the time of the marriage and continued to be so until 
the institution of the proceeding, unless the petition for dissolution is 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(35) 

Divorce 

33. Grounds for a decree of divorce. — Any marriage, solemnized 
whether before or after the commencement of this Code, may be 
annulled by a decree of divorce on any of the following grounds 
namely: — 

(i) either party to the marriage was impotent at the time of the 
marriage and continued to be so until the institution of the proceeding; 

(ii) the husband is keeping a * * * concubine or the wife has become 
the concubine of any other man or leads the life of a prostitute; 

(iii) either party to the marriage has ceased to be a Hindu by 
conversion to another religion; 

(iv) either party is incurably of unsound mind and has been 
continuously under treatment for a period of not less than five years 
preceding the petition; and 

(v) either party is suffering from a virulent * * * form of leprosy.. 

(vi) either party has not resumed marital intercourse for a period 
of two years or upwards after a decree or order for judicial separation 
had been passed against the other party: 

(vii) either party has failed to comply with a decree for restitution 
of conjugal rights for a period of two years or upwards. 





DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


85 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 85 

presented within three years after the solemnization of the marriage, 
or in the ease of a marriage solemnized before the commencement of 
this Code, within two years of such commencement; or 

(iii) in the case of a voidable marriage, whether solemnized before 
or after the commencement of this Code, on the ground that the consent 
of the petitioner or where the consent of his or her guardian is requisite, 
the consent of such guardian was obtained by force or fraud, unless 
the petition for dissolution is presented within one year alter the force 
had ceased to operate or the fraud had been discovered: 

Provided that the Court shall dismiss such petition if — 

(a) in the case of a voidable marriage solemnized before the 
commencement of this Code the force had ceased to operate or the fraud 
had been discovered before such commencement and the petition for 
dissolution is presented more than one year after the commencement 
of this Code; or 

(b) the petitioner has, with his or her free consent, lived with the other 
party to the marriage as husband and wife after the force had ceased to 
operate or the fraud had been discovered, as the case may be. 

(34) 

30. Other grounds for dissolution of marriage. — Part IV 

A marriage, whether solemnized before or after the jjo^page 2 
commence ment of this Code, may be dissolved on any 
of the following grounds, namely, that — 

(i) either party to the marriage was impotent at the time of the 
marriage and continued to be so until the institution of the proceeding; 

(ii) the husband is keeping a woman as a concubine or the wife has 
become the concubine of any other man or leads the life of a prostitute; 

(iii) either party to the marriage has ceased to be a Hindu by 
conversion to another religion; 

(iv) either party is incurably of unsound mind and has been 
continuously under treatment for a period of not less than five years 
preceding the petition; and 

(v) either party is suffering from a virulent and incurable form of 
leprosy. 

38 Further grounds for dissolution. — Either party ( New ) 
to a marriage whether solemnized before or after the 
commencement of this Code, may present a petition to 
the District Court prayin’g that his or her marriage may 
be dissolved on the ground that the other party — 

(a) has not resumed marital intercourse for a period of two years 
or upwards after a decree or order for judicial separation had been 
passed against the respondent; or 

(b) that the respondent has failed to comply with a decree for 
restitution of conjugal rights for a period of two years or upwards. 

(35) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(36) 

34. Right to have marriage annulled. — (1) A decree of nullity of 
marriage may be obtained either by a party to the marriage or by 

a Proctor or by any person affected by, or having an interest in, the 
marriage either on a petition for annulment by a decree of nullity or 
on a plea raised in any other proceeding. 

(2) A petition for a decree of dissolution or for divorce shall lie only 
at the instance of a party to the marriage: 

Provided that no party shall be entitled to take advantage of his or 

her own default or disability for the purpose of relief. 


(37) 

35. Appointment of Proctors. — (1) The State Government may 
appoint one or more Proctors for the State or any part thereof who shall 
have the right — 

(1) to appear or intervene either suo moto in any proceeding for the 
annulment of any marriage, where in the opinion of the Proctor it is 
expedient in the public interest so to do or at the instance of any court; 

(ii) to initiate any proceeding for the annulment of any marriage 
where the appropriate remedy for annulment is by a decree of nullity. 

(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner 
in which the right of the Proctor shall be exercised and all matter 
incidental to or consequential on any exercise of the right. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


87 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 87 


35. Persons entitled to present petition for dissolution. — (1) 

Where a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement 
of this Code, is impugned on the ground that it is a void marriage, 
the plea may be entertained by the Court either — 

(i) on a petition for dissolution presented by either party to the 
marriage; or 

(ii) on an issue being raised in any proceeding by any person 
affected by or having an interest in the marriage. 

(2) Where a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the 
commencement of this Code, is impugned on the ground that it is a 
voidable marriage, no such plea shall be entertained by the Court except 
at the instance of either party to the marriage: 

Provided that no party shall be entitled to take advantage of his or 
her own default or disability for the purpose of relief. 

(36) 


( 37 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(38) 

36. No petition for divorce to be presented within three years 
of marriage. — (1) notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, 
it shall not be competent for any court to entertain any petition for 
a decree for divorce, unless at the date of the presentation of the 
petition three years have elapsed since the date of the marriage: 

Provided that the court may, upon application made to it in 
accordance with such rules as may be made by the High Court in 
that behalf, allow a petition to be presented before three years have 
elapsed since the date of the marriage on the ground that the case 
is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of exceptional 
depravity on the part of the respondent, but, if it appears to the court 
at the hearing of the petition that the petitioner obtained leave to 
present the petition by any misrepresentation or concealment of the 
nature of the case, the court may, if it pronounces a decree, do so 
subject to the condition that the decree shall not have effect until 
after the expiry of tliree years from the date of the marriage or may 
dismiss the petition without prejudice to any petition which may be 
brought after the expiration of the said three years upon the same 
or substantially the same facts as those proved in support of the 
petition so dismissed. 

(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to 
present a petilion for divorce before the expiration of tliree years from 
the date of the marriage, the court shall have regard to the interests 
of any children of the marriage and to the question whether there 
is a reasonable probability of a reconciliation between the parties 
before the expiration of the said three years. 

(39) 

Effect of annulment of marriase 

37. Liberty to parties to marry again. — When a marriage has 
been annulled by a decree of a competent court and no anneal has 
been presented against such decree or when any such appeal has been 
dismissed, it shall be lawful for the respective parties to the marriage 
to marry again as if the prior marriage had been annulled by death. 






DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


89 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 89 


(38) 

50. Liberty to parties to marry again. — When six (New) 
months after the date of an order of a High Court 
confirming the decree for dissolution of marriage made 
by a District Judge have expired, 

or when six months after the date of any decree of a High Court 
dissolving a marriage have expired and no appeal has been presented 
against such decree, 

or when any such appeal has been dismissed or when as a result 
of such appeal any marriage is dissolved, it shall be lawful for the 
respective parties to the marriage to marry again as if the prior 
marriage had been dissolved by death. 

(39) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(40) 

38. Consequences of annulment of marriage. — (1) Where a 
marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity, * * * the parties thereto 
shall be deemed never to have been married, nor to have been related 
to each other as husband and wife: 

Provided that where a marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity 
on the ground that a former husband or wife was living and it is 
adjudged that the subsequent marriage was solemnized in good faith 
and that one or both of the parties fully believed that the former 
husband or wife was dead, children begotten before the decree is 
passed shall be specified in the decree and shall in all respects to 
be deemed to be, and always to have been, the legitimate children 
of their parents. 

(2) Where a marriage is annulled by a decree of dissolution or a 
decree of divorce, the parties shall cease to be related to each other 
as husband and wife from the date of the decree, and any children 
begotten of the marriage shall in all respects be deemed to be, and 
always to have been, the legitimate children of their parents and their 
names shall be specified in the decree. 


(41) 

Jurisdiction and procedure 

39. Extent of power to grant relief under this Part. — Nothing 
contained in this Part shall authorise any Court. — 

(a) to make decrees of nullity of marriage except where the 
marriage has been solemnized in India and the petitioner is resident 
in India at the time of presenting the petition. 

(b) to make decrees of dissolution or divorce, except where the 
parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of 
presenting the petition: or 

(c) to grant any relief under this Part other than a decree of nullity 
of marriage or a decree of dissolution or divorce, except where the 
petitioner resides in India at the time of presenting the petition. 













DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


91 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 91 


37. Effect of declaring marriage null and void . — (1) Where a 
marriage is dissolved on the ground that it is a void marriage, or where 
a marriage has been declared to be void, void marriage shall be deemed 
to have been void ab initio, and any children begotten of the marriage 
shall be deemed to be, and always to have been, illegitimate: 

Provided that where a marriage is dissolved or declared to be void 
on the ground that a former husband or wife was living and it is 
adjudged that the subsequent marriage was solemnized in good faith 
and that one or both of the parties fully believed that the former husband 
or wife was dead, children begotten before the decree is made shall be 
specified in the decree and shall in all respects be deemed to be, and 
always to have been, the legitimate children of their parents. 

(2) Where a marriage is dissolved on any of the grounds 
specified in sections 29 and 30, any children begotten of Part IV, 
the marriage shall in all respects be deemed to be, and sec. 29(1), 
always to have been, the legitimate children of their page 21. 
parents and their names shall be specified in the decree. 

(40) 

Jurisdiction and procedure 

39. Extent of power to grant relief under this Part. — Nothing 
contained in this Part shall authorise any Court. — 

(a) to make decrees for dissolution of marriage — 

(i) in the case of a void marriage or in the case of 

a voidable marriage which contravenes the provisions (New) 
of clause (2) of section 7 or clause (2) of section 10 
or which can be avoided on the ground that either 
party to the marriage was important at the time of 
the marriage and continued to be so until the institution 
of the proceeding, unless the marriage has been 
solemnized in a Province and the petitioner is resident 
in the Province at the time of presenting the petition 
; or 

(ii) in the case of a voidable marriage, not falling within sub-clause 
(i) of clause (a) of this section, unless the parties to the marriage 
are domiciled in a Province at the time when the petition for 
dissolution is presented; or 

(b) to grant any relief under this Part, other than a decree for 
dissolution of marriage except where the petitioner resides in a Province 
at the time of presenting the petition. 


( 41 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(42) 

40. Court to which petittion should be made and hearing in 

camera . — (1} Every petition under this Part shall be presented to 
the district court within the local limits of whose ordinary original 
civil jurisdiction the marriage was solemnized or the husband and 
wife reside or last resided together. 

(2) A proceeding under this Part shall be conducted in camera If 
either party so desires or if the Court thinks ill to do so. 


(43) 

41. Contents and verification of petitions. — (1) Every petition 
presented under this Part shall state, as distinctly as the nature of 
the case permits, the facts on which the claim to relief is founded 
and every petition for the annulment of any marriage or for judicial 
separation shall state that there is no collusion between the petitioner 
and the other party to the marriage. 

(2) The statements contained in every petition under this Part 
shall be verified by the petitioner or some other competent person 
in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and 
may at the hearing be referred to as evidence. 


(44) 

42. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure. — Subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Part, all proceedings under ‘this 
Part between party and party shall be regulated, as far as may be, 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908). 


(45) 

43. Decree in proceeding. — In any petition presented under this 
Part, whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that any of 
the grounds for granting relief exists and that the petition has not 
been presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent or that 
the adultery complained of, if any, has not been connived at or 
condoned, the court shall decree such relief accordingly. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


93 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 93 


40. Court to which petition should be made. — Sec. 3(2), 
Every petition under this Part shall be presented to the Ind. Div. 
District Court Act within the local limits of whose Act. 
ordinary original civil jusidiction the husband and wife 
reside or last resided together. 

48. Suits may be heard within Closed doors. — A proceeding 
under this part shall be conducted in camera at the instance of either 
party or if the Court thinks fit to do so. 

(42) 


41. Contents and verification of petitions. — (1) Sec. 10, 

Every petition presented under this Part shall state, as Ind. Div. 
distinctly as the nature of the case permits, the facts Act. 
on which the claim to relief is founded and every 
petition for a decree of dissolution of marriage, or of 
judicial separation shall state that there is no collusion 
between the petitioner and the other party to the 
marriage. 

(2) The statements contained in every petition under this Part shall 
be verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in the 
manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may at 
the hearing be referred to as evidence. 


42. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure. — Ind. Div. 

Subject to the other provisions contained in this Part, Act. 
all proceedings under this Part between party and 
party shall be regulated, as far as may be, by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908). 

(44) 


43. Decree in proceeding. — In any petition presented under this 
Part, whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that any of 
the grounds for granting relief exists and that the petition has not 
been presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent or that 
the adultery complained of, if any, has not been connived at or 
condoned, the court shall decree such relief accordingly. 

( 45 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


94 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(46) 

Other orders that may he passed in annulment proceeding 
44. Alimony, pendente lite. — Where in any proceeding under this 
Part, it appears to the court that the wife has no independent income 
sufficient for her support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, 
it may, on the application of the wife, order the husband to pay to 
her the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding 
such sum not exceeding one-fifth of her husband’s net income as to 
the court seems reasonable. 


(47) 

45. Permanent alimony. — (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction 

under this Part may, at the time of passing any decree or at any 
time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose, 
order that the husband shall, while the wife remains chaste and 

unmarried, secure to the wife, for her maintenance and support, if 
necessary, a charge on the husband’s property of such gross sum or 
such monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding 
her life as, having regard to her own property, if any, her husband’s 
property and the conduct of the parties, shall be deemed just. 

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the 

circumstances of either party at any time after it has made an order 
under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party vary, 

modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may 
deem just. 

(3) If the court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order 
has been made under sub-section (1) or (2) has remarried or has not 
remained chaste, it shall * * rescind the order. 


(48) 

46. Custody of children. — In any proceeding under this Part, the 
Court may, from time to time, pass such interim orders and make 
such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with 
respect to the custody, maintenance and education of minor children, 
consistently with their wishes wherever possible, and may, after the 
decree, upon application by petition for the purpose, make, revoke, 
suspend or vary, from time to time, all such orders and provisions 
with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such 
children as might have been made by such decree or interim orders 
in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


95 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 95 


45. Alimony, pendente lite . — Where in any proceeding 
under this Part, it appears to the court that the wife 
has no independent income sufficient for her support 
and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, 
on the application of the wife, order the husband to 
pay to her the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly 
during the proceeding such sum not exceeding one fifth 
of her husband’s net income as to the court seems 
reasonable. 

(46) 

46. Permanent alimony. — (1) Any court exercising 
jurisdiction under this Part may, at the time of passing 
Act any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on 
application made to it for the purpose, order that the 
husband shall, while the wife remains chaste and 
unmarried, secure to the wife, for her maintenance and 
support, if necessary, a charge on the husband’s property 
of such gross sum or such monthly or periodical 
payment of money for a term not exceeding her life as, 
having regard to her own properly, if any, her husband’s 
property and the conduct of the parties, shall be 
deemed just. 

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances 
of either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section 
(1), it may, at the instance of either party vary, modify or rescind any 
such order in such manner as the court may deem just. 

(3) If the court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order 
has been made under sub-section (1) or (2) has remarried or has not 
remained chaste, it shall vary or rescind the order. 

(47) 

47. Custody of children. — In any proceeding under S®®- 15 > 
this Part, the Court may, from time to time, pass such Bombay Act. 
interim orders and make such provisions in the decree 

as it may deem just and proper with respect to the 
custody, maintenance and education of minor children, 
consistently wilh their wishes wherever possible, and 
may, after the decree, upon application by petition for 
the purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary, from time 
to time, all such orders and provisions wilh respect to 
the custody, maintenance and education of such children 
as might have been made by such decree or interim 
orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree 
were still pending. 


Sec. 6, 

Bombay 

Act 


Sec. 6, 

Bombay 

Act 


( 48 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(49) 

47. Disposal of property. — Any court exercising jurisdiction under 
this Part may at the time of passing any decree make such provisions 
in the decree as it may deem just and proper as respects — 

(i) any property which belonged jointly to the husband and the wife 
immediately before the decree; 

(ii) any property which belongs to the wife, whether by way of dowry 
as defined in section 93 or otherwise, and which is in the possession 
of the husband. 


(50) 

Execution of. and appeals from, decrees and orders 

48. Enforcement of, and appeal from, decrees and orders. — All 

decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Part 
shall be enforcced in like manner as the decrees and orders of the court 
made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction are enforced, and 
may be appealed from under the law for the lime being in force: 


Provided that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


97 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 97 


(49) 

49. Enforcement of and appeal from orders and (new) 
decrees. — All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under this Part shall be enforced in like manner 
as the decrees and orders of the court made in the exercise 
of its original civil jurisdiction are enforced, and may be 
appealed from under the law for the time being in force: 

Provided that — 

(a) there shall be no appeal from a decree of a District (New) 
(New) Court for dissolution of marriage or from the order 

of the High Court confirming or refusing to confirm any 
such decree; 

(b) there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only. 


( 50 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(51) 

CHAPTER IV 

Special provisions for annulment of Marumakkattayam 
or Aliyasantana marriage 

49. Annulment of Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana marriage. — 

(1) Save as provided in sub-section (4) of section 24A, a marriage 

solemnized under that section may be annulled — 

(a) by a decree of nullity under section 49A; 

(b) by an order of divorce under section 49B; 

(c) by a registered instrument of dissolution executed by the parties 

to the marriage: 

Provided that, if the female party to the marriage has not completed 

the age of eighteen years, no marriage shall be annulled by an order of 
divorce before she completes that age. 

(2) The annulment of a marriage by a registered instrument of dissolution 
shall take effect from the date of the registration of the instrument. 

(52) 

49A. Grounds for a decree of nullity of Marumakkattayam or 
Aliyasantana marriage. — (1) Any marriage solemnized before the 
commencement of this Code under the Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana 
law may be annulled by a decree of nullity, — 

(a) if by reason of the provisions of any law in force at the time 
of the marriage, such marriage was invalid on the ground that either 
party had a spouse living at the time of the marriage; or 

(b) if the parties at the time of the marriage were within the degrees 
of prohibited relationship as defined by clause (c) of section 5 : 
Provided that no marriage so solemnized shall be annulled under the 

provisions of clause (b) of this sub-section, if it was valid under the 
provisions of any law in force at the time of the marriage. 

(2) Save as provided in sub-section (4) of section 24A, a marriage solemnized 
raider that section, may be annulled by a decree of nullity if it contravenes 
the condition specified in clause (i) or clause (iv) of section 7. 

(3) Where a marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity under this section, 
the parties thereto shall be deemed never to have been married, nor to 
have been related to each other as husband and wife: 

Provided that where a marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity on 
the ground that a former husband or wife was living and it is adjudged 
that the subsequent marriage was solemnized in good faith and that one 
or both of the parties fully believed that the former husband or wife was 
dead, children begotten before the decree is passed shall be specified in 
the decree and shall in all respects be deemed to be and always to have 
been the legitimate children of their parents. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


99 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 99 


(51) 


( 52 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


100 


100 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(53) 

49B. Petition and procedure for divorce in respect of 
Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana marriage. — (1) Save as 
provided in sub-section (4) of section 24A, any party to a marriage 
under that section may present a petition to the district court for 
the annulment of such marriage by an order of divorce. 

(2) The petition shall specify the place where, the date on which, 
and the name and address of the guardian, if any, with whose consent, 
the marriage was solemnized. 

(3) A copy of such petition shall be served on the respondent at 
the cost of the petitioner. 

(4) On the motion of the petitioner, made not earlier than six 

months and not later than one year after the date of the service of 
the copy of the petition aforesaid, if the petition is not withdrawn 
in the meantime, the court shall, on being satisfied, after such 
enquiry as it thinks fit that a marriage which is valid under section 
24A was solemnized between the parties and that such marriage 

complied with both the conditions specified in clauses (i) and (iv) 

of section 7, by order in writing declare the marriage annulled. 

(5) The annulment of the marriage shall take effect from the date 

of the order, and either party to the marriage shall then be at liberty 
to marry again subject to the provisions of this Part. 

(6) Where a marriage is annulled by an order of divorce under this 
section, the parties shall cease to be related to each other as husband 
and wife from the date of the order, and any children begotten of 
the marriage shall in all respects be deemed to be and always to 
have been the legitimate children of their parents. 


(54) 

50. Application of certain provisions to Marumakkattayam 
or Aliyasantana marriage. — (1) The provisions of sections 39 to 48 
inclusive shall apply, as far as may be, to proceedings for the 
annulment under this Chapter, whether by a decree of nullity or by 
an order of dissolution, of any marriage solemnized under section 24A. 

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the operation of 
subsection (4) of section 24A, and save as provided in sub-section 
(1), nothing contained in Chapter II or Chapter III shall apply to, 
or in relation to, any marriage solemnized under that section. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


101 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


101 


( 53 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(54) 

(55) 

CHAPTER V 
Savings 

51. Saving of prior marriages and special provisions therefor. — 

(1) A marriage solemnized between Hindus before the commencement of 
this Code, which is otherwise valid, shall not be deemed to be invalid 
or ever to have been invalid by reason only of the fact that the parties 
thereto belonged to the same gotra or pravara or belonged to different 
castes or sub-divisions of the same caste. 

(2) A marriage which was solemnized before the commencement of 
this Code between a female who was governed by the Marumakkattayam 
or Aliyasantana law at the time of the marriage and a male Hindu 
and which is valid and subsisting at the commencement of this Code 
shall continue to be a valid marriage, and the special provisions 
contained in this Code with respect to annulment of Marumakkaltayam 
or Aliyasantana marriages shall apply to, or in relation to, such 
marriage in like manner as they apply to, or in relation to, a marriage 
between persons both of whom are governed by that law. 

(3) A conjugal union of a female belonging to any of the communities 

specified in clause (b) of the definition of “Marumakkattayam law” in 

section 3 with a male Hindu, whether governed by that law or not, 
which was openly solemnized before the commencement of this Code 
with the customary ceremonies prevailing in the community to which 
the parties belong or either of them belongs shall be deemed for all 
purposes [including sub-section (2)] to be and always to have been a 
valid marriage if the parties to the union are not related to each other 
in such degree of consanguinity or affinity that conjugal union between 
them is prohibited by any custom or usage of the community to which 
they belong or either of them belongs: 

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed 
to invalidate any dissolution of the marriage effected before the 
commencement of this Code in accordance with the custom prevailing 
in the community to which the parties belong or either of them belongs. 

51A. Dissolution before or after Code of certain valid 
marriages not to effect rights of children. — Where a marriage 
solemnized before the commencement of this Code between a female 
governed by the Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana law at the time 
and a male Hindu is a valid marriage by reason of any law, whether 

in force at the time of the marriage or passed subsequently, or by 

reason of sub-section (3) of section 51, the dissolution of the marriage, 
whether by death or otherwise and whether before or after the 
commencement of this Code, shall not affect in any way the legal 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


103 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 103 


status or rights under this Code of the children of suafertnffifriage 
or of their descendants. sec. 3, 

. » page 15 (Ex- 

27. saving or prior marriages. — A marriage p i ana tion) 

solemnized between Hindus before the commencement 

of this Code, which is otherwise valid, shall not be 

deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid, by 

reason only of the fact that the parties thereto belonged 

to the same gotra or pravara or belonged to different 

castes or sub-divisions of the same caste. 

51. Savings. — (1) Nothing contained in this Part 
shall be deemed to affect any right conferred by the 
Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXII 
of 1932) to obtain the dissolution of a sacramental 
marriage, whether solemnized before or after the 
commencement of this Code. 


Part IV, 
sec. 34, 
page 22, 
sec. 17, 
Bombay Act. 


(2) Nothing contained in this Part shall affect any 
proceeding under any other law for the time being in 
force for dissolution of marriage or for nullity of 
marriage or for judicial separation pending at the dale 
of the commencement of this Code, and any such 
proceeding may be continued and determined as if this 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Code had not been passed. 

(55) 

51B. Saving of pending proceedings. — Nothing contained in this Part 
shall affect any proceeding under any other law for the time being in force 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


105 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


for the annulment of any marriage or for judicial separation pending at 
the date of the commencement of this Code, and any such proceeding may 
be continued and determined as if this Code had not been passed. 

(56) 

PART III-ADOPTION 

CHAPTER I 
Adoption generally 

52. Prohibition of adoption in contravention of this Part. — (1) 

No adoption shall be made after the commencement of this Code by 
or to a male Hindu except in accordance with the provisions contained 
in this Part. 

(2) Except in the cases referred to in sub-section (2) of section 66, 
any adoption made in contravention of this Part shall be void. 

(3) An adoption which is void shall neither create any rights in the 
adoptive family in favour of any person which he could not have acquired 
except by reason of the adoption nor destroy the rights of any person 
in the family of birth. 


(57) 

53. Requisites of a valid adoption. — No adoption shall be valid unless — 

(i) the person adopting has the capacity, and also the right, to take 
in adoption; 

(ii) the person giving in adoption has the capacity to do so; 

(iii) the person adopted is capable of being taken in adoption; 

(iv) the adoption is completed by a physical giving and taking; and 

(v) the adoption complies with the other conditions mentioned in this 
Part. 


(58) 

Capacity to take in adoption 

54. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption. — Any male 
Hindu who is of sound mind and has completed the age of eighteen 
years has the capacity to take a son in adoption; 

Provided that a Hindu who has a wife living shall not adopt except 
with the consent of his wife or, if he has more than one wife, except 
with the consent of at least one of such wives, unless the wife or all 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


107 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 107 


the wives, as the case may be, is or are incapable of giving consent. 

Explanation . — For the purposes of this section, a wife shall be deemed 
to be incapable of giving consent if she is of unsound mind or has not 
attained the age of eighteen years. 

PART III-ADOPTION secs. 1, ’l7, 

and 27, 

CHAPTER I pages 24, 27 

Adoption generally ^ 28 ' 

52. Prohibition of adoption in contravention of 
this Part. — (1) No adoption shall be made after the 
commencement of this Code by or to a male Hindu except 
in accordance with the provisions contained in this Part. 


(2) Except in the case referred to in sub-section (2) of section 66, any 
adoption made in contravention of the provisions of this Part shall be void. 

(3) An adoption which is void shall neither create any rights in the 

adoptive family in favour of any person which he could not have acquired 
except by reason of the adoption nor destroy the rights of any person 
in the family of birth. Part ^ 

(56) sec. 4, 

page 24 


53. Requisites of a valid adoption. — No adoption 
shall be valid unless — 

(i) the person adopting has the capacity, and also the 
right, to take in adoption; 

(ii) the person giving in adoption has the capacity to do so; 

(iii) the person adopted is capable of being taken in adoption; 

(iv) the adoption is completed by a physical giving and taking; and 

(v) the adoption complies with the other conditions mentioned in this 
Part. 


(57) 


Part VI, 
sec. 5(1), 
page 24 


Capacity to take in adoption 

54. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption. — 

Any male Hindu who is of sound mind and has completed 
the age of eighteen years has the capacity to take a son 
in adoption: 

Provided that a Hindu shall not adopt except with the consent of 
his wife or, if he has more than one wife, except with the consent of 
at least one of such wives, unless the wife or all the wives, as the case 
may be, is or are incapable of giving consent. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


108 


108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Explanation . — For the purposes of this section, a wife shall be deemed 
to be incapable of giving consent if she is of unsound mind or has not 
attained the age of eighteen years. 

(58) 

(59) 

55. Capacity of widow to take in adoption. — (1) Any Hindu widow 
who is of sound mind and has completed the age of eighteen years has 
the capacity to take a son in adoption to her husband. 

Provided that — 

(a) her husband has not * * * * prohibited her from adopting, and 

(b) her power to adopt has not terminated. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a Hindu 
widow who has not completed the age of eighteen years from adopting 
a boy named by her husband in any authority conferred on her in the 
manner hereinafter provided. 


(60) 

56. Authority or prohibition in regard to adoption. — (1) Any 

male Hindu who has the capacity to take a son in adoption as aforesaid 
may authorise his wife to adopt a son to him after his death, or prohibit 
her from doing so. 

(2) Where there are more wives than one, the authority may be given 
to, or the prohibition imposed on, any or all of them. 

(3) Where a Hindu who has left two or more widows, has expressly 
authorised any one or more of them to adopt a son, he shall be deemed 
to have prohibited the others from adopting. 


(61) 

57. Manner of giving authority or imposing prohibition or 
revoking the same. — (1) No authority to adopt, and no prohibition of 
adoption, shall be valid unless given or imposed by an instrument 
registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), or 
by a will executed in accordance with the provisions of section 63 of 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 

(2) Any authority or prohibition so given or imposed may be revoked 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


109 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 109 


either by an instrument registered, or a will executed, aB ar &f5ftsaid. 

sec. 5(2), 

(3) If the authority or prohibition is given or imposed l>jsagte M.11, it 
may also be revoked in any of the other modes set out in section 70 
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925), as modified by 
Schedule III to that Act. 

55. Capacity of widow to take in adoption. — (1) Any 

Hindu widow who is of sound mind and has completed 
the age of eighteen years has the capacity to take a son 
in adoption to her husband; 

Provided that — 

(a) her husband has not expressly or impliedly prohibited her from 

adopting ; and 

(b) her power to adopt has not terminated. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a Hindu 
widow who has not completed the age of eighteen years from adopting 
a boy named by her husband in any authority conferred oripjiir^jp the 
manner hereinafter provided sec 6 ’ 

(59) page 24 ‘ 


56. Authority or prohibition in regard to adoption. — 

(1) Any male Hindu who has the capacity to take a son 
in adoption as aforesaid may authorise his wife to adopt a 
son to him after his death, or prohibit her from doing so. 

(2) Where there are more wives than one, the authority may be given 
to, or the prohibition imposed on, any or all of them. 

(3) Where a Hindu who has left two or more widows, has expressly 

authorised any one or more of them to adopt a son, he shall be deemed 
to have prohibited the others from adopting. ^ rt 

(60) page 24, 


57. Manner of giving authority or imposing 
prohibition or revoking the same. — (1) No authority 
to adopt, and no prohibition of adoption, shall be valid 
unless given or imposed by an instrument registered 
under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), 
or by a will executed in accordance with the provisions 
of section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX 
of 1925). 

(2) Any authority or prohibition so given or imposed may be revoked 
either by an instrument registered, or a will executed, as aforesaid. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(3) If the authority or prohibition is given or imposed by a will, it may 
also be revoked in any of the other modes set out in section 70 of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925), as modified by Schedule III 
to that Act. 

(61) 

(62) 

58. Right to adopt as between two or more widows. — Where 
a Hindu has left two or more widows with capacity to take a son in 
adoption to him, the right to adopt is determined as between them in 
accordance with the following provisions : — 

(a) If he has granted to all or any of them authority to adopt, 

indicating the order of preference in that behalf, the right to adopt 
shall follow that order. 

(b) If he has given no such indication, the right to adopt shall 

follow the order of the seniority of the widows to whom authority 
has been granted, as determined by section 59. 

(c) If he has neither authorised nor prohibited an adoption, the 

right to adopt shall follow the order of the seniority of the widows 
as determined by section 59. 

(d) A widow having the right to adopt under clause (b) or clause 
(c) may renounce it in favour of the next senior widow by a registered 
instrument, if she does not so renounce it and if, without just cause, 
she either refuses, or fails within a reasonable time, to exercise her 
right when called upon to do so by the next senior or any other widow, 
the right shall pass to the next senior widow, mid so on down to 
the last widow in the order of seniority 


(63) 

59. Seniority among wives and widows. — For the purpose of this 
Part, seniority among the wives or widows of a person is determined by 
the order in which they were married to him, the woman who was married 
earlier being reckoned senior to the woman who was married later. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


111 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 111 


(64) Part V 1 ’ 

sec. 8, 

60. Widow’s right to adopt not exhausted by previous P&ger^se. — 

A widow may, subject to the provisions of this Part, adopt several sons 
in succession, one after the death of another, unless the authority, if 
any, conferred upon her by her husband otherwise provides. 

58. Right to adopt as between two or more 
widows. — Where a Hindu has left two or more widows 
with capacity to take a son in adoption to him, the right 
to adopt is determined as between them in accordance 
with the following provisions: — 

(a) If he has granted to all or any of them authority to adopt, 

indicating the order of preference in that behalf, the right to adopt 
shall follow that order. 

(b) If he has given no such indication, the right to adopt shall 

follow the order of the seniority of the widows to whom authority 
has been granted, as determined by section 59. 

(c) If he has neither authorised nor prohibited an adoption, the 

right to adopt shall follow the order of the seniority of the widows 
as determined by section 59.; 

(d) A widow having the right to adopt under clause (b) or clause 
(c) may renounce it in favour of the next senior widow by a registered 
instrument, if she does not so renounce it and if, without just cause, 
she either refuses, or fails within a reasonable time, to exercise her 
right when called upon to do so by the next senior or any other widow, 
the right shall pass to the next senior widow, and so on down to 
the last widow in the order of seniority. 

(62) 


59. Seniority among wives and widows. — For the 

purpose of this Part, seniority among the wives or widows 
of a person is determined by the order in which they were 
married to him, the woman who was married earlier being 
reckoned senior to the woman who was married later. 


Part VI, sec. 
9, page 25. 


Part V, 
sec. 10, 
page 25. 


( 63 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


60. Widow’s right to adopt not exhausted by 
previous exercise. — A widow may, subject to the 
provisions of this Part, adopt several sons in succession, 
one after the death of another, unless the authority, if 
any, conferred upon her by her husband otherwise provides. 

(64) 

(65) 

61. Termination of widow’s right. — (1) A widow’s right to adopt 
terminates — 

(a) when she remarries, or 

(b) when any Hindu son of her husband dies leaving him surviving 

a Hindu son, widow or son’s widow, or 

(c) if she ceases to be a Hindu. 

Explanation . — In this sub-section, son means a son, son’s son, or son’s 
sons’s son, whether by legitimate blood relationship or by adoption. 

(2) The widow’s right to adopt shall not revive after it has once 
terminated. 


( 66 ) 

Capacity to give in adoption 

62. Persons capable of giving in adoption. — (1) No person except 
the father or mother of the boy shall have the capacity to give the boy 
in adoption. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3), 
the father, if alive, shall alone have the right to give in adoption, but 
such right shall not be exercised save with the consent of the mother 
where she is capable of giving consent. 

(3) The mother may give the boy in adoption — ’ 

(a) if the father is dead, 

(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world in any of 
the modes set forth in sub-section (1) of section 110 of Part VII, 

(c) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or 

(d) if he is not capable of giving consent: 

Provided that the father has not prohibited her from doing so by an 
instrument registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 
1908), or by a will executed in accordance with the provisions of 
section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 

(4) The father or mother giving a boy in adoption must be of sound 
mind and must have completed the age of eighteen years. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


113 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 113 


Explanation . — For the purpose of this section, — Part V, 

sec. 10, 

(1) the expressions “father”, or “mother” do not include »m>ptive 
father or an adoptive mother; and 

(ii) a father or mother shall be deemed to be incapable of giving 
consent if he or she, as the case may be, is of unsound mind or has 
not completed the age of eighteen years. 

61. Termination of widow’s right. — (1) A widow’s right 
to adopt terminates — 

(a) when she remarries; or 

(b) when any Hindu son of her husband dies leaving him surviving a 
Hindu son, widow or son’s widow; or 

(c) if she ceases to be a Hindu. 

Explanation . — In this sub-section, son means a son, son’s son, or son’s 
son’s son, whether by legitimate blood relationship or by adoption. 

(2) The widow’s right to adopt shall not revive after it has oncj^ferj^l nated. 

(65) P a & e 25 - 


Capacity to give in adoption 

62. Persons capable of giving in adoption. — (1) No 

person except the father or mother of the boy shall have 
the capacity to give the boy in adoption. 

(2) Subject to the provisions of clauses (b) and (e) of sub-section (3), 
the father, if alive, shall alone have the right to give in adoption, but such 
right shall not be exercised save with the consent of the mother where 
she is capable of giving consent. 

(3) The mother may give the boy in adoption — 

(a) if the father is dead; 

(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world in any of the 
modes set forth in sub-section (1) of section 110 of Part VII; 

(c) if he has ceased to be a Hindu ; or 

(d) if he is not capable of giving consent: 

Provided that the father has not prohibited her from doing so by an 
insuument registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), 
or by a will executed in accordance with the provisions of section 63 of 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 

(4) The father or mother giving a boy in adoption must be of sound 
mind and must have completed the age of eighteen years. 

Explanation . — For the purposes of this section, — 

(i) the expressions “father”, or “mother” do not include an adoptive father 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 114 

114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


or an adoptive mother; and 

(ii) a father or mother shall be deemed to be incapable of giving consent 
if he or she, as the case may be, is of unsound mind or has not completed 
the age of eighteen years. 

( 66 ) 

(67) 

Capacity to be taken in adoption 

63. Who may be adopted. — (1) No female shall be adopted by or 
to any male or female Hindu. 

(2) No boy shall be capable of being taken in adoption, unless the 
following conditions are satisfied, namely, that — 

(i) he is a Hindu; 

(ii) he has not been married; 

(iii) he has not been already adopted; 

(iv) he has not completed the age of fifteen years. 


( 68 ) 

64. Certain persons declared capable of being adopted. — For the 

avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the adoption of the 
following persons is permissible, namely : — 

(i) the eldest or the only son of his father; 

(ii) the son of a woman whom the adoptive father could not have 
legally married, and in particular, is daughter’s son, sister’s son, or 
mother’s sister’s son: and 

(iii) a stranger although near relatives of the adoptive father exist. 


(69) 

Essential ceremonies 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


115 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 115 


65. Completion of adoption. — An adoption is not valid and binding 
unless the boy to be adopted is physically given and taken PSift aY&ption 
by the parents concerned or under their authority, with intent^ 


him from the family of his birth to the family of his adoption. 

Part VI, 

Explanation. — The performance of the Datta homam is Essential 

to the validity of an adoption. page 26 ‘ 

Capacity to be taken in adoption 

63. Who may be adopted. — (1) No female shall be 
adopted by or to any male or female Hindu. 

(2) No boy shall be capable of being taken in adoption, 
unless the following conditions are satisfied, namely, 
that — 

(i) he is a Hindu; 

(ii) he has not been married ; 

(iii) he has not been already adopted; Part VI, 

(iv) he has not completed the age of fifteen years. page *26 

(67) 


64. Certain persons declared capable of being 
adopted. — For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby 
declared that the adoption of the following persons is 
permissible, namely: — 

(i) the eldest or the only son of his father; 


(ii) the son of a woman whom the adoptive father could not have 
legally married, and in particular, is daughter’s son, sister’s son, or 
mother’s sister’s son; and 


(iii) a stranger although near relatives of the adoptive exist. 


( 68 ) 


sec. 15, 
page 26. 


Essential ceremonies 

65. Completion of adoption. — An adoption is not 
valid and binding unless the boy to be adopted is 
physically given and taken in adoption by the parents 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


concerned or under their authority, with intent to transfer 
him from the family of his birth to the family of his 
adoption. 

Explanation . — The performance of the Datta homam is not essential 
to the validity of an adoption. 

(69) 

(70) 

Other conditions for adoption 

66. Other conditions. — (1) In every adoption, the following conditions 
must be complied with : — 

(1) The adoptive father by or to whom the adoption is made must 
have no Hindu son, son’s son, or son’s son’s son (whether by legitimate 
blood relationship or by adoption) living at the time of adoption. 

Explanation . — A person not actually born at the time of adoption, 
although he may then be in the womb and is subsequently born alive, 
is not said to be living at the time of adoption for the purposes of this 
clause. 

(ii) The same boy may not be adopted simultaneously by or to two 
or more persons nor may two or more boys be simultaneously adopted 
by or to the same person. 

(iii) Every adoption must be made with the free consent of the person 
giving and of the person taking in adoption. 

(2) Where the consent of the person giving or of the person taking 
in adoption has been obtained by coercion, undue influence, fraud, 
misrepresentation or mistake, either party may sue for a declaration 
that the adoption is invalid: 

Provided that the Court shall dismiss such suit — 

(a) if the suit is filed more than two years after the coercion or 

undue influence had ceased or the fraud, misrepresentation or mistake 

had been discovered; or 

(b) if the person whose consent has been so obtained has confirmed 

the adoption after the coercion, undue influence has ceased, or after 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


117 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 117 


the fraud, misrepresentation or mistake has been discovered, as the 

case may be, and such confirmation does not prejudicepal^evjrights 

of others. sec - 16 > 

page 26. 

(3) Where no suit is brought within the time limit specified in clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) or where an adoption has been confirmed under 
clause (b) of the said sub-section it shall be deemed to be valid and 
effectual for all purposes as from the date of adoption. 

Other conditions for adoption 

66. Other conditions. — (1) In every adoption, the 
following conditions must be complied with: — 

(1) The adoptive father by or to whom the adoption is made must 
have no Hindu son, son’s son, or son’s son’s son (whether by legitimate 
blood relationship or by adoption) living at the time of adoption. 

Explanation . — A person not actually born at the time of adoption, 
although he may then be in the womb and is subsequently born alive, 
is not said to be living at the time of adoption for the purposes of this 
clause. 

(ii) The same boy may not be adopted simultaneously by or to two 
or more persons nor may two or more boys be simultaneously adopted 
by or to the same person. 

(iii) Every adoption must be made with the free consent of the person 
giving and of the person taking in adoption. 

(2) Where the consent of the person giving or of the person taking 
in adoption has been obtained by coercion, undue influence, fraud, 
misrepresentation or mistake, either party may sue for a declaration 
that the adoption is invalid: 

Provided that the Court shall dismiss such suit — 

(a) if the suit is filed more than two years after the coercion or 
undue influence had ceased or the fraud, misrepresentation or mistake 
had been discovered; or 

(b) if the person whose consent has been so obtained has confirmed, 
the adoption after the conrcion, undue influence has ceased, or after 
the fraud, misrepresentation or mistake has been discovered, as the 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


case may be, and such confirmation does not prejudice the rights of 
others. 

(3) Where no suit is brought within the time limit specified in clause 

(a) of sub-section (2) or where an adoption has been confirmed under 
clause (b) of the said sub-section it shall be deemed to be valid and 
effectual for all purposes as from the date of adoption. 

(70) 

(71) 

CHAPTER II 

Effects of adoption 

67. Effects of adoption. — An adopted son shall be deemed to be the 
son of his adoptive father for all purposes with effect from the date 
of the adoption and from such date all his ties in the family of his 
birth shall be deemed to be severed and replaced by those created by 
the adoption in the adoptive family. 

Provided that — 

(a) he cannot marry any person whom he could not have married 
if he had continued in the family of his birth; 

(b) any property which vested in him before the adoption shall 
continue to vest in him subject to the obligations, if any, attaching 
to me ownership of such property, including the obligation to maintain 
relatives in the family of his birth; 

(c) the adopted son shall not divest any person of any estate which 
vested in him or her before the adoption, except in the manner and 
to the extent specified in section 68. 


(72) 

68. Divesting of estates by adoption. — *Where, after the 
commencement of this Code, a widow makes an adoption, the adopted 
son shall take — 

(a) one-half of the estate inherited by her and her co-widows, if 
any, as the heirs of the adoptive father * * * *; 

(b) if the adoption is made after the death of a son, son’s son, son’s, 
son’s son of the adoptive father, one-half of the estate the adoptive 
mother and her co-widows, if any, inherited from the adoptive father, 
and in addition, one-half of the estate inherited by the adoptive 
mother as the heir of her son, son’s son, or son’s son’s son, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


119 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 119 


the share in the estate in each case being determined as it stood 
immediately before the adoption: 

Provided that if the whole estate or any part thereof pdwrjtifl by 
her or them is impartible by custom, usage or by the terms g#c a h^»grant 
or enactment, the adopted son shall have the whole of sucR a ?fhpaftible 
estate as it stood immediately before the adoption in addition to what 
he may be entitled to under clause (a) or clause (b). 

CHAPTER II 
Effects of adoption 

67. Effects of adoption. — An adopted son shall be 

deemed to be the son of his adoptive father for all 
purposes with effect from the date of the adoption and 

from such date all his ties in the family of his birth shall 

be deemed to be severed and replaced by those created 

by the adoption in the adoptive family. 

Provided that — 

(a) he cannot marry any person whom he could not have married 
if he had continued in the family of his birth; 

(b) any property which vested in him before the ad^g^ioj^ 1, shall 

continue to vest in him subject to the obligations, if an^ag^tfeyehing 
to the ownership of such property, including the obligation to maintain 
relatives in the family of his birth; 

(c) the adopted son shall not divest any person of any estate which 
vested in him or her before the adoption, except in the manner and 
to the extent specified in section 68. 

(71) 

68. Divesting of estates by adoption. — (1) Where, 
after the commencement of this Code, a widow makes 
an adoption, the adopted son shall take — 

(a) one-half of the estate inherited by her and her co-widows, if 
any, as the heirs of the adoptive father as it stood immediately before 
the adoption; 

(b) if the adoption is made after the death of a son, son’s son, son’s 
son’s son of the adoptive father, one-half of the estate the adoptive 
mother and her co-widows, if any, inherited from the adoptive father, 
and in addition, one-half of the estate inherited by the adoptive 
mother as the heir of her son, son’s son, or son’s son’s son, 

the share in the estate being determined as it stood immediately before 
the adoption: 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


120 


120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Provided that if the whole estate or any part thereof inherited by 
her or them is impartible by custom, usage or by the terms of any grant 
or enactment, the adopted son shall have the whole of such impartible 
estate as it stood immediately before the adoption in addition to what 
he may be entitled to under clause (a) or clause (b). 

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of 
agricultural land, wherever situate in the Provinces of India. 

(72) 

(73) 

69. Right of adoptive to dispose of their properties. — Subject 
to any agreement to the contrary, an adoption does not deprive the 
adoptive father or mother of the power to dispose of his or her property 
by transfer inter vivos or by will. 


(74) 

70. Determination of the adoptive mother in case of adoption 
by widower. — (1) Where a Hindu who has a wife living adopts a son, 
she shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother. 

(2) Where a Hindu has more than one wife living — 

(i) that wife in association with whom or with whose consent he 
makes the adoption, or 

(ii) if more than one wife has been so associated or has so consented, 
the seniormost in marriage among the wives so associated or 
consenting; 

shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother, and the other wives the 
stepmothers, of the adopted son. 

(3) Where a widower adopts at any time after his wife’s death, the 
wife who died last immediately preceding the adoption, shall be deemed 
to be the adoptive mother, and any other predeceased wife or any wife 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


121 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 121 


subsequently married by him shall be deemed to be the ^fcfff)-¥fother, 
of the adoptive son, unless the adoptive father has directlfi c m?^|!ven 
a clear indication that some other of such wives shall be pa <?eeme'd to 
be the adoptive mother; in which case, any predeceased wife who is 
not the adoptive mother and any wife subsequently married by the 
adoptive father shall be deemed to be the stepmothers of the adopted 
son. 

(4) Where a bachelor adopts, any wife subsequently married by him 
shall be deemed to be the step-mother of the adopted son. 

69. Right of adoptive parents to dispose of their 
properties. — subject to any agreement to the contrary, 
an adoption does not deprive the adoptive father or Part VI ’ 
mother of the power to dispose of his or her property by p®g e 2 7 28 
transfer inter vivos or by will. 

(73) 


70. Determination of the adoptive mother in case 
of adoption by widower. — (1) Where a Hindu who has 
a wife living adopts a son, she shall be deemed to be the 
adoptive mother. 

(2) Where a Hindu has more than one wife living — 


Part VI, 
sec 22(3), 
page 28. 


(i) that wife in association with whom or with whose consent he 
makes the adoption, or 

(ii) if more than one wife has been so associated or has so consented, 
the seniormost in marriage among the wives so associated or 
consenting; shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother, and the other 
wives the step-mothers of the adopted son. 


(3) Where a widower adopts at any time after his wife’s 
death, the wife who died last immediately preceding the 
adoption, shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother, and 
any other predeceased wife or any wife subsequently 
married by him shall be deemed to be the step-mother, 
of the adopted son, unless the adoptive father has directed 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


or given a clear indication that some other of such wives 
shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother; in which case, 
any predeceased wife who is not the adoptive mother and 
any wife subsequently married by the adoptive father 
shall be deemed to be the step-mothers of the adopted 

son. 

(4) Where a bachelor adopts, any wife subsequently married by him 
shall be deemed to be the step-mother of the adopted son. 

(74) 

(75) 

71. Determination of the adoptive mother in case of adoption 
by widow. — (1) Where one of several widows of a deceased Hindu makes 
an adoption, she shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother, and the 
other widows the step-mothers, of the adopted son. 

(2) Where two or more widows jointly make an adoption, the 
seniormost in marriage among the widows shall be deemed to be the 
adoptive mother, and the other widow or widows the step-mother or 
step-mothers, of the adopted son. 


(76) 

72. Valid adoption not to be cancelled. — No adoption which has 
been validly made can be cancelled by the adoptive father or mother 
or any other person, nor can the adopted son renounce his status as 
such adopted son and return to the family of his birth. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


123 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 123 


Part VI, 
sec. 23, 
page 28. 


(77) 

73. Certain agreements to be void. — An agreement not to adopt, 
or curtailing the rights of an adopted son, is void. 

71. Determination of the adoptive mother in case 
of adoption by widow. — (1) Where one of several 
widows of a deceased Hindu makes an adoption, she shall 
be deemed to be the adoptive mother, and the other 
widows the step-mothers, of the adopted son. 

(2) Where two of more widows jointly make an adoption, the 
seniormost in marriage among the widows shall be deemed to be the 
adoptive mother, and the other widow or widows the step-mother or 
step-mothers, of the adopted son. 

(75) 


72. Valid adoption not to be cancelled. — No adoption which has 
been validly made can be cancelled by the adoptive father or mother 
or any other person, nor can the adopted son renounce h?s ai f!tcHIis as 
such and return to the family of his birth. page 27 

( 76 ) 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


73. Certain agreements to be void. — An agreement 
not to adopt, or curtailing the rights of an adopted son, 
is void. 

(77) 

(78) 

CHAPTER III 

Registration or record of adoptions 

74. Registration and proof of adoptions. — (1) The State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that in the State or 
in such areas as may be specified in the notification, no adoption made 
under the provisions of this Part shall be valid unless evidenced by a 
document in writing duly registered under any law for the time being 
in force relating to the registration of documents. 

(2) Where an adoption is required to be evidenced by a registered 
document under sub-section (1) no evidence shall be given in proof of 
such adoption except the document itself. 

74A. Recording of adoptions in cases to which section 74 does 
not apply. — Where no notification has been issued under section 74, 
the State Government may, for the purpose of facilitating the proof of 
any adoption made under the provisions of this Part, by rules, provide 
that particulars relating to such adoption shall be entered in the 
Register of Adoptions maintained in this behalf by such authority as 
may be appointed for this purpose by the State Government: 

Provided that an application is made to such authority in the manner 
specified in section 75. 

(79) 

75. Application when to be made and particulars to be set out 
therein. — The application under section 74A shall be signed by the 
person taking, and the person giving, in adoption and shall be made 
within ninety days of the adoption. It shall state the following 
particulars and such other particulars as may be prescribed: — 

(i) the date of the adoption; 

(ii) the form of the adoption; 

(iii) the name or names, and the age or ages, of the person or persons 
taking in adoption; 

(iv) if the adoptive father is a married man, the name of his wife; 
and if he is a widower the name of his pre-deceased wife; 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


125 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 125 


If there are two or more wives or pre-deceased wives, their names, 

the order in which, and the dates on which, they were married to him, 
and the name of the wife or pre-deceased wife who is Jjie. t ^optive 

mother, if any; sec . 30 , ’ 

(v) if the person adopting is a woman, the name of her Rt8hafi?t and 

the names of her co- wives or co-widows, if any; 

(vi) the name and age of the person giving in adoption; 

(vii) the name of the adopted boy in the family of his birth; 

(viii) the age of the adopted boy; and 

(ix) the name of the adopted boy in the family of his adoption. 

CHAPTER III 
Record of adoptions 

74. Application for recording of adoption. — When 
an adoption has been made under the provisions of this 
Part and the parties thereto desire to have the adoption 
recorded in the Register of Adoptions maintained for this 
purpose, they may apply in this behalf to such authority 
as may be appointed for this purpose by the Provincial 
Government, by notification in the official Gazette, and 
who has jurisdiction in the place where the adoption was 
made 


Part VI 
sec. 31, 
page 29. 


(78) 


75. Application when to be made and particulars 
to be out therein. — The application shall be signed by 
the person taking, and the person giving, in adoption and 
shall be made within ninety days of the adoption. It shall 
state the following particulars and such other particulars 
as may be prescribed: — 

(i) the date of the adoption; 

(ii) the form of the adoption; 

(iii) the name or names, and the age or ages, of the person or persons 
taking in adoption ; 

(iv) if the adoptive father is a married man, the name of his wife; 
and if he is a widower the name of his pre-deceased wife; 

If there are two or more wives or pre-deceased wives, their names, 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the order in which, and the dates on which, they were married to him, 

and the name of the wife or pre-deceased wife who is the adoptive 

mother, if any; 

(v) if the person adopting is a woman, the name of her husband and 

the names of her co- wives or co-widows, if any; 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


127 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 127 


(vi) the name and age of the person giving in adoption; 

(vii) the name of the adopted boy in the family of his birth ; 
(viii) the age of the adopted boy; and 

(ix) the name of the adopted boy in the family of his adoption. 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


128 


128 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(79) 

(80) 

76. Recording of adoption. — If the authority appointed under section 
74A is satisfied that the application has been signed by the person taking 
and the person giving in adoption and that the adoption has taken place 
as stated, he shall cause a record of the adoption to be made in the Register 
of Adoption. 

76. Recording of adoption. — If the authority appointed under section 
74A is satisfied that the application has been signed by the person taking 
and the person giving in adoption and that the adoption has taken place 
as stated, he shall cause a record of the adoption to be made in the Register 
of Adoption. 

(80) 

(81) 

PART IV— MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP 

77. Definitions. — In this Part — 

(a) “minor” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen 
years; 

(b) “natural guardian” means any of the guardians referred to in 
section 78, but does not include a guardian — 

(i) appointed by the will of the minor’s father, or 

(ii) appointed or declared by a court, or 

(iii) empowered to act as such by or under any enactment relating 
to any court of wards. 


(82) 

78. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor. — The natural guardians 
of a Hindu minor, in respect of the minor’s person as well as in respect 
of the minor’s property are — 

(a) in the case of a boy or unmarried girl — the father, and after 
him, the mother : provided that the custody of a minor who has not 
completed the age of three years shall ordinarily be with the mother; 

(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unmarried 
girl — the mother and after her, the father; 

(c) in the case of a married girl — the husband: 

Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural 
guardian of a minor under the provisions of this section — 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


129 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 129 


(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu ; or 

(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the worlcf^M j'&ny of 

the modes set forth in sub-section (1) of section 110. ' 99 


(83) 

79. Natural guardianship of adopted son. — The natural 
guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor passes, on adoption, 
from the family of his birth to the family of his adoption. 

PART IV— MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP 

77. Definitions. — In this Part — 

(a) “minor” means a person who has not completed the Part V, 

age of eighteen years; page 4 22 

(b) “natural guardian” means any of the guardians referred to in 
section 78, but does not include a guardian — 

(i) appointed by the will of the minor’s father, or 

(ii) appointed or declared by a court, or 

(iii) empowered to act as such by or under any enactment relating 
to any Court of Wards. 

(81) 


78. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor. — The 

natural guardians of a Hindu minor, in respect of the 
minor’s person as well as in respect of the minor’s 

properly are — 

(a) in the case of a boy or unmarried girl — the father, and after him, 
the mother: provided that the custody of a minor who has not completed 
the age of three years shall ordinarily be with the mother, 

(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimati >a ?fcS&arried 

girl — the mother and after her, the father; sec ‘ 5 ’ 

° page 22. 

(c) in the case of a married girl — the husband: 

Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural 

guardian of a minor under the provisions of this section — 

(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu ; or 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


130 


130 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world in any of 
the modes set forth in sub-section (1) of section 110. 

(82) 


79. Natural guardianship of adopted son. — The natural 
guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor passes, on 
adoption, from the family of his birth to the family of his 
adoption. 

(83) 


(84) 

80. Power of natural guardian. — (1) The natural guardian of a 
Hindu minor has power, subject to the provisions of this section, to 
do all acts which are necessary or reasonable and proper for the benefit 
of the minor or for the realization, protection or benefit of the minor’s 
estate; but the guardian can in no case bind the minor by a personal 
covenant. 

(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the previous permission 
of the court — 

(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, 
any part of the immovable property of the minor; or 

(b) lease any part of such property for a term exceeding five years 
or for a term extending more than one year beyond the date on which 
the minor will attain majority. 

(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a natural guardian, in 
contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), is voidable at the 
instance of the minor or any other person affected thereby. 

(4) No court shall grant permission to the natural guardian to do 
any of the acts mentioned in sub-section (2) except in case of necessity 
or for an evident advantage to the minor. 

(5) The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (VIII of 1890), shall apply 
to, and in respect of, an application for obtaining the permission of the 
court under sub-section (2) in all respects as if it were an application 
for obtaining the permission of the court under section 29 of that Act, 
and in particular — 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


131 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 131 


(a) proceedings in connection with the application shall be deemed 
to be proceedings under that Act within the meaning of section 4A 
thereof; 

(b) the court shall observe the procedure and have the powers 
specified in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 31 of that Act; and 

(c) an appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of the court 
refusing permission to the natural guardian to do any of the acts 
mentioned in sub-section (2) of this section. 


(6) In this section, “court” means the district court within the local 
limits of which the immovable property in respect of which the 
application is made, or any part thereof, is situated, or a court 
empowered under section 4A of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
(VIII of 1890). 


80. Power of natural guardian. — (1) The natural guardian of a 
Hindu minor has power, subject to the provisions of this section, to do 
all acts which are necessary or reasonable and proper for the benefit 
of the minor or for the realization, protection or benefit ofpth| ^ninor’s 
estate; but the guardian can in no case bind the minor by^a personal 
covenant. 

page 23. 

(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the previous permission 
of the court — 


(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or 
otherwise, any part of the immovable property of the minor; or 

(b) lease any part of such property for a term exceeding five years 
or for a term extending more than one year beyond the date on which 
the minor will attain majority. 

(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a natural guardian, in 
contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), is voidable at the 
instance of the minor or any other person affected thereby. 

(4) No court shall grant permission to the natural 
guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in sub-section 
(2) except in case of necessity or for an evident advantage 
to the minor. 

(5) The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (VIII of 1890), shall apply to, 
and in respect of, an application for obtaining the permission of the court 
under sub-section (2) in all respects as if it were an application for obtaining 
the permission of the court under section 29 of that Act, and in particular — 

(a) proceedings in connection with the application shall be deemed 
to be proceedings under that Act within the meaning of section 4A 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


thereof; 

(b) the court shall observe the procedure and have the powers 
specified in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 31 of that Act; and 

(c) an appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of the court 
refusing permission to the natural guardian to do any of the acts 
mentioned in sub-section (2) of this section. 

(6) In this section, “court” means the district court within the local limits 
of which the immovable property in respect of which the application is 
made, or any part thereof, is situated, or a court empowered under section 
4A of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (VIII of 1890). 

(84) 

(85) 

81. Revocation of authority by natural guardian. — Where the 
natural guardian of a Hindu minor authorises another person to take 
charge of the minor, the authority is revocable except — 

(a) where it is not in the interests of the minor to permit revocation; 
or 

(b) where the natural guardian has ceased to be a Hindu; or 

(c) where for any other sufficient cause, it is not desirable to permit 
revocation. 


( 86 ) 

82. Testamentary guardian and his powers. — (1) A Hindu father 
may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of his minor legitimate children 
in respect of the minor’s person, or in respect of the minor’s property, 
or in respect of both; 

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise 
any person to act as the guardian of the person of the minor if the 
mother is alive and is capable of acting as the natural guardian of her 
minor child. 

(2) The guardian so appointed has, after the death of the father, 
the right to act as the minor’s guardian, and to exercise all the rights 
of a natural guardian under this Part to such extent and subject to 
such restrictions, if any, as may be specified in the will. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a Hindu widow may, by 
will appoint a guardian for any of her minor children in respect of the 


*Dr. Ambedkar’s remarks, in his copy ‘Not to be moved’ — Ed. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


133 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 133 


person of the minor; Part V, 

sec. 7, 

Provided that her husband has not already by will ap^^gt^. any 
person to be the guardian of the person of such child. 

(4) The right of the guardian so appointed shall, where the minor 
is a girl, cease on her marriage. 

(87) 

*83. Duty of guardian regarding religious upbringing of minor. — 

It shall be the duty of the guardian of a Hindu minor to bring un the 
minor in the religion of the father of the minor. 

( 88 ) 

Part V, 

84. De facto guardian not to deal with minor’s prop^gtjg^— After 
the commencement of this Code, no person shall be entitleqbage aBspose 
of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely on the ground 
of his or her being the de facto guardian of the minor. 

81. Revocation of authority by natural guardian. — 

Where the natural guardian of a Hindu minor authorises 
another person to take charge of the minor, the authority 
is revocable except — 

(a) where it is not in the interests of the minor to permit revocation; 
or 


(b) where the natural guardian has ceased to be a Hindu ; or 

(c) where for any other sufficient cause, it is not desirable to permit 
revocation. 

(85) 


82. Testamentary guardian and his powers. — (1) Hindu 
father may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of his minor 
legitimate children in respect of the minor’s person, or in respect 
of the minor’s property, or in respect of both; 


Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise 

any person to act as the guardian of the person of the ijunor^if the 

mother is alive and is capable of acting as the natural guarman of her 

minor child. SeC ‘ 9 ’ 

page 23. 

(2) The guardian so appointed has, after the death of the father, 
the right to act as the minor’s guardian, and to exercise all the rights 
of a natural guardian under this Part to such extent an<P a Std¥ect to 
such restrictions, if any, as may be specified in the wilf®^^ 


(3) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a Hindu widow may, by 
will, appoint a guardian for any of her minor children in respect of the 
person of the minor: 




DAAMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-02 MK Ms 9-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Provided that her husband has not already by will appointed any 
person to be the guardian of the person of such child. 

(4) The right of the guardian so appointed shall, where the minor 
is a girl, cease on her marriage. 

( 86 ) 

83. Duty of guardian to bring up minor as a 
Hindu — It shall be the duty of the guardian of a Hindu 
minor to bring up the minor as a Hindu. 

(87) 

84. De facto guardian not to deal with minor’s 
property. — Alter the commencement of this Code, no 
person shall be entitled to dispose of, or deal with, the 
property of a Hindu minor merely on the ground of his 
or her being the de facto guardian of the minor. 

( 88 ) 

(89) 

85. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration. — In the 

appointment or declaration of any person as guardian of a Hindu minor 
by a court, the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration 
and no person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the 
provisions of this Part or of section 24, if the Court is of opinion that 
his or her guardianship will not be for the welfare of the minor. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


135 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


85. Welfare of minor to be paramount consider- Part V, 
ation. — In the appointment or declaration of any person as sec ' 12, 
guardian of a Hindu minor by a court, the welfare of the page 
minor shall be the paramount consideration and no person 
shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the 
provisions of this Part or of section 24, if the Court is of 
opinion that his or her guardianship will not be for the 
welfare of the minor. 

( 89 ) 


135 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(90) 

PART V.— JOINT FAMILY AND CO-PARCENARY 
CHAPTER I 

General 

86. Abrogation of right by birth and survivorship generally. — 

Except in the cases and to the extent expressly provided in this Part, no 
Hindu shall, after the commencement of this Code, acquire any right to, 
or interest in — 

(a) any property of an ancestor during his lifetime merely by 
reason of the fact that he is born in the family of the ancestor, 
or 

(b) any joint family property which is founded on the rule of 
survivorship. 


(91) 

87. Joint tenancy to be replaced generally by tenancv-in-com- 
mon. — Except in the cases and to the extent expressly provided in this Part. 
* * * all persons holding, on the commencement of this Code, any property 
jointly as members of a joint family shall be deemed to hold the property 
as tenants-in-common, as if a partition had taken place between them as 
respects such property on such commencement and as if each one of them 
is holding his or her own share separately as full owner thereof; 

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the right to maintenance 
and residence, if any, of the members of the joint family other than the 
persons who have become entitled to hold their shares separately, and any 
such right can be enforced as if this Code had not been passed. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


137 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 137 


PART V. — JOINT FAMILY PROPERTY 

86. Birth in family not to give rise to rights in 
property. — On and after the commencement of this Code, 
no right to claim any interest in any property of an ancestor 
during his lifetime, which is founded on the mere fact that 
the claimant was born in the family of the ancestor shall be 
recognised in any Court. 

Explanation . — In this section, “property” includes both movable and 
immovable property, whether ancestral or not and whether acquired jointly 
with other members of the family or by way of acretion to any ancestral 
property or in any other manner whatsoever. 

(90) 


Part IIIA, 
sec. 2, 
page 12. 


87. Joint tenancy to be replaced by tenancy-in- 
common. — On and after the commencement of this Code, no 
Court shall recognise any right to or interest in any joint 
family property, based on the rule of survivorship ; and all 
persons holding any joint family property on the day this 
Code comes into force shall be deemed to hold it as tenants- 
in-common as if a partition had taken place between all the 
members of the joint family as respects such property on the 
date of the commencement of this Code and as if each one 
of them is holding his or her own share separately as full 
owner thereof: 

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the right to maintenance 
and residence, if any, of the members of the joint family other than the 
persons who have become entitled to hold their shares separately, and any 
such right can be enforced as if this Code had not been passed : 

Provided further that in the case of any female who p art jj 
becomes entitled to hold any share separately under the sec. 3, 
provisions of this section, she shall only take the limited proviso p. 3. 
estate known as the Hindu woman’s estate under the law 
in force before the commencement of this Code and on her 
death such estate shall revert to the persons entitled thereto 
under the law in force prior to the commencement of this 
Code. 


Part IIIA, 
sec. 2, 
page 11. 


( 91 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


138 


138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(92) 

88. Rule of pious obligation * * * * abrogated. — (1) After the 
commencement of this Code, no court shall, save as provided in sub-section 
(2), recognise any right to proceed against any male lineal descendant for 
the recovery of any debt due from any of his paternal ancestors or any 
alienation of property in respect of or in satisfaction of any such debt on 
the ground of the pious obligation of such descendant to discharge any such 
debt. 

(2) In the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of this 
Code, nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect — 

(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against any such descendant. 

or 

(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of any such debt, 

and any such right or alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of 
pious obligation in the same manner and to the same extent as would have 
been the case if this Code had not been passed. 

Explanation . — For the purposes of sub-section (2) the expression “ such 
descendant ” shall be deemed to refer to the male lineal descendant who was 
born or adopted prior to the commencement of this Code. 


(93) 

89. Liability of members of joint family for debts before Code not 
affected. — Where a debt has been contracted before the commencement of 
this Code by the manager or Karta of a joint family for family purposes, 
nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any member of the joint 
family to discharge any such debt, and any such liability may be enforced 
against all or any of the persons liable therefor in the same manner and 
to the same extent as would have been the case if this Code had not been 
passed. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


139 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 139 


88. Rule of pious obligation of Hindu son abrogated. — (1) After the 
commencement of this Code, no court shall, save as provided in sub-section 
(2), recognise any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great-grandson 
for the recovery of any debt due from his father, grandfather or great 
grandfather any alienation of property in respect of, or in satisfaction of, 
any such debt on the ground of the pious obligation of the son, grandson 
or great-grandson to discharge any such debt. 

(2) In the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of this 
Code, nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect — 

(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son, grandson or 
great-grandson, as the case may be, or, 

(b) any alienation made in respect of, or in satisfaction of, any such 
debt, and any such right or alienation shall be enforceable under the rule 
of pious obligation in the same manner and to the same extent as would 
have been the case if this Code had not been passed. 

Explanation . — For the purposes of sub-section (2) the expression “son, 
grandson, or great-grandson” shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson 
or great-grandson, as the case may be, who was born or adopted prior to 
the commencement of this Code. 

(92) 

89. Liability of members of joint family for debts before Code not 
affected. — Where a debt has been contracted before the commencement of 
this Code by the manager or Karta of a joint family for family purposes, 
nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any member of the joint 
family to discharge any such debt, and any such liability may be enforced 
against all or any of the persons liable therefor in the same manner and 
to the same extent as would have been the case if this Code had not been 
passed. 


( 93 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


140 


140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(94) 

CHAPTER II 

Mitakshara Co-parcenary 

90. Application of Chapter. — This Chapter applies to Hindus who would 
have been governed by the mitakshara school of Hindu law if this Code 
had not been passed. 

90A. Definition. — In this Chapter, — 

“ancestral property” means any property acquired by a male Hindu by 
way of inheritance from his father, father’s father or father’s father’s father, 
and includes — 

(a) any share in the property of any such paternal ancestor allotted 
to him on partition, and 

(b) any accretions to ancestral property; 

but shall not be deemed to include — 

(i) any gains of learning as defined in the Hindu Gains of Learning 
Act, 1930 (XXX of 1930), acquired by him; 

(ii) any property acquired by him otherwise than by way of inheritance; 

(iii) any property acquired by him by way of inheritance from any person 
other than any of the three immediate paternal ancestors, and 

(iv) any other separate property in his possession, 

although all or any of such properties are for the time being shared 
by him jointly with a co-parcener. 

Explanation. — Accretions to ancestral property include income from such 
properly, property purchased or acquired out of such income or with the 
assistance of such property, the proceeds of sale of such property, and 
property purchased out of such proceeds; 

90B. Co-parcenary. — (1) A person becomes a co-parcener if the following 
conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 

(i) that he — 

(a) has either inherited any ancestral property, or 

(b) is born in the family of the person who has inherited any such 
property and is a lineal descendant of such person in the male line ; and 

(ii) that in the ease of any person referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause 
(i) he is not for the time being removed more than four degrees — 

(a) from the person who has inherited any such property, or 

(b) from any of the descendants of any person who has so inherited 
and who is the oldest living paternal ancestor of that person in the male 
line. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


141 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(2) For the purpose of computing the number of degrees under sub-section 
(1), the person concerned and the person with respect to whom the 
relationship is to be traced shall each be counted as one degree. 

(3) When there is a partition among the members of a co-parcenary, the 
co-parceners who have separated shall cease to be co-parceners with respect 
to each other; but it shall not be presumed, until the contrary is proved: — 

(a) that each of the persons so separating has, by reason only of such 
separation, ceased to be a co-parcener with respect to his own descendants 
in the male line; or 

(b) that, where only one co-parcener has so separated, the remaining 
members of the co-parcenary have, by reason only of such separation, 
ceased to be co-parceners as amongst themselves. 

(4) “Co-parcenary” is a body of two or more male persons who are for 
the time being co-parceners. 

(95) 

90C. Incidents of co-parcenary property. — The following rules shall 
apply to any ancestral property acquired, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Code, by a member of a co-parcenary : — 

(a) every co-parcener shall by reason of his birth in the family of the 
person acquiring ancestral property have an interest in the property equal 
to that of his father; 

(b) all the members of the co-parcenary shall hold the property as joint 
tenants; 

(c) on the death of any co-parcener (other than the sole surviving member) 
his interest in the property shall devolve by survivorship on the surviving 
members of the co-parcenary and not by succession on his heirs ; 

(d) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c), where a coparcener 
dies, his widow and daughter shall amongst themselves have in the 
property — 

(i) in the case of the widow, an interest equal to that of the son, 

(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, an interest equal to onehalf 
of that of the son and, in the case of a married daughter, one quarter 
of that of the son. 

(96) 

90D. Extent of right of co-parcener to alienate co-parcenary 
property. — Neither any co-parcener nor any female who acquires an interest 
in any ancestral property by reason of the provisions contained in clause 
(d) of section 90C shall, by reason merely of the fact of being a co-parcener 
or of having acquired such interest, be entitled to transfer or charge in any 
way the property except his or her undivided or other interest therein, and 
no court shall, in execution of any decree passed against any such member 
or female, proceed against any ancestral property otherwise than against 
the interest in the property belonging to such co-parcener or female, as the 
case may be. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


143 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(97) 

90E. Right to claim partition of to-parcenary property. — (1) Any 

co-parcener and any female who has acquired an interest in ancestral 
property by reason of the provisions contained in clause (d) of section 90C 
may, at any time, claim partition and separate enjoyment of his or her share 
in the property whether or not the other parties concerned are agreeable 
thereto. 

(2) Where any female who has acquired any such interest as is referred 
to in sub-section (1) dies without claiming partition and obtaining separate 
enjoyment of her share in the property, her interest in the property shall, 
on her death, revert to the members of the co-parcenary. 

(98) 

90F. Right of co-parcener to buy off the share of another co- 
parcener, etc., in certain cases. — Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 90D a co-parcener may require any other co-parcener who has ceased 
to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion or a female who has acquired 
an interest in ancestral property by reason of the provisions contained in 
clause (d) of section 90C to take his or her share in the ancestral property 
for separate enjoyment and thereupon the provisions of the Partition Act, 
1893 (IV of 1893), shall apply as if there was a partition and as if the co- 
parcener who has ceased to be a Hindu or the female, as the case may 
be, were the transferee of a share of a dwelling house belonging to the co- 
parcenary. 

(99) 

90G. Allotment of shares on partition. — The following rules shall apply 
to regulate the allotment of shares to the members of a co-parcenary on 
a partition being made amongst them, namely: — 

(a) where the partition is between a father and his sons, each son shall 
take a share equal to that of his father; 

(b) where the partition is between brothers, they, shall take equal 
shares; 

(c) where the partition is between co-parceners belonging to different 
branches of the family, the property shall be divided amongst the branches 
equally per stirpes; 

(d) where the partition is between co-parceneras belonging to the same 
branch, the property shall be divided equally amongst them per capita. 

(100) 

90H. Termination of coparcenary. — So long as there is no other 
coparcener in the family, every person who acquires any ancestral property 
shall be entitled to hold the property as an absolute owner, and on his death, 
the property shall devolve on his heirs by succession and not by survivorship. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


145 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 101 ) 

CHAPTER III 

Marumakkattayam, Aliyasantana and Nambudri joint families 

901. Special provisions repecting Marumakkattayam, Aliyasantana 
and Nambudri joint families. — Nothing contained in this Part shall apply 
to any tcirwcid, tavcizhi, katiunba, kavaru or illom to which the 
Marumakkattayam, Aliyasantana or Nambudri law would have applied if 
this Code had not been passed, and, notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Code, all matters relating to the rights (whether by way of succession 
or otherwise) of any person in, or the management or partition of, any such 
tarwad, tavashi, kutumba, kavaru or illom and of its properties shall continue 
to be regulated by the law which was applicable thereto immediately before 
the commencement of this Code, as if that law had not been repealed by 
this Code. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


147 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


148 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 102 ) 

CHAPTER IV 
Miscellaneous 

90J. Savings. — Nothing contained in this Part shall apply to — 

(a) any estate which descends to a single heir by a customary rule of 
succession or by the terms of any grant or enactment; or 

(b) any estate attached to a sthanam (position of dignity) and enjoyed 
by a single person from time to time in accordance with any law, custom 
or usage in force in the State of Travancore-Cochin or in the districts of 
Malabar, South Canara and Nilgiris of the State of Madras ; or 

(c) the following estates situated in the State of Travancore-Cochin, 
namely: — 

Idapally, Poonjar and Kilimanoor Estates and the Valiamma Thampuran 
Kovilagam Estate including the Palace Fund. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


149 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 149 


90. Saving of impartible estates. — Nothing contained in this Part shall 
apply to any estate which descends to a single heir by a customary rule 
of succession or by the terms of any grant or enactment. 

( 102 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


150 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(103) 

PART VI.— WOMAN’S PROPERTY 

91. Nature of woman’s property. — (1) Any property acquired by a 
woman after the commencement of this Code shall be her absolute property. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property acquired by a 
woman by way of gift or under a will where the terms of the gift or the 
will, expressly or by necessary implication, prescribe a restricted estate in 
such property : 

Provided that no such implication shall arise by reason only of her sex. 

Explanation . — In this section “property” includes both movable and 
immovable property acquired by a woman, whether such acquisition was 
made before, at or after marriage or during widowhood and whether by 
inheritance or devise, or on partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, or 
by her own skill or exertion or by purchase or by prescription or in any 
other manner whatsoever. 


(104) 

92. Devolution of woman’s property. — (1) Where any woman dies after 
the commencement of this Code any property acquired by her whether such 
acquisition was made before or after the commencement of this Code, shall, 
in so far as it consists of heritable property, devolve on her own heirs in 
the manner laid down in Part VII. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the property of a woman in 
which she had, at the time of her death, only the limited estate known as 
the Hindu woman’s estate, and such property shall devolve as hereunder — 

(i) where such limited estate was obtained by inheritance it shall devolve 
on the persons who under Part VII would have been the heirs of the last 
full owner thereof if such owner had died intestate immediately after her; 

(ii) where such limited estate was obtained by partition or in any other 
manner not herein provided for it shall devolve on the persons who would 
have been entitled to it if this Code had not been passed. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 151 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 151 


PART VI.— WOMAN’S PROPERTY 

91. Nature of woman’s property. — (1) Any property Part II, Sec. 
acquired by a woman after the commencement of this Code 13 > P a S e 9 - 
shall be her absolute property. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property acquired by a 
woman by way of gift or under a will where the terms of the gift or the 
will, expressly or by necessary implication, prescribe a restricted estate in 
such property: 

Provided that no such implication shall arise by reason only of her sex. 

Explanation . — In this section “property” includes both movable and 
immovable property acquired by a woman, whether such acquisition was 
made before, at or after marriage or during widowhood and whether by 
inheritance or devise, or on partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, or 
by her own skill or exertion or by purchase or by prescription or in any 
other manner whatsoever. 

(103) 


92. Devolution of woman’s property. — (1) Where any p ar t II, Sec. 

woman dies after the commencement of this Code any 3, 
property acquired by her whether such acquisition was made page 3 ‘ 
before or after the commencement of this Code, shall, in so 
far as it consists of heritable property, devolve on her own 
heirs in the manner laid down in Part VII. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the property of a woman in 
which she had, at the time of her death, only the limited estate known as 
the Hindu women’s estate, and such property shall devolve as hereunder — 

(i) where such limited estate was obtained by inheritance it shall devolve 
on the persons who under Part VII would have been the heirs of the last 
full owner thereof if such owner had died intestate immediately after her, 

(ii) where such limited estate was obtained by partition or in any other 
manner not herein provided for it shall devolve on the persons who would 
have been entitled to it if this Code had not been passed. 


( 104 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(105) 

93. Dowry to be held in trust for wife. — (1) In the case of any marriage 
solemnized after the commencement of this Code, any dowry given on the 
occasion of or as a condition of or as consideration for such marriage shall 
be deemed to be the properly of the woman whose marriage has been so 
solemnized. 

(2) Where any dowry is received by any person other than the woman 
whose marriage has been so solemnized as aforesaid such person shall hold 
it in trust for the benefit and separate use of the woman and shall transfer 
it to her on her completing the age of eighteen years or if she dies before 
completing that age to her heirs as specified in Part VII. 

Explanation . — In this section, “dowry” includes any property transferred 
or agreed to be transferred by or on behalf of, either party to the marriage 
or any of his relatives, to any relative of the other party, whether directly 
or indirectly on the occasion of or as a condition of or as consideration for 
such marriage, but does not include any small customary presents made 
to the bridegroom or to any relative of either party to the marriage. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


153 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 153 


93. Dowry to be held in trust for wife. — (1) In the case Part IV, sec. 
of any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this 28, page 20 ‘ 
Code, any dowry given on the occasion of or as a condition 
of or as consideration for such marriage shall be deemed to 
be the property of the woman whose marriage has been so 
solemnized. 

(2) Where any dowry is received by any person other than the woman 
whose marriage has been so solemnized as aforesaid such person shall hold 
it in trust for the benefit and separate use of the woman and shall transfer 
it to her on her completing the age of eighteen years or if she dies before 
completing that age to her heirs as specified in Part VII. 

Explanation . — In this section, “dowry” includes any property transferred 
or agreed to be transferred by or on behalf of, either party to the marriage 
or any of his relatives, to any relative of the other party, whether directly 
or indirectly on the occasion of or as a condition of or as consideration for 
such marriage, but does not include any small customary presents made 
to the bridegroom or to any relative of either party to the marriage. 

( 105 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(106) 

PART VII.— SUCCESSION 
CHAPTER I 

Application 

94. Certain estates excluded from operation of Part. — This Part shall 
not apply to * * *, — 

(i) any estate which descends to a single heir by a customary rule of 
succession or by the terms of any grant or enactment, or to any other estate 
specified in section 90J. or 

(ii) any property which devolves by survivorship on the surviving members 
of a co-parcenarv in accordance with the provisions of Part V. or 

(iii) any property belonging to a tarwad. tavazhi, kutumba, kavaru or illorn 
to which the provisions of section 901 apply. 

(107) 

95. Application of Part. — Save as otherwise expressly provided in section 
94, this Part regulates the succession to the property of a Hindu dying 
intestate after the commencement of this Code in the following cases, 
namely: — 

(a) where the property is movable property, unless it is proved that the 
intestate was not domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends at 
the time of his or her death ; 

(b) where the property is immovable property situate in the said 
territories, whether the intestate was domiciled in the said territories at 
the time of his or her death or not. 

Explanation — For the purposes of this Part, the domicile of a Hindu shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions contained in section 6 to 
18, both inclusive, of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 

(108) 

96. No distinction between divided and undivided sons, etc., for 
purposes of succession. — For purposes of intestate succession, no distinc- 
tion shall be made, — 

(1) between a son who was divided and a son who was undivided from 
the intestate or between a son who was divided and a son who was reunited 
with him; 

(2) between a female heir * * * who is a widow and one who is not a 
widow or between a female heir who is poor and one who is rich or between 
a female heir with issue and one without issue or possibility of issue. 







D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


155 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 155 

PART VII.— SUCCESSION 
CHAPTER I 

General 

94. Certain estates excluded from operation of Part. — Part II, 

This Part shall not apply to. — sec. 1, 

page 2. 

(i) agricultural land in Governors’ Provinces; or 

(ii) any estate which descends to a single heir by a customary rule of 
succession or by the terms of any grant or enactment. 

(106) 

95. Application of Part. — Save as provided in section 94, Part II, 
this Part regulates the succession to the property of a Hindu sec ‘ 3> 
dying intestate after the commencement of this Code in the page 
following cases, namely : — 

(a) where the property is movable properly, unless it is proved that the 
intestate was not domiciled in any of the Provinces of India at the time 
of his or her death ; 

(b) where the property is immovable property situate in any of the 
Provinces of India, whether the intestate was domiciled in any of the 
Provinces of India at the time of his or her death or not. 

Explanation. — For the purposes of this Part, the domicile of a Hindu shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions contained in section 6 to 
18, both inclusive, of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 

(107) 

96. No distinction between divided and undivided Part sec - 
sons, etc., for purposes of succession. — lor purposes of 2 and 4, page 

intestate succession, no distinction shall be made, — 6. 

(1) between a son who was divided and a son who was undivided from 
the intestate or between a son who was divided and a son who was reunited 
with him; 

(2) between a female heir who is married and one who 
is unmarried or a female heir who is a widow and one who 
is not a widow or between a female heir who is poor and 
one who is rich or between a female heir with issue and one 
without issue or possibility of issue. 

(108) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(109) 

CHAPTER II 

Intestate succession to the property of males 
General Provisions 

97. Definitions. — (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires. — 

(a) “agnate” — a person is said to be an agnate jgotraja) of another if the 
two are related by blood or adoption wholly through males; 

(b) “cognate” — a person is said to be a cognate (bandhu) of another in 
the two are related by blood or adoption wholly through males; 

(c) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed 
to the property of an intestate under this Part. 

(d) “intestate” — a person is deemed to die intestate in respect of property 
of which he or she has not made a testamentary disposition capable of taking 
effect; 

(2) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires , words importing 
the masculine gender shall not be taken to include females. 

( 110 ) 

98. General rules of succession in the case of males . — Save as 
otherwise expressly provided in sections 105A to 105J inclusive , the property 
of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set 
out in this Part: — 

(a) firstly, upon the preferential heirs, being the relatives specified in class 
I of the Eighth Schedule; 

(b) secondly, if there is no preferential heir of class I, then upon the 
preferential heirs being the relatives specified in class II of the Eighth 
Schedule; 

(c) thirdly, if there is no preferential heir of any of the two classes, then 
upon his relatives being the agnates specified in section 102 ; and 

(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon his relatives being the cognates 
specified in section 103. 

(Ill) 

99. Order of succession amongst preferential heirs. — As amongst the 
preferential heirs those in class I of the Eighth Schedule shall take together, 
and those standing in the first entry in class II shall be preferred to those 
standing in the second entry, and those in the second entry to those in the 
third entry and so on in succession. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


157 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 157 


CHAPTER II 

Intestate succession 

Succession to the property of a Hindu mile 

97. Definitions. — (1) In this Part, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context, — 


Part II, 
sec. 2, 

page 2. Part 

II, 

sec. 5, 
page 2. 


(a) “agnate” — a person is said to be an agnate tgotraja) of another, if the 
two are related by blood or adoption wholly through males; 

(b) “cognate” — a person is said to be a cognate ( bandhu ) of another in 
the two are related by blood or adoption but not wholly through males; 

(c) “heir “ means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed 
to the property of an intestate under this Part. 

(d) “intestate” — a person is deemed to the intestate in respect of property 
of which he or she has not made a testamentary disposition capable of taking 
effect ; 

(2) In this Part, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context, words importing the masculine gender shall not be taken to include 
females. 

98. Rule of succession in the case of male Hindu. — Part H> 

Subject to the provisions of this Part, the property of a male sec ‘ 4 ’ 

pagg 4 

Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules 
set out in this Part: — 

(a) firstly, upon the preferential heirs, being the relatives specified in class 
I of the Schedule VII; 

(b) secondly, if there is no preferential heir of class I, then upon the 
preferential heirs being the relatives specified in class II of Schedule VII; 

(c) thirdly, if there is no preferential heir of any of the two classes, then 
upon his relatives being the agnates specified in section 102; and 

(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon his relatives being the cognates 
specified in section 103. 

( 110 ) 

99. Order of succession amongst preferential heirs. — p art n 

As amongst the preferential heirs those in class I of Schedule sec. 6, 

VII shall take together, and those standing in the first entry P a S e 6 - 
in class II shall be preferred to those standing in the second 
entry, and those in the second entry to those in the third 
entry and so on in succession. 


(Ill) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 112 ) 

100. Distribution of property amongst preferential heirs in class 

L — (1) The property of an intestate shall be divided among the preferential 
heirs in class I of the Eighth schedule so that the share of the widow shall 
be equal to that of each son, including a predeceased son leaving a son or 
a son’s son living at the intestate’s death, and the share of each unmarried 
daughter shall be half that of each son and the share of each married 
daughter shall be one-quarter of that of each son : 

Provided that where a predeceased son leaves no son or son’s son but 
leaves his widow or his son’s widow living at the intestate’s death, then 
the share of such predeceased son shall be half that of a son of the intestate. 

(2) The share given to a predeceased son of the intestate under sub-section 
(1) shall be divided as follows: — 

(a) If such predeceased son has left a son or a son’s son living at the 
intestate’s death then his share shall be divided so that the share of the 
widow of such predeceased son shall be equal to that of a son of such 
predeceased son including any son who may have died before the intestate 
leaving a son living at the intestate’s death : 

Provided that if any son of such predeceased son dies before the intestate 
leaving a widow but no son living at the intestate’s death then the share 
of such son of the predeceased son shall be half that of any other son of 
such predeceased son. 

(b) The share of any son of the predeceased son who may have died before 
the intestate shall be divided between his widow and his sons in equal shares. 

(c) If such predeceased son has left a widow or a son’s widow or widows 
of two or more sons but has not left a son or a son’s son living at the 
intestate’s death then the share of such predeceased son shall be divided 
between his widow and his son’s widows so that the share of the predeceased 
son’s widow shall be double the share of the widow of each son of such 
predeceased son. 

(3) For the purposes of this section where a person has left more than 
one widow all the widows shall take between them equally the share which 
a single widow would have taken. 





D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


159 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 159 


100. Distribution of property amongst preferential Part IV, sec. 
heirs in class I. — (1) The property of an intestate shall be 7 > 
divided among the preferential heirs in class I so that the P a S e 6 - 
share of the widow shall be equal to that of eaeh son, 
including a predeceased son leaving a son or a son’s son living 
at the intestate’s death and the share of each daughter shall 
be equal to that of each son : 

Provided that where a predeceased son leaves no son or son’s son but 
leaves his widow or his son’s widow living at the intestate’s death, then 
the share of such predeceased son shall be half that of a son of the intestate. 

(2) The share given to a predeceased son of the intestate under sub-section 
(1) shall be divided as follows: — 

(a) If such predeceased son has left a son or a son’s son living at the 
intestate’s death then his share shall be divided so that the share of the 
widow of such predeceased son shall be equal to that of a son of such 
predeceased son including any son who may have died before the intestate 
leaving a son living at the intestine’s death : 

Provided that if any son of such predeceased son dies before the intestate 
leaving a widow but no son living at the intestate’s death then the share 
of such son of the predeceased son shall be half that of any other son of 
such predeceased son. 

(b) The share of any son of the predeceased son who may have died before 
the intestate shall be divided between his widow and his sons in equal shares. 

(c) If such predeceased son has left a widow or a son’s widow or widows 
of two or more sons but has not left a son or a son’s son living at the 
intestate’s death then the share of such predeceased son shall be divided 
between his widow and his son’s widows so that the share of the predeceased 
son’s widow shall be double the share of the widow of each son of such 
predeceased son. 

(3) For the purposes of this section where a person has left more than 
one widow all the widows shall take between them equally the share which 
a single widow would have taken. 

Illustrations 

(i) The surviving heirs of an intestate are three sons, A, B and C, five grandsons 
by a predeceased son D, and two great grandsons by a predeceased son of another 
predeceased son E, A, B and C take one share each, and the branches of D and 
E get one share each. The grandson in D’s branch and the great grandson in E’s 
branch divide the stare allotted to their respective branches equally. Each son of 
the intestate, therefore, takes one fifth of the heritable property, each grandson one- 
twenty-fifth, and each great-grandson one-tenth. 

(ii) Only a widow or daughter survives an intestate. She takes the whole of the 
heritable property. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(114) 

101. Mode of distribution amongst preferential heirs in class II. — 

The property of an intestate shall be divided between the preferential heirs 
in any one entry in class II of the Eighth Schedule so that they share equally. 


(115) 

102. Agnates who are heirs. — In the absence of any preferential heirs 
specified in class I or classs II of the Eighth Schedule, agnates of the 
deceased, related to the intestate within five degrees, shall be entitled to 
succeed in accordance with the rules set out in this Part. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


161 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 161 


(iii) The surviving heirs are a widow and two grandsons by a predeceased son. 
The widow takes one share and the grandsons together take one share. The widow 
therefore, takes one half of the heritable property and each grandson one fourth. 

(iv) The surviving heirs are a daughter and the widow of a predeceased son. The 
daughter takes one share, and the widow gets half a share. 

(v) The surviving heirs are a son, a daughter, and the widow of a predeceased 
son. The son gets one share, the daughter gets one share, and the widow of the 
predeceased son gets half a share. 

(vi) The surviving heirs are a son, a daughter, and the widow and the son of 
a predeceased son. The son gets one share, the daughter gets one share and the 
widow and the son of the predeceased son get between them one share, which has 
then to the distributed equally between them. 

(vii) The surviving heirs are — 

(a) a widow, 

(b) a son. 

(c) a daughter, 

(d) the widow of a predeceased son, 

(e) the widow and two sons of another predeceased son. 

The widow gets one share; the son gets one share; the daughter gets one share; 
the widow of the first mentioned predeceased son — (d) above — gets half a share; 
and the heirs mentioned in (a) above between them get one share, which has then 
to be distributed equally among them. 

(viii) The surviving heirs are — 

(a) a son, 

(b) the widow and three sons of a predeceased son, 

(c) the widow of a predeceased son of the predeceased son referred to in (b), The 
son gets one share and the heirs in entries (b) and (c) together, get one share. 

The latter share should be distributed so that the widow and each of the sons 
in entry (b) get portion each and the widow in entry (c) gets one-half of such a 
portion. In the result, the intestate’s son gets one-half of the heritable property, 
the widow of his predeceased son gets one-ninth, each of the three sons of such 
predeceased son also gets one-ninth, and the widow of the intestate’s grandson gets 
one-eighteenth 

(113) 

101. Mode of distribution amongst preferential heirs in class II. — 

The property of an intestate shall be divided between the preferential heirs 
in any one entry in class II of Schedule VII, so that they share equally. 

(114) 

102. Agnates who are heirs. — In the absence of any Part I, 
preferential heirs specified in class I or classs II of Schedule sec. 8, 

VII, agnates of the deceased, related to the intestate within P a S e 7 - 
five degrees, shall be entitled to succeed in accordance with 

the rules set out in this Part. 


( 115 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(116) 

103. Cognates who are heirs. — In the absence of any preferential heir 
and agnates, cognates of the deceased related to the deceased within five 
degrees, shall be entitled to succeed in accordance with the rules set out 
in this Part. 


(117) 

104. Order of succession amongst agnates and cognates. — The order 
of succession among agnates or cognates, as the case may be, shall be 
determined in accordance with the rules of preference laid down hereunder: — 

Rule 1 . — Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent 
is preferred. 

Rule 2 . — Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, 
that heir is preferred who has fewer or no degrees of ascent. 

Rule 3 . — Where the number of degrees of descent is also the same or 
none, the heir who is in the male line is preferred to the heir who is in 
the female line at the first point (counting from the intestate to the heir) 
where the lines of the two heirs can be so distinguished. 

Rule 4 . — Where the two lines cannot be so distinguished, the heir who 
is a male is preferred in the heir who is a female. 

Rule 5 . — Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under 
the foregoing rules, they take together. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


163 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 163 


103. Cognates who are heirs. — In the absence of any 
preferential heir and agnates, cognates of the deceased 
related to the deceased within five degrees, shall be entitled 
to succeed in accordance with the rules set out in this Part. 

( 116 ) 

104. Order of succession amongst agnates and cog- 
nates. — The order of succession among agnates or cognates, 
as the case may be, shall be determined in accordance with 
the rules of preference laid down hereunder: — 

Rule 1. — Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent 
is preferred. 

Rule 2. — Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, 
that heir is preferred who has fewer or no degrees of ascent. 

Rule 3. — Where the number of degrees of descent is also the same or 
none, the heir who is in the male line is preferred to the heir who is in 
the female line at the first point (counting from the intestate to the heir) 
where the lines of the two heirs can be so distinguished. 

Rule 4. — Where the two lines cannot be so distinguished, the heir who 
is a male is preferred to the heir who is a female. 

Rule 5. — Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under 
the foregoing rules, they take together. 

Illustrations 

In the following illustrations, the letters F and M stand for the father and mother 
respectively in that portion of the line which ascends from the intestate to the 
common ancestor, and the letters S and D for the son and daughter respectively 
in that portion of the line which descend from the common ancestor to the heir. 
Thus MFSS stands for the intestate’s mother’s father’s son’s son (mother’s brother’s 
son) and FDS stands for the intestate’s father’s daughter’s son (sister’s son). 

(i) The competing heirs are (1) SDSS (son’s daughter’s son’s son and (2) FDDS 
(sister’s daughter’s son). No. (1) who has no degree of ascent is preferred to No. 
(2) who has one degree of ascent. 

(ii) The competing heirs are (1) FDDD (sister’s daughter’s daughter) and (2) 
MFSSD (maternal uncle’s son’s daughter). The former who has only one degree of 
ascent is preferred to the latter who has two such degrees. 

(iii) The competing heirs are (1) FDSS (sister’s son’s son) and MFSSD (material 
uncle’s son’s daughter). The former who has only one degree of ascent is preferred 
to the latter who has two such degrees. 

(iv) The competing heirs are (1) MFDSS (mother’s sister’s son’s son) and (2) 
MFFDS (mother’s father’s sister’s son). The former who has two degrees of ascent 
is preferred to the latter who has three such degrees. 

(v) The competing heirs are (I) MFM (mother’s father’s mother) and (2) FFFDSS 
father’s father’s sister’s son’s son). The number of degrees of ascent in both cases 
is the same, viz., three, but the former has no degree of descent while the latter 
has three such degrees. The former (1) is therefore preferred. 


Part I, 
sec. 8, 
page 7. 


Part II, 
sec. 9, 

pages 7 & 8. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(117A) 

105. Computation of degrees. — (1) For the purposes of determining the 
order of succession amongst agnates or cognates, relationship shall be 
reckoned from the intestate to the heir in terms of degrees of ascent, or 
degrees of descent, or both, as the case may be. 

(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be computed exclusive 
of the intestate. 

(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


165 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 165 


(vi) The competing heirs are (1) FMF (father’s mother’s father) and (2) MFFF 
(mother’s father’s father). The number of degrees of ascent in both the cases is the 
same, and there are no degrees of descent. The lines of the two heirs diverge at 
the very first point. No. (1) being in the male line and No. (2) in the female line. 
No. (1) is preferred to No. (2). 

(vii) The competing heirs are (1) FDSS (sister’s son’s son) and (2) FDDS (sister’s 
daughter’s son). The heirs are equally near both in ascent and descent. The 
dissimilarity in the lines occurs at the third point. At this point. No. (1) is in the 
male line and No. (2) father’s mother’s sister’s son). The former is preferred. 

(viii) The competing heirs are (1) FMFSS (father’s mother’s brother’s son) and 

(2) FMFDS father’s mother’s sister’s son). The former’s preferred. 

(ix) The competing heirs are (1) FDDS (sister’s daughter’s son) and (2) FDDD 
(sister’s daughter’s daughter). The former is preferred. 


(117) 


105, Computation of degrees. — (1) For the purposes of Part II, 
determining the order of succession amongst agnates or sec. 8, 
cognates, relationship shall be reckoned from the intestate P a S e 7 - 
to the heir in terms of degrees of ascent, or degrees of descent, 
or both, as the case may be. 

(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be computed exclusive 
of the intestate. 

(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending. 

Illustrations 

(i) The heir to be considered is the father’s mother’s father of the intestate. He 
has no degrees of descent, but has three degrees of ascent represented in order 
by (1) the intestate’s father, (2) that father’s mother, and (3) her father (the heir). 

(ii) The heir to be considered is the father’s mother’s father’s mother of the 
intestate. She has no degrees of descent, but has four degrees of ascent represented 
in order by (1) the intestate’s father, (2) that father’s mother, (3) her father, and 

(4) his mother (the heir). 

(iii) The heir to be considered is the son’s daughter’s son’s daughters of the 
intestate. She has no degrees of ascent, but has four degrees of descent represented 
in order by (1) the intestate’s son, (2) that son’s daughter, (3) her son, and (4) his 
daughter (the heir). 

(iv) The heir to be considered is the mother’s father’s father’s daughter’s son of 
the intestate, the has three degrees of ascent represented in order by (1) the 
intestate’s mother, (2) her father and (3) the father’s father, and two degrees of 
descent represented in order by (1) the daughter of the common ancestor, viz., the 
mother’s father’s father and (2) her son (the heir). 

(117A) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(118) 

Succession to the property of male Marumakkattayis, etc. 

105 A. Rules of succession to male Marumakkattayis, etc. dying 
intestate. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter the sepa- 
rate or self-acquired property of a male Hindu who dies intestate in respect 
thereof, shall — 

(a) in the case of a person to whom the Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana 
law would have applied if this Code had not been passed, devolve in the 
order and according to the rules contained in sections 105-C to 105-1 
inclusive; and 

(b) in the case of a person to whom the Nambudri law would have applied 
if this Code had not been passed, devolve in the order and according to 
the rules set out in section 105-J. 

(119) 

105 B. Lineal descendant defined. — In sections 105C to 105J inclusive 
and in section 109A and 109B, the expression “lineal descendant”, used with 
reference to any person, means any descendant of that person, whether in 
the male or female line or partly in the male and partly in the female line, 
and includes any child of that person. 

(120) 

105 C. Devolution of property, where there is a lineal descen- 
dant. — (1) Where the intestate has left him surviving a lineal descendant 
or descendants and his mother or a widow or widows or both his mother 
and a widow or widows, the whole of the intestate’s property shall devolve 
on them. 

(2) In the absence of the mother and widow, the whole of the property 
shall devolve on the lineal descendant or descendants. 

( 121 ) 

105 D. Rules of distribution. — Where there is a lineal descendant, the 
distribution of the property among the heirs referred to in section 105C shall 
be made in accordances with the following rules, namely: — 

(a) each child (son or daughter) shall be entitled to an equal share; 

(b) where a child has predeceased the intestate, the lineal descendants 
of such child shall, subject to the provisions of clause (e), be entitled to the 
share which the child would have taken had he or she survived the intestate; 

(c) grand-children of the intestate by a deceased child shall be entitled 
in equal shares to what such child would have taken had he or she survived 
the intestate; 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


167 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


168 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Provided that where any such grand-child has also predeceased the 
intestate, the lineal descendants of such grand-child shall, subject to the 
provisions of clause (e), be entitled to the share which the grand-child would 
have taken had he or she survived the intestate; 

(d) the property shall devolve in the like manner on the remoter surviving 
lineal descendants of the intestate; 

(e) the descendants of a child, grand-child or other lineal descendant of 
the intestate shall not be entitled to any share in his property, if such child, 
grand-child or other descendant is living at the time of the death of the 
intestate; 

(f) the widow, or, where there is more than one widow, all the widows 
together, shall be entitled to a share equal to that of a child, such share 
being taken equally by the widows where there is more than one; 

(g) the mother shall be entitled to a share equal to that of a child. 

(122) 

105 E. Devolution of property, where there is no lineal descendant 
but there is a widow or mother. — (1) Where the intestate has not left 
him surviving any lineal descendant but has left his mother and a widow 
or widows, one-half of the property shall devolve on his mother and the 
other half on his widow or widows in equal shares. 

(2) In the absence of a widow, the whole of the property shall devolve 
on the mother. 

(123) 

105 F. Devolution of property where there is no mother but there 
is a widow or lineal descendant of mother. — (1) Where the intestate 
has not left him surviving any lineal descendant or his mother but has left 
a widow or widows and also a lineal descendant or descendants of his mother, 
one-half of the property shall devolve on the widow or widows in equal shares 
and the other half on such lineal descendant or descendants. 

(2) In the absence of any lineal descendant of the intestate’s mother, the 
whole of the property shall devolve on the widow or widows in equal shares 
and, in the absence of the widow, the whole of the property shall devolve 
on the mother’s lineal descendants. 

(124) 

105 G. Devolution where there is maternal grand-mother or her 
descendant or the father. — (1) Where the intestate has not left him 
surviving any of the heirs mentioned in sections 105C, 105E and 105F but 
has left his father and his maternal grand-mother or lineal descendant or 
descendants, one-half of the property shall devolve on his father and the 
other half on her maternal grand-mother or, in her absence, on her lineal 
descendant or descendants. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


169 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


170 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(2) In the absence of any lineal descendant of the maternal grand-mother 
the whole of the property shall devolve on the father, and, in the absence 
of the father, the whole of the property shall devolve on the maternal 
grandmother or her lineal descendant or descendants, as the case may be. 

(125) 

105 H. Devolution in other cases. — (1) Where the intestate has not 
left him surviving any of the heirs mentioned in sections 105C, 105E, 105F 
and 105G, the whole of the property shall devolve on his mother’s maternal 
grand mother, or, in her absence, on her lineal descendant or descendants. 

(2) In the absence of any such descendant, the whole of the property shall 
devolve on a remoter female ascendant of the intestate in the female line 
or, in her absence, on her lineal descendant or descendants, me nearer 
ascendant and her descendants, excluding the more remote ascendant and 
her descendants. 

(126) 

105 I. Rules for distribution among lineal descendants of mother 
or other ascendant. — The distribution of the intestate’s property or any 
share thereof to which two or more lineal descendants of his mother or other 
ascendant are entitled under the forgoing sections shall be made in 

accordance with the rules specified in clauses (a) to (e) of section 105C, as 

if the mother or other ascendant had died intestate in respect of such 

property or share leaving her surviving the descendants aforesaid. 

(127) 

105 J. Special rules of succession to Nambudri males. — Notwith- 
standing anything contained in this Chapter, the separate or self-acquired 
property of a male Hindu who, if this Code had not been passed, would 
have been governed by the Nambudri law, shall, if he dies intestate in respect 
thereof, devolve in the order, and in accordance with the rules, specified 
below, namely: — 

(a) where the intestate has left him surviving any lineal descendant or 
descendants or a widow or widows or both such descendant or descendants 
and a widow or widows, the whole of the property shall devolve on them 
in accordance with the rules specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section. 

(b) where me intestate has not left him surviving any of me relatives 
referred to in clause (a) the property shall devolve in the order, and in 
accordance with the rules, specified in sections 97 to 108. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


171 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(128) 

Intestate Succession to the property of female 
General Provision 

106. Heirs of a Hindu woman. — Except as otherwise expressly provided 
in sections 109A and 109B, the properly of a female Hindu dying intestate 
shall devolve, according to the rules set out in this Part, — 

(a) firstly, upon the husband and children, including the children of any 
predeceased child, and 

(b) secondly, if there is no heir specified in clause (a), then, upon the 
heirs specified in section 109 in the order named therein. 


(129) 

107. Division of shares among heirs. — (1) Where a Hindu woman dies- 
intestate leaving husband and children, the property of which she dies 
intestate shall be divided among her husband and children so that they share 
equally. 

(2) Where a Hindu woman dies intestate leaving children but no husband, 
the property of which she dies intestate shall be divided among the children, 
so that they share equally. 

(3) If any child of a Hindu woman dying intestate has died in her life 
time, leaving children alive at the time of her death, the children of such 
child shall take the share which such child would have taken if living at 
the intestate’s death. 


(130) 

108. Husband succeeds where no children. — Where a Hindu woman 
dies Intestate leaving husband but no children, including children of any 
predeceased child entitled to succeed under section 107, the property of which 
she dies intestine shall devolve upon the husband. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


173 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 173 


Succession to the property of a Hindu woman 

106. Heirs of a Hindu woman. — Subject to the provisions p a rt II, 
of this Chapter, the property of a Hindu woman dying sec. 14, 
intestate shall devolve — page 9 ‘ 

(a) firstly, upon the husband and children, including the children of any 
predeceased child, and 

(b) secondly, if there is no heir specified in clause (a), then, upon the 
heirs specified in section 109 in the order named therein. 


(128) 


107. Division of shares among heirs. — (1) Where a Part II, 

Hindu woman diesintestate leaving husband and children, the sec - 14, P age 

9 

property of which she dies intestate shall be divided among 
her husband and children so that they share equally. 


(2) Where a Hindu woman dies intestate leaving children Part II, 

but no husband, the property of which she dies intestate shall sec ‘ 14, page 

9. 

be divided among the children, so that they share equally. 


(3) If any child of a Hindu woman dying intestate has died 
in her life time, leaving children alive at the time of her 
death, the children of such child shall take the share which 
such child would have taken if living at the intestate’s death. 


(129) 

108. Husband succeeds where no children. — Where a Hindu woman 
dies Intestate leaving husband but no children, including children of any 
predeceased child entitled to succeed under section 107, the property of which 
she dies intestate shall devolve upon the husband. 


( 130 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(131) 

109. Other heirs of the woman’s property. — Where a Hindu woman 
dies leaving no heirs specified in section 107 or 108, then the property of 
which she dies intestate shall devolve upon the following heir in the order 
named hereunder, namely, — 

(1) mother, father; 

(2) husband’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules 
as would have applied, if the property had been his and he had died intestate 
in respect thereof immediately after his wife; 

(3) mother’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules 
as would have applied, if the property had been hers and she had died 
intestate in respect thereof immediately after her daughter; 

(4) father’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules as 
would have applied, if the property had been his and he had died intestate 
in respect thereof immediately after his daughter. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


175 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 175 


109. Other heirs of the woman’s property. — Where a Part II, 

Hindu woman dies leaving no heirs specified in sections 107 sec ‘ 14, page 
or 108, then the property of which she dies intestate shall 
devolve upon the following heir in the order named hereun- 
der, namely, — 

(1) mother, father; 

(2) husband’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules 
as would have applied, if the property had been his and he had died intestate 
in respect thereof immediately after his wife; 

(3) mother’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules 
as would have applied, if the property had been hers and she had died 
intestate in respect thereof immediately after her daughter; 

(4) father’s heirs, in the same order and according to the same rules as 
would have applied, if the property had been his and he had died intestate 
in respect thereof immediately after his daughter. 

( 131 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(132) 

Succession to the property of female Marumakkattayis, etc. 

109A. Rules of succession to Marumakkattayam or Aliyasantana 
female dying intestate. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, 
the separate or self-acquired property of a female Hindu, who if this Code 
had not been passed would have been governed by the Marumakkattayam 
or Aliyasantana law shall, if she dies intestate in respect thereof, devolve 
in the order and according to the rules specified below, namely: — 

(a) where the intestate has left her surviving a lineal descendant or 
descendants, the whole of such property shall devolve on such descendant 
or descendants in accordance with the provisions contained in clauses (a) 
to (c) of section 105D; 

(b) in the absence of any lineal descendants of the intestate, the whole 
of the property shall devolve on the intestate’s mother or, in her absence, 
on her lineal descendant or descendants; 

(c) where the intestate has not left her surviving any lineal descendant 
of herself or of her mother but has left her husband and her maternal grand- 
mother or her lineal descendant or descendants, one-half of the property 
shall devolve on her grand-mother or, in her absence, on her lineal 
descendant or descendants; 

(d) in the absence of the intestate’s maternal grand-mother and her lineal 
descendants, the whole of the property shall devolve on the intestate’s 
husband, and in the absence of the husband, the whole of the property shall 
devolve on her maternal grand-mother or her lineal descendant or descen- 
dants, as the case may be; 

(e) where the intestate has not left her surviving any of the heirs 
mentioned in the forgoing clauses, the whole of the property shall devolve 
on her mother’s maternal grand-mother or in her absence on her lineal 
descendant or descendants and, in the absence of any one descendant, on 
a remoter female ascendant in the female line or, in her absence, on her 
lineal descendant or descendants, the nearer ascendant and her descendants 
excluding the more remote ascendants and her descendants ; 

(f) the distribution of the intestate’s property or any share thereof to which 
two or more lineal descendants of her mother or other ascendant are entitled 
under the foregoing clauses shall be made in accordance will the rules 
specified in clauses (a) to (e) of section 105D, as if the mother or other 
ascendant had died intestate in respect of such property or shall leaving 
her surviving the descendants aforesaid. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


177 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(133) 

109B. Rules of succession to Nambudri female dying intestate. — 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the separate or self- 
acquired property of a female Hindu who, if this Code had not been passed, 
would have been governed by the Nambudri law, shall, if she dies intestate 
in respect thereof, devolve in the order, and in accordance with the rules, 
specified below, namely : — 

(a) where the intestate has left her surviving any lineal descendant 
or descendants, the whole of the property shall devolve on such descendant 
or descendants in accordance with the rules specified in clause (a) to (e) 
of section 105D. 

(b) in the absence of any lineal descendant, the property shall devolve 
on her husband; 

(c) in the absence of the husband, the property shall devolve upon the 
heirs in the order, and in accordance with the rules, specified in section 
109. 


(134) 

Succession to the property of a hermit 

110. Rules for hermits, etc. — (1) Where a person completely and finally 
renounces the world by becoming a hermit or an ascetic or a perpetual 
religious student his property shall devolve upon his heirs, in the same order 
and according to the same rules as would have applied if he had died 
intestate in respect thereof at the time of such renunciation. 

(2) Any property acquired by such a person after his renunciation shall 
devolve on his death, not upon his relatives, but as follows: 

(a) In the case of a hermit upon a spiritual brother belonging to the same 
hermitage; 

(b) In the case of an ascetic subject to any custom or usage governing 
the case, upon his virtuous disciple; and 

(c) In the case of a perpetual religious student, upon his preceptor. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


179 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 179 


Succession to the property of a hermit 

110. Rules for hermits, etc. — (1) Where a person com- Part I, 
pletely and finally renounces the world by becoming a hermit sec. 11, page 

Q 

or an ascetic or a perpetual religious student his property 
shall devolve upon his heirs, in the same order and according 
to the same rules as would have applied if he had died 
intestate in respect thereof at the time of such renunciation. 

(2) Any property acquired by such a person after his renunciation shall 
devolve on his death, not upon his relatives, but as follows: — 

(a) In the case of a hermit upon a spiritual brother belonging to the same 
hermitage, 

(b) In the case of an ascetic subject to any custom or usage governing 
the case, upon his virtuous disciple; and 

(c) In the case of a perpetual religious student, upon his preceptor. 

( 134 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


180 


180 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 135 ) 

General provisions relating to succession 

111. Full blood preferred to half blood. — Heirs related to an intestate 
by full blood shall be preferred to heirs related by half blood, if the nature 
of the relationship is the same in every other respect. 


( 136 ) 

112. Mode of succession of two or more heirs. — If two or more heirs 
succeed together to the property of an intestate, they shall take the 
property — 

(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Part, per capita and not 
per stirpes ; and 

(b) as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants. 


( 137 ) 

113. Right of child in womb. — A person who was in the womb at the 
time of the death of an intestate and who is subsequently born alive shall 
have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had been 
born before the death of the intestate. The inheritance shall be deemed to 
vest in such a case with effect from the date of the death of the intestate. 


( 138 ) 

114. Presumption of survivorship. — Where two persons have died in 
circumstances rendering it uncertain whether either of them, and if so which, 
survived the other then, for all purposes affecting succession to property, 
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger survived 
the elder. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


181 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 181 


General provisions relating to succession P art H> 

sec. 15, page 

111. Full blood preferred to half blood. — Heirs related 10 
to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred to heirs related 
by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is the same 
in every other respect. 

Illustration 

(i) A brother by full blood is preferred to a brother by half blood; but a brother 
by half blood succeeds before a brother’s son by full blood, a brother being a 
nearer heir than a brother’s son. 

(ii) A paternal uncle by half blood is preferred to a paternal uncle’s son by 
full blood, an uncle being a nearer heir than an uncle’s son. 

(iii) A full brother’s daughter’s is preferred to a half brother’s daughter’s 
daughter but the former is not preferred to a half brother’s daughter’s son, as 
the nature of the relationship is not the same in the two cases. The latter, who 
is a nearer heir by virtue of rule 4 in section 104 is preferred although he is 
only related by half blood. 


( 135 ) 


112. Mode of succession of two or more heirs. — If two 

or more heirs succeed together to the property of an intestate, 
they shall take the property — 


Part II, 
sec. 24, page 

11 . 


(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Part, per capita and not 
per stirpes; and 


(b) as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants. 


( 136 ) 

113. Right of child in womb. — A person who was in the womb at the 
time of the death of an intestate and who is subsequently born alive shall 
have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had been 
born before the death of the intestate. The inheritance shall be deemed to 
vest in such a case with effect from the date of the death of the intestate. 

( 137 ) 

114. Presumption of survivorship. — Where two persons Part III-A, 

have died in circumstances rendering it uncertain whether Divn. Ill, 

either of them, and if so which, survived the other then, for sec ' 16, page 

14. 

all purposes affecting succession to property, it shall be 
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger 
survived the elder. 


( 138 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(139) 

115. Application of Partition Act, 1893, in certain cases. — Where, 
after the commencement of this Code, a share in any immovable property 
of an intestate or in any business carried on by such intestate, whether 
solely or in conjunction with other, — 

(a) devolve upon one or more of the intestate’s son, son’s son, son’s son’s 
son, together with other relatives, and one of the heirs sues for partition, 
or 

(b) devolves upon a daughter, together with any of the male relatives 
specified in Class I of the Eighth Schedule, and any one of such male relatives 
compels the daughter to take her share of the property of the intestate for 
separate enjoyment (which he is hereby empowered to do), 

the provisions of the Partition Act, 1893 (IV of 1893) shall apply as if 
there was a partition and as if he or she were the transferee of a share 
of a dwelling house and the intestate’s family, were an undivided one. 


(140) 

Disqualification of heirs 

116. Hermit, etc., disqualified. — A person who has completely and 
finally renounced the world in any of the modes set forth in sub-section 
(1) of section 110 shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of any 
of his relatives by blood, marriage or adoption. 

(141) 

117. Unchaste wife disqualified. — A woman, who after marriage, has 
been unchaste during her husband’s lifetime, shall, unless he has condoned 
the unchastity, be disqualified from inheriting his property: 

Provided that the right of a woman to inherit to her husband shall not 
be questioned on the above ground, unless a Court of law has found her 
to have been unchaste as aforesaid in a proceeding to which she and her 
husband were parties and in which the matter was specifically in issue, the 
finding of the Court not having been subsequently reversed. 

(142) 

118. Disqualification of certain widows remarrying. — The widow of 
a predeceased son, the widow of a predeceased son of a predeceased son, 
the father’s widow and the brother’s widow shall not be entitled to succeed 
as heirs, if on the date the succession opens, they have remarried. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 183 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 183 

115. Application of Partition Act, 1893, in certain Part II, sec. 
cases. — Where, after the commencement of this Code, a share 12, page 9- 
in any immovable property of an intestate or in any business 

carried on by such intestate, whether solely or in conjunction 
with others, devolves upon one or more of the intestate’s son, 
son’s son, son’s son’s son, together with other relatives, and 
one of the heirs sues for partition, the provisions of the 
Partition Act, 1893 (IV of 1893) shall apply as if there was 
a partition and as if he or she were the transferee of a share 
of a dwelling house and the intestate’s family, were an 
undivided one. 

(139) 

Disqualification of heirs 

116. Hermit, etc., disqualified. — A person who has p a rt II, sec. 
completely and finally renounced the world in any of the 18, page 11. 
modes set forth in sub-section (1) of section 110 shall be 
disqualified from inheriting the property of any of his 

relatives by blood, marriage or adoption. 

(140) 

117. Unchaste wife disqualified. — A woman, who after Part II, sec. 
marriage, has been unchaste during her husband’s lifetime, 19 > P a S e !• 
shall, unless he has condoned the unchastity, be disqualified 

from inheriting his properly: 

Provided that the right of a woman to inherit to her husband shall not 
be questioned on the above ground, unless a Court of law has found her 
to have been unchaste as aforesaid in a proceeding to which she and her 
husband were parties and in which the matter was specifically in issue, the 
finding of the Court not having been subsequently reversed. 

(141) 

118. Disqualification of certain widows remarry- (New) 
ing. — The widow of a predeceased son, the widow of a 
predeceased son of a predeceased son, the father’s widow and 

the brother’s widow shall not be entitled to succeed as heirs, 
if on the date the succession opens, they have remarried. 


( 142 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-03 MK 


Chandan 16-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


184 


184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(143) 

119. Murderer disqualified. — A person who commits murder or abets 
the commission of murder shall be disqualified from inheriting the property 
of the person murdered, or any other property in furtherance of the 
succession to which he or she committed or abetted the commission of the 
murder. 


(144) 

120. Convert’s descendants disqualified. — Where, before or after the 
commencement of this Code, a Hindu has ceased or ceases to be one by 
conversion to another religion, children born to him or her after such 
conversion and their descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the 
property of any of their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants 
arc Hindus at the time when the succession opens. 


(145) 

121. Succession when heir disqualified. — If any person is disqualified 
from inheriting any property under this Chapter, it shall devolve as if such 
person had died before the intestate. 

(146) 

122. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify. — No person shall be 
disqualified from succeeding to any property on the ground of any disease, 
defect or deformity, or save as provided in this Chapter, on any other ground 
whatsoever. 


(147) 

Escheat 

123. Failure of heirs. — If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed 
to his or her property in accordance with the provisions of this Part, such 
property shall go to the Government : and the Government shall take the 
property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which an heir would 
have been subject. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


185 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


119. Murderer disqualified. — A person who commits Part 2 ^)’ 
murder or abets the commission of murder shall be disqualified page n 
from inheriting the property of the person murdered, or any 
other property in furtherance of the succession to which he 
or she committed or abetted the commission of the murder. 


( 143 ) 

120. Convert’s descendants disqualified. — Where, before Part II, 

or after the commencement of this Code, a Hindu has ceased sec ' 20 ‘ 

page 11 

or ceases to be one by conversion to another religion, children 
born to him or her after such conversion and their descendants 
shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of any of 
their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants 
are Hindus at the time when the succession opens. 

( 144 ) 

121. Succession when heir disqualified. — If any person Part II, 
is disqualified from inheriting any property under this page^l 
Chapter, it shall devolve as if such person had died before 

the intestate. 


( 145 ) 

122. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify. — No person Part II, 
Part II, shall be disqualified from succeeding to any property sec - 
on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save 
as provided in this Chapter, on any other ground whatsoever. 

( 146 ) 


Escheat 

123. Failure of heirs. — If an intestate has left no heir Part H> 
qualified to succeed to his or her property in accordance with p^ge 11 
the provisions of this Part, such property shall go to the 
Crown; and the Crown shall take the property subject to all 
the obligations and liabilities to which an heir would have 
been subject. 


185 


(147) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


186 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(148) 

CHAPTER III 

Testamentary succession 

124. Testamentary succession. — (1) Any Hindu may dispose of by will 
or other testamentary disposition any property which is capable of being 
so disposed of by him in accordance with the provisions of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925), or any other law for the time being 
in force and applicable to Hindus. 

(2) Nothing herein contained shall authorise a Hindu — 

(a) to deprive any person of any right to maintenance to which such 
person is entitled under the provisions of this Code or any other law for 
the time being in force; 

(b) to create in property any interest or estate which he or she cannot 
lawfully create. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


187 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 187 

CHAPTER III 

Testamentary succession 

124. Testamentary succession. — (1) Any Hindu may Part III, 
dispose of by will or other testamentary disposition any Sec ' i 2 
property which is capable of being so disposed of by him in 
accordance with the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 

1925 (XXXIX of 1925), or any other law for the time being 
in force and applicable to Hindus. 

(2) Nothing herein contained shall authorise a Hindu — 

(a) to deprive any person of any right to maintenance to which such 
person is entitled under the provisions of this Code or any other law for 
the time being in force; 

(b) to create in property any interest or estate which he or she cannot 
lawfully create. 

( 148 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


188 


188 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(149) 

PART VIII.— MAINTENANCE 

125. Maintenance explained. — In this Part, the expression “maintenance” 
includes — 

(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and 
medical attendance and treatment; and 

(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses 
of, mid incident to, her marriage. 

Personal liability to maintain members of family 

126. Maintenance of wife. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, 
a Hindu wife, whether married before or alter the commencement of this 
Code, shall be entitled to be maintained by her husband during his life- 
time and alter his death, by his father. 

(2) A Hindu wife may claim maintenance from her husband only if and 
while she lives with him: 

Provided that she shall be entitled to live separately from him without 
forfeiting her claim to maintenance — 

(a) if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy or has been suffering 
from venereal disease in a communicable form and not contracted from 
her; 

(b) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is 
living ; 

(c) if he has been guilty of such cruelty as to render it unsafe for her 
to live with him; 

(d) if he is guilty of desertion, mat is to say, of abandoning her without 
just cause and without her consent or against her wish; 

(e) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; 

(f) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately. 

(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance 
from her husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion 
to another religion. 


(150) 

127. Maintenance of widowed daughter-in-law. — The obligation of a 
father-in-law to maintain his widowed daughter-in-law under section 126 
only extends in so far as he has the means to do so and the widowed 
daughter-in-law is unable to maintain hereself out of her own property or 
to obtain maintenance from her husband’s estate or from her son, if any, 
or his estate. Any such obligation shall cease on her remarriage. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


189 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 189 


PART VIII.— MAINTENANCE 

125. Maintenance explained. — In this Part, the expression 
“maintenance” includes — 


Part III-A, 
sec. 3. 
page 2. 


(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and 
medical attendance and treatment; and 

(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses 
of, mid incident to, her marriage. 


Personal liability to maintain members of family 

126. Maintenance of wife. — (1) Subject to the provisions Part IV, 

of this section, a Hindu wife, whether married before or after sec ‘ 26- 

19 

the commencement of this Code, shall be entitled to be and 2 o. 
maintained by her husband during his life-time and after his 
death, by his father. 

(2) A Hindu wife may claim maintenance from her husband only if and 
while she lives with him: 

Provided that she shall be entitled to live separately from him without 
forfeiting her claim to maintenance — 

(a) if he is suffering from a loathsome disease ; 

(b) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is 
living; 

(c) if he has been guilty of such cruelty as to render it unsafe or 
undesirable for her to live with him; 

(d) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without 
just cause and without her consent or against her wish; 

(e) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; 

(f) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately. 

(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and 
maintenance from her husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu 
by conversion to another religion. 

(149) 


127. Maintenance of widowed daughter-in-law. — The 

obligation of a father-in-law to maintain his widowed daughter- 
in-law under section 126 only extends in so far as he has 
the means to do so and the widowed daughter-in-law is 
unable to maintain herself out of her own property or to 
obtain maintenance from her husband’s estate or from her 
son, if any, or his estate. Any such obligation shall cease on 
her remarriage. 


Part III-A, 
sec. 8, 
page 13. 


( 150 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(151) 

128. Maintenance of children and aged parents. — (1) Subject to the 
provisions of this section, a Hindu is bound, during his life-time, to maintain 
his legitimate or illegitimate child and his aged parents. 

(2) A legitimate or illegitimate child may claim maintenance from his or 
her father so long as he or she is a minor: 

Provided that in the case of an unmarried daughter she may claim 
maintenance so long as she lives with her father and remains unmarried. 

(3) A father may claim maintenance from his son if he is aged and infirm. 


(152) 

129. Maintenance of children by mother. — A Hindu woman is bound 
during her life-time to maintain her legitimate or illegitimate children if 
her husband is unable to do so and she has the necessary means to maintain 
them. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


191 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 191 


128. Maintenance of children and aged parents. — (New) 

(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a Hindu is bound, 
during his life-time, to maintain his legitimate or illegitimate 

child and his aged parents. 

(2) A legitimate or illegitimate child may claim maintenance from his or 
her father so long as he or she is a minor: 

Provided that in the case of an unmarried daughter she may claim 
maintenance so long as she lives with her father and remains unmarried. 

(3) A father may claim maintenance from his son if he is aged and infirm. 

(151) 

129. Maintenance of children by mother. — A Hindu (New) 
woman is bound during her life-time to maintain her legitimate 

or illegitimate children if her husband is unable to do so and 
she has the necessary means to maintain them. 

(152) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(153) 

Liability of heirs to maintain dependants out of estate 

130. Maintenance of dependants. — (1) Subject to the provisions of 
section 131 the heirs of a deceased Hindu shall be bound to maintain the 
dependants of the deceased out of the estate inherited from the deceased 
by the heir. 

(2) The following relatives of the deceased shall be deemed to be his 
dependants for the purposes of this Part, namely : — 

(i) his father; 

(ii) his mother; 

(iii) his widow, so long as she does not remarry; 

(iv) his son, son of his predeceased son, or son of a predeceased son 
of his predeceased son, who is a minor, so long he remains one, provided 
and to the extent that he is unable to obtain maintenance, in the case 
of a grandson, from his father’s estate, and in the case of a great-grandson, 
from the estate of his father or father’s father, 

(v) his unmarried daughter, so long as she remains unmarried; 

(vi) his married daughter; 

Provided and to the extent that he is unable to obtain maintenance 
from her husband or from her son, if any, or his estate; 

(vii) his widowed daughter: 

Provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance — 

(a) from the estate of her husband, or 

(b) from her son, if any, or his estate, or 

(e) from her father-in-law or his father or the estate of either of them; 

(viii) any widow of his son or of a son of his predeceased son, so long 
as she does not remarry: 

Provided and to the extent that she is unable lo obtain maintenance 
from her husband’s estate, or from her son, if any, or his estate; or in 
the case of a grandson’s widow, also from her father-in-law’s estate; 

(ix) his minor illegitimate son, so long as he remains a minor; 

(x) his unmarried illegitimate daughter, so long as she remains 
unmarried. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


193 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 193 


Liability of heirs to maintain dependants out of estate 

130. Maintenance of dependants. — ( 1) Subject to the Part m A 
provisions of section 131 the heirs of a deceased Hindu shall sec. 5, 
be bound to maintain the dependants of the deceased out of page 12 ’ 
the estate inherited from the deceased by the heir. 

(2) The following relatives of the deceased shall be deemed to be his 
dependants for the purposes of this Part, namely: — 

(i) his father, 

(ii) his mother; 

(iii) his widow, so long as she does not remarry; 

(iv) his son, son of his predeceased son, or son of a predeceased son 
of his predeceased son, who is a minor, so long as he remains one, provided 
and to the extent that he is unable to obtain maintenance, in the case 
of a grandson, from his father’s estate, and in the case of a great-grandson, 
from the estate of his father or father’s father, 

(v) his unmarried daughter, so long as she remains unmarried; 

(vi) his married daughter; 

Provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance 
from her husband or from her son, if any, or his estate; 

(vii) his widowed daughter: 

Provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance — 

(a) from the estate of her husband, or 

(b) from her son, if any, or his estate, or 

(c) from her father-in-law or his father or the estate of either of them; 

(viii) any widow of his son or of a son of his predeceased son, so long 
as she does not remarry: 

Provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance 
from her husband’s estate, or from her son, if any, or his estate; or in 
the case of a grandson’s widow, also from her father-in-law’s estate; 

(ix) his minor illegitimate son, so long as he remains a minor, 

(x) his unmarried illegitimate daughter, so long as she remains 
unmarried. 


( 153 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(154) 

131. Extent of liability of heirs to maintain dependants. — Where 
a dependant has not obtained, by testamentary or intestate succession, any 
share in the estate of a male Hindu dying after the commencment of this 
Code, or 

where, in a case of testamentary succession, the share so obtained by 
a dependant is less than what would be awarded to him or her by way 
of maintenance under this Part, 

he or she is entitled, subject to the provisions of this Part, to maintenance 
from those who take the estate: 

Provided that the liability of each heir shall be in proportion to the value 
of the share or part of the estate taken by him or her; 

Provided further that no person who is himself or herself a dependant 
shall be liable to contribute to the maintenance of others, if he or she has 
obtained a share or part the value of which is, or would if the liability lo 
contribute were enforced become, less than what would be awarded to him 
or her by way of maintenance under this Part. 

(155) 

Amount of Maintenance 

132. Amount of maintenance. — (1) In determining the amount of 
maintenance, if any, to be awarded to the wife, children or aged parents 
under this Part, regard shall be had to — 

(a) the position and status of the parties; 

(b) the reasonable wants of the claimant; 

(c) if the claimant is living separately from the father, whether he or 
she is justified in doing so; 

(d) the value of the claimant’s property and any income derived from 
such property, or from the claimant’s own earnings, or from any other 
source ; 

(e) the number of persons who are entitled to maintenance under the 
provision of this Part. 

(2) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to 
a dependant under this Part, regard shall be had to — 

(a) the net value of the estate of the deceased, after providing for the 
payment of his debts; 

(b) the provision, if any, made under a will of the deceased in respect 
of the dependant; 

(e) the position and status of the deceased and of the dependant; 

(d) the degree of relationship between the two ; 

(e) the reasonable wants of the dependants ; 

(f) the past relations between the dependant and the deceased; 

(g) the value of his or her property and any income derived from such 
properly, or from his or her own earnings, or from any other source; 

(h) the number of dependants who are entitled to maintenance under 
the provisions of this Part; 

(i) in the case of a widow, her conduct. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


195 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 195 


131. Extent of liability of heirs to maintain dependants. — Part III-A, 

Where a dependant has not obtained, by testamentary or sec - 4 > 
intestate succession, any share in the estate of a male Hindu dying P a S e 12 - 
after the commencement of this Code, or 

where, in a case of testamentary succession, the share so obtained by a 
dependant is less than what would be awarded to him or her by way of 
maintenance under this Part, 

he or she is entitled, subject to the provisions of this Part, to maintenance 
from those who take the estate: 

Provided that the liability of each heir shall be in proportion to the value 
of the share or part of the estate taken by him or her; 

Provided further that no person who is himself or herself a dependant shall 
be liable to contribute to the maintenance of others, if he or she has obtained 
a share or part the value of which is, or would if the liability to contribute 
were enforced become, less than what would be awarded to him or her by way 
of maintenance under this Part. 

( 154 ) 

Amount of Maintenance 

132. Amount of maintenance. — (1) In determining the amount Part III-A, 

of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to the wife children or aged sec. 6, 
parents under this Part, regard shall be had to — page 13. 

(a) the position and status of the parties; 

(b) the reasonable wants of the claimant; 

(c) if the claimant is living separately from the father, whether he or she 
is justified in doing so; 

(d) the value of the claimant’s property and any income derived from such 
property, or from the claimant’s own earnings, or from any other source ; 

(e) the number of persons who are entitled to maintenance under the 
provision of this Part. 

(2) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a 
dependant under this Part, regard shall be had to — 

(a) the net value of the estate of the deceased, after providing for the 
payment of his debts; 

(b) the provision, if any, made under a will of the deceased in respect of 
the dependant: 

(c) the position and status of the deceased and of the dependant; 

(d) the degree of relationship between the two; 

(e) the reasonable wants of the dependants; 

(f) the past relations between the dependant and the deceased; 

(g) the value of his or her property and any income derived from such 
property, or from his or her own earnings, or from any other source; 

(h) the number of dependants who are entitled to maintenance under the 
provisions of this Part; 

(i) in the case of a widow, her conduct. 

( 155 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(156) 

133. Amount of maintenance in the discretion of court. — (1) It shall 
be in the discretion of the Court to determine whether any, and if so what, 
maintenance shall be awarded under the provisions of this Part, with due 
regard to the considerations set out in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of 
section 132, as the case may be, so far as they are applicable. 

(2) The expenses that may be allowed to an unmarried daughter in respect 
of her marriage shall in no case exceed the value of one-half of what she 
would have inherited from the deceased, if he had died intestate. 


(157) 

134. Amount of maintenance may be altered on change of 
circumstances. — The amount of maintenance, whether fixed by a decree 
of court or by agreement, either before or after the commencement of this 
Code, may be altered subsequently, if there is a material change in the 
circumstances, justifying such alteration. 


(158) 

135. Debts to have priority. — Subject to the other provisions contained 
in this Part debts of every description shall have priority over the claims 
of dependants for maintenance under this Part. 


(159) 

136. maintenance when to be a charge. — A dependant’s claim for 
maintenance under the provisions of this Part shall not be a charge on the 
estate of the deceased or any portion thereof, unless the same has been 
created by the will of the deceased, by a decree of court, by agreement 
between the dependant and the owner of the estate or portion, or otherwise. 

(160) 

137. Transfer where a third person is entitled to maintenance. — 

Where a third person has a right to receive maintenance out of an estate 
and such estate or any part thereof is transferred, the right to receive 
maintenance may be enforced against the transferee if the transferee has 
notice of the existence of such right, and in such a case the right can be 
enforced against the property to the extent to which it would have been 
liable had this Code not been passed. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


197 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 197 


133. Amount of maintenance in the discretion of 
court. — (1) It shall be in the discretion of the Court to 
determine whether any, and if so what, maintenance shall 
be awarded under the provisions of this Part, with due regard 
to the considerations set out in sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2) of section 132, as the case may be, so far as they are 
applicable. 

(2) The expenses that may be allowed to an unmarried daughter in respect 
of her marriage shall in no case exceed the value of one-half of what she 
would have inherited from the deceased, if he had died intestate. 

(156) 

134. Amount of maintenance may be altered on 
change of circumstances. — The amount of maintenance, 
whether fixed by a decree of court or by agreement, either 
before or after the commencement of this Code, may be 
altered subsequently, if there is a material change in the 
circumstances, justifying such alteration. 

(157) 

135. Debts to have priority. — Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Part debts of every description 
shall have priority over the claims of dependants for 
maintenance under this Part. 

(158) 

136. maintenance when to be a charge. — A dependant’s 
claim for maintenance under the provisions of this Part shall 
not be a charge on the estate of the deceased or any portion 
thereof, unless the same has been created by the will of the 
deceased, by a decree of court, by agreement between the 
dependant and the owner of the estate or portion, or 
otherwise. 

(159) 

137. Transfer where a third person is entitled to maintenance. — 

Where a third person has a right to receive maintenance out of an estate 
and such estate or any part thereof is transferred, the right to receive 
maintenance may be enforced against the transferee if the transferee has 
notice of the existence of such right, and in such a case the right can be 
enforced against the property to the extent to which it would have been 
liable had this Code not been passed. 

(160) 


Part III-A, 

sec. 7(2), 
page 14. 


Part III-A, 
sec. 8, 
page 14. 


Part III-A, 
sec. 9, 
page 14. 


Part III-A, 
sec. 6(2), 
page 13. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(161) 

PART IX.— MISCELLANEOUS 

138. Power to make rules. — (1) The State Government may make rules 
to carry out the objects of this Code. 

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may prescribe — 

(i) the particulars relating to Dharmik marriages which may be entered 
in the Hindu Dharmik Marriage Register and the manner in which and 
the circumstances under which such entries shall be made; 

(ii) the cases and areas in which particulars of Dharmik marriages shall 
be compulsorily entered, and the punishment for any contravention 
thereof; 

(iii) the areas for which Marriage Registrars shall be appointed and 
their duties and functions; 

(iv) the manner in which Hindu Dharmik Marriage Register and the 
Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Books shall be kept and the manner in which 
notices of marriages under section 12 shall be published: 

(v) the manner in which notices of applications under section 21 shall 
be given: 

(vi) the fees payable for the solemnization of any civil marriage or for 
any other duties to be performed by the Registrar of Marriages: 

(vii) the fees payable for the inspection of and for certified copies of 
extracts from the Hindu D harmik Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil 
Marriage Certificate Book: 

(viii) the form in which and the intervals within which copies of entries 
in the Hindu Dharmik Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil Marriage 
Certificate Book shall be sent to the Registrar Genial of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages; 

(ix) The verson by whom, the form in which and the authority to which 
notice of any marriage under section 24A may he given : 

(x) the particulars to be specified in applications for the recording of 
adoptions; 

(xi) the fees payable for recording adoptions; 

(xii) the form in which the Register of Adoptions shall be maintained ; 
and 

(xiii) the manner in which copies of entries in the Register of Adoptions 
may be certified. 

(162) 

139. Amendments and repeals. — The enactments mentioned in the third 
column of the First Schedule shall be amended to the extent specified in 
the fourth column thereof, and the enactments mentioned in the third column 
of the Second Schedule shall be repealed to the extent specified in the fourth 
column thereof. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


199 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 199 


PART IX.— MISCELLANEOUS 

138. Power to make rules. — (1) The Provincial Government may make 
rules to carry out the objects of this Code. 

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may prescribe — 

(i) the particulars relating to sacramental marriages which may be 
entered in the Hindu Sacramental Marriage Register and the manner in 
which and the circumstances under which such entries shall be made; 

(ii) the cases and areas in which particulars of Sacramental marriages 
shall be compulsorily entered, and the punishment for any contravention 
thereof; 

(iii) the areas for which Marriage Registrars shall be appointed and 
their duties and functions; 

(iv) the manner in which Hindu Sacramental Marriage Register and 
the Hindu Civil Marriage Notice Books shall be kept and the manner 
in which notices of marriages under section 12 shall be published: 

(v) the manner in which notices of applications under section 21 shall 
be given: 

(vi) the fees payable for the solemnization of any civil marriage or for 
any other duties to be performed by the Registrar of Marriages: 

(vii) the fees payable for the inspection of and for certified copies of, 
extracts from the Hindu Sacramental Marriage Register and the Hindu 
Civil Marriage Certificate Book: 

(viii) the form in which and the intervals within which copies of entries 
in the Hindu Sacramental Marriage Register and the Hindu Civil Marriage 
Certificate Book shall be sent to the Registrar Genral of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages; 

(ix) the particulars to be specified in applications for the recording of 
adoptions 

(x) the fees payable for recording adoptions; 

(xi) the form in which the Register of Adoptions shall be maintained; 
and 

(xii) the manner in which copies of entries in the Register of Adoptions 
may be certified. 

(161) 


139. Amendments and repeals. — The enactment mentioned to the third 
column of the First Schedule shall be amended to the extent specified in 
the fourth column thereof, and the enactments mentioned in the third column 
of the Second Schedule shall be repealed to the extent specified in the fourth 
column thereof. 


( 162 ) 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 200 

200 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(163) 

FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 139) 

Amendments 

Year | No. Short title Amendments 

2 3 4 

1872 III The Special Marriage 1. In the preamble, the words “and for persons 
Act, 1872 who profess the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or 

Jain a religion” shall be omitted, 

2. In section 2, the words “or between persons 
each of whom professes one or other of the 
following religions, mat is to say, the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religions” shall be 
omitted. 

3. Sections 23, 24, ***** 25 and 26 shall 
stand repealed. 















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


201 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 201 

FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 139) 


Amendments 


Year 

No. 

Short title 

Amendments 

1 

2 

3 

4 

1872 

III 

The Special Marriage 
Act, 1872. 

1. In the preamble, the words “and for persons 
who profess the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or 
Jaina religion” shall be omitted. 

2. In section 2, the words “or between persons 
each of whom professes one or other of the 
following religions, that is to say, the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religions” shall be 
omitted. 

3. Sections 23,24, except in so far as they effect 
succession to agricultural land in Governors’ 
Provinces, and the whole of sections 25 and 
26 shall stand repealed. 


( 163 ) 
















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(164) 

SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 139) 

Repeals 


Year 

No. 

Short title 

Extent of repeal 

i 

2 

3 

4 



Central Acts 


1866 

XXI 

The Native Converts’ Marriage 

The whole, in so far as it, in its 



Dissolution Act, 1866. 

application to Hindus, is inconsistent 




with the provisions of this Code. 

1923 

XII 

The Hindu Inheritance (Removal 

The whole. * * * * 



of Disabilities) Act, 1928. 


1929 

II 

The Hindu Law of Inheritance 

Do. 



(Amendment) Act, 1929. 


1937 

XVIII 

The Hindu Women’s Right to 

Do. 



property Act, 1937. 


1946 

XIX 

The Hindu Married Women’s 

Do. 



Right to Separate Residence 




and Maintenance Act, 1946. 


1946 

XXVIII 

The Hindu Marriage Disabilities 

Do. 



Removal Act, 1946. 




State Acts 


1933 

XXI 

The Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 

The whole except as provided in 




Parts V and VII. 

1933 

XXII 

The Madras Marumakkattayam 

Do. 



Act, 1932. 


1949 

IX 

The Madras Aliyasantana Act, 

Do. 



1949. 


(Kollom 

year) 



1100 

II 

The Travancore Nair Act, 1100. 

Do. 

1100 

III 

The TravancoreEzhava Act, 1100. 

Do. 

1101 

VI 

The Nanjinad Vellala Act, 1101. 

Do. 

1106 

III 

The Travancore Malayala 

The whole except as provided in 



Brahmin Act, 1106. 

Part VII. 

1108 

VII 

The Travancore Kshatriya Act, 

The whole except as provided in 



1108. 

Parts V and VII 

1115 

VII 

The Travancore Krishnavaka 




Marumakkathayee Act, 1115. 

Do. 

1107 

VIII 

The Cochin Thiyya Act, 1107. 

Do. 

1113 

XXIX 

The Cochin Nayar Act, 1113. 

Do. 

1113 

XXXIII 

The Cochin Marumakkathayam 

Do. 



Act, 1113. 


1114 

XVII 

The Cochin Nambudri Act. 1114. 

The whole except as provided in 




Parts VII. 

1115 

XVII 

The Cochin Makkathayam Thiyya 

The whole. 



Act, 1115. 
















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


203 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 203 


SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 139) 
Repeals 


Year 

No. 

Short title 

Extent of repeal 

1 

2 

3 

4 

1866 

XXI 

The Native Converts’ Marriage 
Dissolution Act, 1866. 

The whole, in so far as it, in its 
application to Hindus, is incon- 
sistent with the provisions of 
this Code. 

1928 

XII 

The Hindu Inheritance (Removal 
of Disabilities) Act, 1928. 

The whole except in so far as it 
affects succession to agricultural 
land in Governors’ Provinces. 

1929 

II 

The Hindu Law of Inheritance 
(Amendment) Act, 1929. 

Do. 

1937 

XVIII 

The Hindu Women’s Right to 
property Act, 1937. 

The whole 

1946 

XIX 

The Hindu Married Women’s 
Right to Separate Residence 
and Maintenance Act, 1946. 

Do. 

1946 

XXVIII 

The Hindu Marriage Disabilities 
Removal Act, 1946. 

Do. 


( 164 ) 
















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


204 


204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(165-67) 

THIRD SCHEDULE 
First Division 
[See section 5(a)] 
Sapinda Relationship 


Column 1 

1. Daughter. 

2. Daughter’s daughter. 

3. Son’s daughter. 

4. Daughter’s son’s daughter. 

5. Son’s son’s daughter. 

6. Daughter’s daughter’s son’s daughter. 

7. Daughter’s son’s son’s daughter. 

8. Son’s daughter’s son’s daughter. 

9. Son’s son’s son’s daughter. 

10. Mother. 

11. Sister. 

12. Sister’s daughter (niece). 

13. Brother’s daughter. 

14. Sister’s son’s daughter. 

15. Brother’s son’s daughter. 

16. Sister’s daughter’s son’s daughter. 

17. Sister’s son’s son’s daughter. 

18. Brother’s daughter’s son’s daughter. 

19. Brother’s son’s son’s daughter 

20. Mother’s mother. 

21. Mother’s sister. 

22. Mother’s sister’s daughter. 

23. Mother’s brother’s daughter. 

24. Mother’s sister’s son’s, daughter. 

25. Mother’s brother’s son’s daughter. 

26. Mother’s sister’s daughter’s son’s 
daughter. 

27. Mother’s sister’s son’s son’s daughter. 

28. Mother’s brother’s daughter’s son’s daughter. 

29. Mother’s brother’s son’s son’s daughter. 

30. Father’s mother. 

31. Father’s sister. 

32. Father’s sister’s daughter. 

33. Father’s brother’s daughter. 

34. Father’s sister’s son’s daughter. 

35. Father’s brother’s son’s daughter. 

36. Father’s sister’s daughter’s son’s 
daughter. 


Column 2 

1. Son. 

2. Son’s son. 

3. Daughter’s son. 

4. Son’s son’s son 

5. Daughter’s son’s son. 

6. Son’s daughter’s son’s son. 

7. Son’s son’s son’s son. 

8. Daughter’s daughter’s son’s son. 

9. Daughter’s son’s son’s son- 

10. Father’s 

11. Brother. 

12. Brother’s son. 

13. Sister’s son. 

14. Brother’s son’s son. 

15. Sister’s son’s son. 

16. Brother’s daughter’s son’s son. 

17. Brother’s son’s son’s son. 

18. Sister’s daughter’s son’s son. 

19. Sister’s son’s son’s son. 

20. Father’s father. 

21. Father’s brother. 

22. Father’s brother’s son. 

23. Father’s sister’s son. 

24. Father’s brother’s son’s son. 

25. Father’s sister’s son’s son. 

26. Father’s brother’s daughter’s son’s 
son. 

27. Father’s brother’s son’s son’s son. 

28. Father’s sister’s daughter’s son’s son. 

29. Father’s sister’s son’s son’s son. 

30. Mother’s father. 

31. Mother’s brother. 

32. Mother’s brother’s son. 

33. Mother’s sister’s son. 

34. Mother’s brother’s son’s son. 

35. Mother’s sister’s son’s son. 

36. Mother’s brother’s daughter’s 
son’s son. 






D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


205 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Column 1 Column 2 


37. 

Father’s sister’s son’s son’s daughter. 

37. 

Mother’s 

brother’s son’s son’s son. 

38. 

Father’s brother’s daughter’s son’s 
daughter. 

38. 

Mother’s 

sister’s daughter’s son’s son. 

39. 

Father’s brother’s son’s son’s 
daughter. 

39. 

Mother’s 

sister’s son’s son’s son. 

40. 

Father’s mother’s mother. 

40. 

Father’s 

father’s father. 

41. 

Father’s mother’s sister. 

41. 

Father’s 

father’s brother. 

42. 

Father’s mother’s sister’s daughter. 

42. 

Father’s 

father’s brother’s son. 

43. 

Father’s mother’s brother’s daughter. 

43. 

Father’s 

father’s sister’s son. 

44. 

Father’s mother’s sister’s son’s 
daughter. 

44. 

Father’s 

father’s brother’s son’s son. 

45. 

Father’s mother’s brother’s son’s 
daughter. 

45. 

Father’s 

father’s sister’s son’s son. 

46. 

Father’s mother’s sister’s daughter’s 
son’s daughter. 

46. 

Father’s father’s brother’s daughter’s 
son’s son. 

47. 

Father’s mother’s sister’s son’s son’s 
daughter. 

47. 

Father’s 

son. 

father’s brother’s son’s son’s 

48. 

Father’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s 
son’s daughter. 

48. 

Father’s father’s sister’s daughter’s 
son’s son. 

49. 

Father’s mother’s brother’s son’s son’s 
daughter. 

49. 

Father’s 

son. 

father’s sister’s son’s son’s 

50. 

Father’s father’s mother. 

50. 

Father’s 

mother’s father. 

51. 

Father’s father’s sister. 

51. 

Father’s 

mother’s brother. 

52. 

Father’s father’s sister’s daughter. 

52. 

Father’s 

mother’s brother’s son. 

53. 

Father’s father’s brother’s daughter. 

53. 

Father’s 

mother’s sister’s son. 

54. 

Father’s father’s sister’s son’s 
daughter. 

54. 

Father’s 

mother’s brother’s son’s son. 



(166) 



55. 

Father’s father’s brother’s son’s 
daughter. 

55. 

Father’s 

mother’s sister’s son’s son. 

56. 

Father’s father’s sister’s daughter’s 
son’s daughter. 

56. 

Father’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s 
son’s son. 

57. 

Father’s father’s sister’s son’s son’s 
daughter. 

57. 

Father’s 

son. 

mother’s brother’s son’s son’s 

58. 

Father’s father’s brother’s daughter’s 
son’s daughter. 

58. 

Father’s mother’s sister’s daughter’s 
son’s son. 

59. 

Father’s father’s brother’s son’s son’s 
daughter. 

50. 

Father’s 

son 

mother’s sister’s son’s son’s 

60. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s mother. 

60. 

Father’s 

father’s father’s father. 

61. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s sister. 

61. 

Father’s 

father’s father’s brother. 

62. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter. 

62. 

Father’s 

father’s father’s brother’s son. 

63. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
daughter. 

63. 

Father’s 

father’s father’s sister’s son. 

64. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
son’s daughter. 

64. 

Father’s father’s brother’s brother’s 
son’s son. 

65. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s daughter. 

65. 

Father’s 

son 

father’s father’s sister’s son’s 





D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


207 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K. -05- 12-2013 


208 


208 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Column 1 Column 2 


66. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

67. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
son’s son’s daughter. 

68. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

69. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s son’s daughter. 

70. Father’s mother’s father’s mother. 

71. Father’s mother’s father’s sister. 

72. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s 

daughter. 

73. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
daughter. 

74. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s son’s 
daughter. 

75. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
son’s daughter. 

76. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

77. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s son’s 

son’s daughter. 

78. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

79. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
son’s son’s daughter. 

80. Father’s father’s mother’s mother. 

81. Father’s father’s mother’s sister. 

82. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s 

daughter. 

83. Father’s father’s mothers brother’s 
daughter. 

84. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s son’s 
daughter. 

85. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s daughter. 

86. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

87. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s son’s 

son’s daughter. 

88. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

89. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s son’s daughter. 

90. Father’s father’s father’s mother. 

91. Father’s father’s father’s sister. 

92. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s 

daughter. 

93. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s 

daughter. 


66. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

67. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s son’s 
son’s son. 

68. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

69. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s son’s 
son’s son. 

70. Father’s father’s mother’s father. 

71. Father’s father’s mother’s brother. 

72. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 

son. 

73. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s son. 

74. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 

son’s son. 

75. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s son’s 
son. 

76. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

77. Father’s father’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s son’s son. 

78. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

79. Father’s father’s mother’s sister’s son’s 
son’s son. 

80. Father’s mother’s father’s father. 

81. Father’s mother’s father’s brother. 

82. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 

son. 

83. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s son. 

84. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 

son’s son. 

85. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s son’s 
son. 

86. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

87. Father’s mother’s father’s brother’s 
son’s son’s son. 

88. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

89. Father’s mother’s father’s sister’s son’s 
son’s son. 

90. Father’s mother’s mother’s father. 

91. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother. 

92. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 

son. 

93. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 

son. 





D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


209 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K. -05- 12-2013 


210 


210 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Column 1 Column 2 


94. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s son’s 
daughter. 

95. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s son’s 
daughter. 

96. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 

97. Father’s father’s father’s sister’s son’s 
son’s daughter 

98. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s daughter. 


(167) 

94. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s son. 

95. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
son’s son. 

96. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 

97. Father’s mother’s mother’s brother’s 
son’s son’s son. 

98. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter’s son’s son. 


99. Father’s father’s father’s brother’s son’s son’s 99. Father’s mother’s mother’s sister’s 
daughter. son’s son’s son. 


100. Husband’s brother’s widow. 


100. Husband’s brother’s son. 


101. Husband’s brother’s son’s widow. 


101. Husband’s father’s brother’s son. 


102. Husband’s brother’s son’s son’s widow. 102. Husband’s father’s father’s son. 


*Sr. No. 100 to 102 added by Dr. Ambedkar in his own handwriting -Ed. 






D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


211 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

168 

Second Division 

Degrees of Prohibited Relationship 


[See section 5 (b)] 


Column 1 


Column 2 

1. Mother. 

1. 

Father. 

2. Father’s widow (step mother). 

2. 

Mother’s husband (step father). 

3. Mother’s mother. 

3. 

Father’s father. 

4. Mother’s father’s widow (step grand- 
mother). 

4. 

Father’s mother’s husband (step grand- 
father). 

5. Mother’s mother’s mother. 

5. 

Father’s father’s father. 

6. Mother’s mother’s father’s widow (step 
great grand-mother). 

6. 

Father’s father’s mother’s husband 
(step great grand-father). 

7. Mother’s father’s mother. 

7. 

Father’s mother’s father. 

8. Mother’s father’s father’s widow (step 
great grand-mother). 

8. 

Father’s mother’s mother’s husband 
(step great grand-father). 

9. Father’s mother. 

9. 

Mother’s father. 

10. Father’s father’s widow (step grand- 
mother). 

10. 

Mother’s mother’s husband (step 
grand-father). 

11. Father’s mother’s mother. 

11. 

Mother’s father’s father. 

12. Father’s mother’s father’s widow 
(step great grand-mother). 

12. 

Mother’s father’s mother’s husband 
(step great grand-father). 

13. Father’s father’s mother. 

13. 

Mother’s Mother’s father. 

14. Father’s father’s father’s widow 
(step great grand-mother). 

14. 

Mother’s mother’s mother’s husband 
(step great grand-father). 

15. Daughter. 

15. 

Son. 

16. Son’s widow. 

16. 

Daughter’s husband. 

17. Daughter’s daughter. 

17. 

Son’s son. 

18. Daughter’s son’s widow. 

18. 

Son’s daughter’s husband. 

19. Son’s daughter. 

19. 

Daughter’s son. 

20. Son’s son’s widow. 

20. 

Daughter’s daughter’s husband. 

21. Daughter’s daughter’s daughter. 

21. 

Son’s son’s son. 

22. Daughter’s daughter’s son’s widow. 

22. 

Son’s son’s daughter’s husband. 

23. Daughter’s son’s daughter. 

23. 

Son’s daughter’s son. 

24. Daughter’s son’s son’s widow. 

24. 

Son’s daughter’s daughter’s husband. 

25. Son’s daughter’s daughter. 

25. 

Daughter’s son’s son. 

26. Son’s daughter’s son’s widow. 

26. 

Daughter’s son’s daughter’s husband. 

27. Son’s son’s daughter. 

27. 

Daughter’s daughter’s son. 

28. Son’s son’s son’s widow. 

28. 

Daughter’s daughter’s daughter’s 
husband. 

29. Sister. 

29. 

Brother. 

30. Sister’s daughter. 

30. 

Brother’s son. 

31. Brother’s daughter. 

31. 

Sister’s son. 

32. Mother’s sister. 

32. 

Mother’s brother. 

33. Father’s sister. 

33. 

Father’s brother. 

34. Father’s brother’s daughter. 

34. 

Father’s brother’s son 

35. Mother’s sister’s daughter. 

35. 

Mother’s sister’s son. 






D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


213 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(169) 

FOURTH SCHEDULE 


( See section 12) 

Notice of Marriage 

To a Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II 

of the Hindu Code for the District. 

We hereby give you notice that a civil marriage under Part II of the Hindu 
Code is intended to be solemnized between us within three calendar months 
from the date hereof. 


Names 

Condition 

Rank or profession 

Age 

Dwelling place 

A B 

Unmarried 

Widower 

Divorcee 

Land owner 



C D 

Spinster 

Widow 





Length of residence 


Witness our hands, this 


day of , 19 


(Signed) 


A B 
C D 


















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


215 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 215 

THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 12) 

Notice of Marriage 

To a Registrar of Hindu Marriages under 

Part II of the Hindu Code for the District. 

We hereby give you notice that a civil marriage under Part II of the Hindu 
Code is intended to be solemnized between us within three calendar months 
from the date hereof. 


Names 

Condition 

Rank or profession 

Age 

Dwelling place 

Length of residence 

A B 
C D 

Unmarried 

Widower 

Land owner 




Divorcee 

Spinster 

Widow 


Witness our hands, this day of , 19 

(Signed) A B 
C D 


( 169 ) 


















D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(170) 

FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 17) 

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM 

I. A B, hereby declare as follows: — 

1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower, as the case may 
be). 

2. I profess the Hindu religion (or the Buddhist, the Sikh or the Jaina 
religion, as the case may be). 

3. I have completed years of age. 

4. I am not related to C D (the bride) within the degrees of relationship 
prohibited by Part II of the Hindu Code. 

(And when the bridegroom has not completed the age of twenty-one years : 

5. The consent of M N, my father (or guardian, as the case may be), has 
been given to a marriage between myself and C D, and has not been revoked.) 

6. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if 
in making such statement, I either know or believe it to be false or do not 
believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine. 

(Signed) A B (the bridegroom). 

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE 

I, C D, hereby declare as follows: — 

1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower, as the case may 
be). 

2. I profess the Hindu religion (or the Buddhist, the Sikh or the Jaina 
religion, as the case may be). 

3. I have completed years of age. 

4. I am not related to A B (the bridegroom) within the degrees of 
relationship prohibited by Part II of the Hindu Code. 

(And when the bride has not completed the age of twenty-one unless she 
is a widow: 

5. The consent of O P, my father (or guardian, as the case may be), has 
been given to a marriage between myself and AB, and has not been revoked.) 

6. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if 
in making such statement, I either know or believe it to be false or do not 
believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine. 

(Signed) C D (the bride). 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


217 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 217 

FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 17) 

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM 

I. A B, hereby declare as follows: — 

1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower, as the case may 
be). 

2. I profess the Hindu religion (or the Buddhist, the Sikh or the Jaina 
religion, as the case may be). 

3. I have completed years of age. 

4. I am not related to C D (the bride) within the degrees of relationship 
prohibited by Part II of the Hindu Code. 

(And when the bridegroom has not completed the age of twenty-one years : 

5. The consent of M N, my father (or guardian, as the case may be), has 
been given to a marriage between myself and C D, and has not been revoked.) 

6. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if 
in making such statement, I either know or believe it to be false or do not 
believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine. 

(Signed) A B (the bridegroom). 

DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE 

1. C D, hereby declare as follows: — 

1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow, as the case may 
be). 

2. I profess the Hindu religion (or the Buddhist, the Sikh or the Jaina 
religion, as the case may be). 

3. I have completed years of age. 

4. I am not related to A B (the bridegroom) within the degrees of 
relationship prohibited by Part II of the Hindu Code. 

(And when the bride has not completed the age of twenty-one years unless 
she is a widow: 

5. The consent of O P, my father (or guardian, as the case may be), has 
been given to a marriage between myself and AB, and has not been revoked.) 

6. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if 
in making such statement, I either know or believe it to be false or do not 
believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine. 

(Signed) C D (the bride). 

(contd.) 219 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Signed in our presence by the above-named A B and C D. So far as we 
are aware, there is no lawful impediment to the marriage. 

G H "I 

I J (three witnesses). 

K L -I 

(And when the bridegroom or bride has not completed the age of twenty- 
one years, except in the case of a widow : 

Signed in my presence and with my consent by the above-named A B 
and C D; M N (O P, the father (or guardian) of the above-named A B (or 
C D, as the case may be). 

(Countersigned) E F, 

Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 
Hindu Code for the District of 

Dated the day of 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


219 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


219 


Signed in our presence by the above-named A B and C D. So far as we 
are aware, there is no lawful impediment to the marriage. 

G 


(And when the bridegroom or bride has not completed the age of twenty- 
one years, except in the case of a widow: 

Signed in my presence and with my consent by the above-named A B 
and C D; M N (O P) the lather (or guardian) of the above-named A B (or 
C D, as the case may be). 


I 


K 



(three witnesses). 


(Countersigned) E F, 
Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 


Dated the 


Hindu Code for the District of 

day of 


( 170 ) 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


220 


220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(171) 

SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 19) 

Registrar’s Certificate of Civil Marriage 

I, E F, certify that, on the of 19 , 

A B, and C D appeared before me and that each of them, in my presence 
and in the presence of three credible witnesses who have signed hereunder, 
made the declarations required by Part II of the Hindu Code and that a 
marriage under the said Part was solemnized between them in my presence. 

(Signed) E F, 

Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 
Hindu Code for the District of 



(signed) A 

B 


C 

D 


G 

H 1 


I 

J y (three witnesses) 


K 

L \ 

Dated this 

day of. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


221 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 221 


FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 19) 

Registratr’s Certificate of Civil Marriage 

I, E F, certify that, on the of 19 , 

A B, and C D appeared before me and that each of them, in my presence 
and in the presence of three credible witnesses who have signed hereunder, 
made the declarations required by Part II of the Hindu Code and that a 
marriage under the said Part was solemnized between them in my presence. 

(Signed) E F, 

Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 
Hindu Code for the District of 


(signed) A B 
C D 
G H 
I J 
K L 


(three witnesses) 


Dated this 


day of 


( 171 ) 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(172) 

SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 

Registratr’s Certificate of Dharmik Marriage 

I, E F, certify that A B and C D appeared before me this day and that 
each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three credible witnesses 
who have signed hereunder, declared that a Dharmik marriage was 

solemnized between them in a Hindu form on the day 

of 19 , and expressed their desire to have such 

marriage registered, and that in accordance with their desire, the said 
marriage has, this day, been registered under section 21 of Part II of the 

Hindu Code, having effect as such from the day of 

19 , the date on which an application was made 

for the registration of their marriage under section 21 aforesaid. 

The following children born to them after the solemnization of their 
marriage in the Hindu form as aforesaid shall be deemed to be, and always 
to have been, legitimate. 

[Here enter the names of the children, in the order of their dates of birth, 
specifying against each child the date of his or her birth.] 

(Signed) E F, 

Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 
Hindu Code for the District of 


(Signed) A 

B 


C 

D 


G 

H ' 

| 

I 

J 

Y (three witnesses) 

K 

L - 

1 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


223 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 223 

SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 

Registrar’s Certificate of Sacramental Marriage 

I, E F, certify that A B and C D appeared before me this day and that 
each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three credible witnesses 
who have signed hereunder, declared that a sacramental marriage was 

solemnized between them in a Hindu form on the day of 

19 , and expressed their desire to have such 

marriage registered, and that in accordance with their desire, the said 
marriage has, this day, been registered under section 21 of Part II of the 

Hindu Code, having effect as such from the day of 

19 , the date on which an application was made for the registration 

of their marriage under section 21 aforesaid. 

The following children bom to them after the solemnization of their 
marriage in the Hindu form as aforesaid shall be deemed to be, and always 
to have been, legitimate. 

[Here enter the names of the children, in the order of their dates of birth, 
specifying against each child the date of his or her birth.] 

(Signed) E F, 

Registrar of Hindu Marriages under Part II of the 
Hindu Code for the District of 


(Signed) A 

B 

C 

D 1 

G 

H [ 

I 

J J (three witnesses) 

K 

L 

(172) 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(173) 

EIGHTH SCHEDULE 

Preferential Heirs 
Class I 

(See section 98) 

Son; widow: * (a) daughter; son of a predeceased son; widow of a 
predeceased son; son of a predeceased son of a predeceased son; widow of 
a predeceased son of a predeceased son. 

Class II 

(See section 98) 

I. Father ; mother.* (b) 

II. (1) Son’s daughter, (2) daughter’s son, (3) daughter’s daughter. 

III. (1) Son’s daughter’s son. (2) son’s son’s daughter. (3) son’s daughter’s 
daughter. (4) brother. (5) sister. 

IV. (1) Daughter’s son’s son. (2) daughter’s son’s daughter. (3) daughter’s 
daughter’s son. (4) daughter’s daughter’s daughter. 

V. (1) Brother’s son, (2) sister’s son, (3) brother’s daughter and (4) sister’s 
daughter. 

VI. Father’s father; father’s mother. 

VII. Father’s widow; brother’s widow. 

VIII. Father’s brother; father’s sister. 

IX. Mother’s father; mother’s mother. 

X. Mother’s brother; mother’s sister. 

Explanation . — In this Schedule, references to a brother or sister, do not 
include references to a brother or sister by uterine blood. 


““Corrected as (a) ‘un-married daughter’ and (b) ‘ married daughter’ by Dr. Ambedkar 
in his personal copy. 






D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


225 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 225 

SEVENTH SCHEDULE 

Preferential Heirs 
Class I 

( See section 98) 

Son; widow : daughter; son of a predeceased son; widow of a predeceased 
son ; son of a predeceased son of a predeceased son ; widow of a predeceased 
son of a predeceased son. 

Class II 

(See section 98) 

I. Father; mother. 

II. (1) Son’s daughter, (2) daughter’s son, (3) daughter’s daughter. 

III. (1) Son’s daughter’s son, (2) son’s son’s daughter, (3) son’s daughter’s 
daughter, (4) daughter’s son’s son, (5) daughter’s son’s daughter, (6) 
daughter’s daughter’s son, (7) daughter’s daughter’s daughter. 

IV. Brother, sister. 

V. (1) Brother’s son, (2) sister’s son, (3) brother’s daughter and (4) sister’s 
daughter. 

VI. Father’s father; father’s mother. 

VII. Father’s widow; brother’s widow. 

VIII. Father’s brother; father’s sister. 

IX. Mother’s father; mother’s mother. 

X. Mother’s brother; mother’s sister. 

Explanation . — In this Schedule, references to a brother or sister, do not 
include references to a brother or sister by uterine blood. 

(173) 


• • 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


227 


SECTION III 

DISCUSSION ON THE HINDU CODE 
AFTER RETURN OF THE BILL 
FROM 

THE SELECT COMMITTEE 


11th FEBRUARY 1949 
TO 

14th DECEMBER 1950 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


229 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 229 


* HINDU MARRIAGES VALIDITY BILL 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): I move : 

“That the Bill to provide that marriages between Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
and their different castes and sub-castes are valid, be referred to a Select 
Committee consisting of Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir, Sardar Hukum 
Singh, Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, 
Shrimati G. Durgabai, Shrimati Renuka Ray, Shri Ramnath Goenka, Dr. 
Bakshi Tek Chand, Lala Achint Ram, Ch. Ranbir Singh, Shri Mahabir 
Tyagi, and the Mover and that the number of members whose presence 
shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

Sir, in making this motion, with your permission, I will just state what 
the present condition of the law is. At present in all matters, Hindus, Sikhs 
and Jains are bound by the Hindu Law. In regard to marriage today 
according to the terms of the Hindu Law, a marriage between a man and 
a woman belonging to different castes is not valid except in Bombay where 
anuloma marriages are allowed but the pratiloma marriages are not allowed. 
In Allahabad, Madras and Calcutta, the High Courts have been pleased to 
hold that even the anuloma marriages are not valid. 

As regards persons belonging to different religions, I should say here also 
the position is very indefinite. According to custom any marriage is allowed 
which may not be allowed according to the strict principles of the Hindu 
Law. For instance, in the Punjab even karvari and chandradari marriages 
are allowed, and though according to strict Hindu Law marriages between 
members of different Hindu communities are not allowed, by custom in many 
places such marriages are allowed. For instance, in Nepal such marriages 
are held to be valid. In the Punjab, which is not a caste-ridden Province, 
marriages between the Sikhs and Hindus have been held to be valid not 
by the courts but by the society in general. Their children have been allowed 
to inherit and they have been treated just as though the marriages have 
taken place according to law. As between Jains and Hindus previously no 
marriages used to take place, but at present the pendulum has swung the 
other way and marriages take place between Jains and Hindus, especially 
Jain Aggarwals and Hindu Aggarwals, but it is very doubtful if a Jain 
Aggarwal could marry validly a Shudra or a Brahman. As regards sub- 
divisions and sub-castes also, before the Act of 1946 was passed marriages 
between sub-divisions of the Hindu community were declared legal in some 
places and in others illegal. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. I, 11th February 1949, pp. 419-28. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


230 


230 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


But that is beside the point here. If sub-division and sub-caste is the 
same, then I am sorry to have used the word “sub-caste” here. The 
marriage between the members of the sub-divisions of the principal caste 
have already been legalised. In regard to the rest, for instance, if persons 
belonging to different religions and different castes want to marry, my 
humble submission is that according to the present law such marriages 
are not legal. At present, public opinion clearly demands that this must 
go and the marriage between persons of different faiths as well as of 
different castes should be made legal. At present there are many young 
men and women who want to marry beyond their castes. So far as public 
opinion goes, I am on sure ground that we are a solid rock of foundation 
for this measure. 

Taking it from a national standpoint, may I humbly submit to the 
House that to resolve the present friction between Hindus and Sikhs 
in the Punjab and to make them one solidified people if hundred girls 
of Sikhs and Hindus were married to hundred boys of Hindus and Sikhs, 
the whole trouble would have gone. In fact, I believe that if the Hindus 
and Muslims had married with each other, this Pakistan would not have 
been brought about. If we adopt this inter-marriage as a system among 
ourselves, I am prefectly sure that all the bitterness between the castes 
and the bitterness between persons of different faiths would go away. 

I do not understand why we should not adopt this measure. It may be 

said that the true principles of Hindus Dharm stand in our way, we 
are not well advised in adopting contrary measures. May I humbly submit 
that the first sloka in Mahabaratha begins in this manner that because 
there are not many Kshatriyas in the land, therefore some Brahmins 
may be brought and asked to procreate Kshatriyas. All our religion and 
our Vedic lore do tell us that among Hindus such marriages were not 
infrequent. As a matter of fact, before the caste system became 

stereotyped, it can very well be imagined that there was no prohibition 
among the Hindus for intermarriage so far as caste was concerned. 
Therefore taking it from the radical point of view, I should understand 
that there is no special difficulty with regard to this measure. 

But all the same, the point that I wish to make is that it is an 
enabling measure. It does not force any person to marry outside his 
caste. If a person so wishes, if a young man and a woman are so 

minded, if their parents are so minded, all I want is that the couple 
should be enabled to marry and their offsprings should be legitimate. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


231 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 231 


At present, if a Hindu wants to marry outside his caste, it is not as 
if he cannot effect his purpose by resort to falsehood. According to the 
Ary a Marriage Validation Act he can very well marry any Hindu outside 
his caste. Supposing a person does not belong to Arya Samaj, why should 
he have recourse to falsehood to effect his purpose ? Therefore, the thing 
which the law should care about is that persons be enabled to do things 
in a legal manner. I also know that according to the provisions of the 
Special Marriage Act (Act III of 1872) it was possible for a Hindu to 
contract a marriage under its unamended provisions provided he declared 
that he was a non-Hindu while continuing to be a Hindu. A very nice 
paradox is given in the Hindu Code by H. S. Gour in para 457. This 
is what it says: 

“It will thus be seen that the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act has 
created a paradox. If the Hindu declares himself to be a non-Hindu and 
marries, he remains subject to Hindu Law. If he does not so declare, he 
ceases to be subject to Hindu Law, giving rise to a conundrum : When 
is a Hindu a non-Hindu ? The answer is : When he marries as a Hindu 
under the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act.” 

When the Act of 1923 was passed — I have read the proceedings 
of that time — it appears that Dr, Gour was driven to a corner and he 
had to accept a situation which would never have been accepted had 
he been free. According to the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, the 
situation is very strange. If a person wants to marry outside his religion, 
say, a Hindu wants to marry a non-Hindu, then under the Amendment 
Act, “their previous rights are un-affected to the extent provided in the 
Caste Disabilities Removal Act.” But yet what happens if they marry 
? The disability which they will suffer from, I am going to describe from 
Gour’s Hindu Law. “Their previous rights are unaffected to the extent 
provided in the Caste Disabilities Removal Act. They no longer possess 
the right of adoption. And if the person so marrying is an adopted son, 
his adoptive father may, if so chooses, make another adoption.” So mat 
the poor man who wants to marry, his rights as an adopted son go away 
and his father is competent to have another adoption. Then, “such 
marriage has the effect of dissolving the joint family.” This is another 
very great disability. If a person wants to marry a non-Hindu, he must 
cease to be a Hindu so far as the joint family is concerned. Then, “ 
succession to their property and to the property of their issue is regulated 
by the Indian Succession Act.” My humble submission is that there is 
no reason why we should undergo these disabilities. Why should a man 
wants to marry a non-Hindu suffer from these things, which go to show 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that as a matter of fact he must renounce all the laws which are dear 
to him and which he has inherited from generations. This is a wrong 
provision and leads to fraud and many other evils. There is no doubt 
that from the old position the present position is a bit better. I know 
of cases in which Arya Samajists married before the Arya Marriage 
Validation Act was passed and for years together they did not declare 
themselves as husband and wife. They were afraid of declaring, and 
what would happen to their off-spring ? It may be said that at present 
the Hindu Code Bill is on the anvil, so where is the necessity for this 
measure at this stage ? I would beg of you to allow me to meet this 
point. 

In the first place, may submission is, I do not know when the Hindu 
Code Bill will be passed. It is doubtful if it will be passed in this 
session, next session or some other session. We do not know. Secondly, 
if this Bill is accepted, it would pave the way for such of the provisions 
of the Hindu Law as are given there and so it will be a help to passing 
that law. What would happen to many people who would not marry 
on account of this law not being there ? Or if a person dies will his 
rights to property not be affected ? At the same time, if this Bill is 
not allowed to be passed into law, many cases which could be governed 
by this law will be governed by the present law and people will suffer. 
The whole nation shall suffer in so far as we will not be able to make 
for conditions which would go to solidify the nation and make it 
homogeneous. 

It may be said, it is a case of piecemeal legislation. We all know many 
instances of such piecemeal legislation. We know that we passed in 1946 
the Act relating to validity of marriages between subsection of castes 
and then we passed in Bombay, the prevention of Bigamous Marriages 
Act; and many other laws have been passed. I do not know of any other 
objections that may be raised to this Bill. It is a very small measure 
and this is a one-class Bill. All that it says is that previous marriages 
will be regarded as valid and in future such marriages will be valid. 
It does not propose to do anything else. I did not, as a matter of fact, 
venture to come before the House with a straight motion that it be passed 
into law because I am afraid it is a convention of this House that all 
these measures should be taken to the Select Committee. 

I am anxious that in this session, we should be able to pass this 
measure into law, so that so far as the public is concerned, they will 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


233 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 233 


feel convinced that we mean business and we want to evolve a classless 
society. I know what I am saying may not be liked. I was taken to task 
for expressing such an opinion in the papers an opinion which I read today 
to the House but in this vital matter, we are not to fear anybody. Mahatma 
Gandhi has told us we must have a class-less society. This is the right way 
to have a class-less society. All differences between those people who are 
opposed to each other from the point of view of social rights, economic rights 
and political rights, will disappear and we will have one class-less society, 
if we adopt a measure like this. I would beseech the House to kindly pass 
this measure in this session after referring it to the Select Committee today. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to provide that marriages between Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
and their different castes and sub-castes are valid, be referred to a Select 
Committee consisting of Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir, Sardar Hukum 
Singh, Shri M. Anathasayanam Ayyangar, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, Shrimati 
G. Durgabai, Shrimati Renuka Ray, Shri Ramnath Goenka, Dr. Bakshi Tek 
Chand, Lala Achint Ram, Ch. Ranbir Singh, Shri Mahavir Tyagi and the 
Mover and that the number of members whose presence shall be necessary 
to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

The usual practice is to fix a date by which the report may be submitted 
to the House. With instructions to report by what date ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : By the end of this month, say the 28th 
of February. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : With instructions to report by the 28th of 
February, 1949. 

Shri K. Hanumanthaiya (Mysore State): Sir, I have great pleasure 
in welcoming this Bill, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava has advanced very 
good reasons in support of it. They hardly need any support or addition. 
Before August 1947, our watch-word was ‘freedom’ and Mahatma Gandhi 
gave us the phrase ‘quit India’ and after the attainment of freedom, 
Sardar Patel has given us the word consolidation. He is doing it on the 
political front and that is the greatest achievement that this country can 
boast of. ( Interruption ). And we have to do it also — may I say humbly 
with all sincerity and not with any levity — on the social front also. The great 
danger to India is ‘disruptive tendencies’, which are called communal 
tendencies and the marriage instruction is the bastion which keeps 
these various differences intact and in perpetuity. This measure in a very 
humble fashion makes a beginning to abolish those distinctions in times to 
come and consolidate the Hindu society to begin with. I heartily welcome 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-04 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


this measure and I suggest to the mover of this motion that he can take 
another Member into the Select Committee and I suggest Shrimati Annie 
Mascarene, M.A.B.L. being taken into the Select Committee. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have no objection to add the name. 

Shri K. M. Munshi (Bombay : General): I beg to support this 
motion. My honourable friend, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava was 
pleased to describe this measure as a small measure. I beg to differ 
from him. It is a very big measure and a very important one. It should 
have been passed not now, but forty years ago. When the question 
was first raised before the courts and when the courts held in different 
provinces that marriage between the Hindus of different castes were 
invalid for one reason or the other. But in those days the Government 
benches were not prepared to allow the Hindu community to be 
dynamic and wanted to perpetuate the old customs which were 
enshrined in text books composed 700 or 800 years ago. I remember 
a case, Sir, I think it was some 40 years ago, when the validity of 
the marriage of a widow, whose husband had died several years ago 
was raised before the Bombay High Court and the High Court held 
that after long years of married life and leading case where I tried 
for four years to establish that the marriage bet-after having grand 
children, her marriage was invalid because she happened to belong 
to a higher caste than her husband. I was concerned in another leading 
case where I tried for four years to establish that the marriage 
between a Hindu of higher caste with a wife of a lower caste was 
invalid. But for the fact that Sir Lallubhai Shaw was a judge of 
catholicity, perhaps I would have won the case, but even then the validity 
of anuloma marriage as we call them, — between the husband of a 
superior Hindu caste and the wife of an inferior Hindu caste — is not 
accepted as valid in some of the provinces. The question has also risen 
with regard to Hindus and Jains in part of the country. Hindus and 
Jains marry freely, but the point has always come before the lawyers 
for opinion whether a marriage between a Hindu and a Jain was valid. 
Now these are questions which ought to have been solved, as I said, 
years and years ago. But we have reached a stage when this must be 
solved immediately. 

My honourable friend, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava referred to the 
special case of the Punjab. It is not a special case of any particular 
province; it affects the whole of the country. On account of education, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


235 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 235 


on account of freedom marriages between members of different castes take 
place. But they find themselves in great difficulty on account of this doctrine 
of Hindu Law. I know, not one or two, but dozens of cases where the parties 
merely profess to marry under the Civil Marriage Act, though they do not 
want to do it; they hated doing it; they do not want to disturb the joint 
family; they do not want that the succession Act should apply to them; they 
do not want to separate themselves from their parents; but because of the 
unfortunate state of the law, they have to marry under the Civil Marriage 
Act. Therefore, I submit, Sir, this a crying grievance which requires to be 
remedied as early as possible. I am glad that the mover has accepted your 
suggestion about the 28th of February and this Bill should be passed as 
early as possible. 

There is one little point which I should like to mention and I am sure 
this deflect will be duly rectified in the Select Committee. The words as 
they stand are: 

Notwithstanding any text, rule, interpretation of Hindu Law, or any 
custom or usage to the contrary, no marriage among Hindus is or will 
he deemed to be invalid by reason of the fact that the parties thereto 
belong to different religions, castes or sub-castes. 

This might lead possibly to a construction that this provision only applies 
to marriages between parties who are alive. I think it should be made 
perfectly clear that even marriages of this character which have taken place 
in the past and in respect of which the question of succession arises should 
be deemed valid hereafter. I am sure proper rectification will be made in 
the Select Committee. I therefore, Sir, heartily support this motion. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi): I rise to support the motion 

which is before the House just as my honourable friend, Shri Munshi 
has pointed out, I also feel that it is a really very important measure. 
For many years one tiling which has been standing in the way of 
Hindu solidarity and also in the way of our national solidarity is this 
division of the Hindu society in castes. I feel the time has come when 
we should pass a measure like this which seeks to abolish these 
artificial barriers without any further delay. I know of instances where 
some of my close friends who did not believe in civil marriages had 
to resort to civil marriages, simply because they happened to choose 
a mate which belonged to a different caste. You are aware, Sir, that 
the Arya Samaj has always been a believer in caste system by ‘Guna 
and Karma'. In spite of the fact that the founder of the Arya Samaj 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


236 


236 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


preached that cult and from the very beginning they advocated that there was 
no caste by birth, Arya Samajists also had to suffer from the same disability 
from which other people are suffering today. 

It was after many years of struggle that the Arya Marriage Validation Act 
was passed. But, I find public opinion amongst Hindu has also advanced 
sufficiently and not only Arya Samajists but today many more Hindus do not 
recognise the artificial barriers placed by the caste system based on birth. 
Therefore, there is no reason why they should be forced to have recourse 
to the Arya Marriage Validation Act or to the Civil Marriage Act. Today, 
when public opinion has advanced, and when the caste barriers that have stood 
in the way of the solidarity of the Hindus and in the way of creating a national 
feeling, have gone, I feel the passage of a measure like this should not be 
delayed. 

There may of course be some point in saying that the Hindu Code is coming 
and therefore we should not have any piecemeal legislation. But along with 
many of my friends I too believe that a measure of this nature, which is 
in no way opposed to the reformist ideas contained in the Hindu Code, should 
not be delayed. Although, my honourable friend Dr. Ambedkar would like the 
Hindu Code to be passed into law this very session, many of us do not share 
that view. It may take time. After all, that is a very important measure and 
has got many controversial clauses. Therefore, I would urge that this measure 
should be welcomed by us and its passage should not be delayed. 

I wholeheartedly support the motion moved by my honourable friend Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava and I hope Dr. Ambedkar will also accept it and that 
the house will pass this small measure which is of great importance to Hindu 
Society, in this very session. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand (East Punjab : General): I wholeheartedly support 
the motion which Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava has made for referring this 
Bill to the Select Committee. The Bill has so far received support from various 
quarters of the House and I do hope that not a single discordant note will 
be raised against it. 

The Bill, if I may say so, is no new measure. A Bill almost 
on identical terms was introduced in the old Imperial Legislative 
Council as it was then called, in 1919 by the late Mr. Vitthalbhai 
Patel. That Bill was circulated for opinion. Of course, different opinions 
were expressed, the orthodox element opposing it, officials opposing it 
and a number of persons and societies supporting it. But, before the 
Bill could come up for consideration before the Council, the Montagu 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


237 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 237 


Chelmsford Reforms came into operation the council was dissolved and the 
Bill lapsed. After that, Dr. Gour attempted in 1923 to modify the old Bill 
of 1872 but then also, there was opposition and the Bill had to be modified 
in several particulars. It was only in the form of a civil marriage that persons 
of different castes or different sub-castes of Hindus could marry, sacramental 
marriages are not permitted. With regard to sacramental marriages under 
the Hindu Law, the position is different in the differnt provinces. Some 
provinces, as has been pointed out, permit what are called Anuloma 
Marriages ; other provinces do not allow that. In the latter provinces, the 
courts have held that though in some of the Smiritis, Anuloma marriages 
were permitted, they have become obsolete and they are not now recognised. 
In almost all Provinces, it is held that Pratiloma marriages are invalid. In 
the punjab and in some other provinces, where custom is the rule of decision, 
marriages between certain castes are allowed, but between certain other 
castes are not allowed. I think the time has now come when a bold step 
should be taken and this measure should be placed on the Statute book. 
No doubt, under the Hindu Code which is now before us, provisions to this 
effect have been made. The Hindu Code Bill is however a very comprehensive 
measure dealing with different subjects and covers a very much wider field. 
There is much opposition to some portions of it. We do not know how long 
it will take for the Bill to pass, in what form it will be passed, or whether 
it will be passed at all. <Shri L Krishnaswami Bharathi: “It will be passed.”) 
It will certainly take time. There is no reason therefore, so far as this matter 
is concerned, to delay the passage of this simple measure, with which I think 
most people are aggreed. I therefore support the motion. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U.P.: General): I do also want to have the honour 
of recording my support to this Bill of great reform as my honourable friend 
Mr. Munshi has said . 

It is long since india has suffered on account of communal 
differences. Marriages are the root cause and elections the ‘fruit-cause’ 
for all these differences; because, it is primarily at the time of the 
marriage that one enquires into the caste of the other. Every time 
when marriages are held, castes are enquired into. The next occasion, 
when the caste of a person is enquired into, is when one stands for 
election. Now that we have decided to have, joint electorates, we have 
to a great extent done away with the ‘fruit-cause’ of the communal 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


evil. Thus politically we have put ourselves on the right track. And as my 
friend Mr. Hanumanthaiya has just now said, the credit goes to the 

Honourable Sardar Patel for giving us political consolidation in the country. 
After this political consolidation, our next immediate need is to have social 
consolidation. This Bill will provide this need I am sure, if this Bill is passed 
into law, marriages will be free. I am a believer in free marriages. Now 
that India is free marriages must also be free and there should be no 

restrictions. I am sorry that the Bill has come at a very late stage in our 

lives: but let us pass this bill for our future generations to practice it. I 
hope that the country will enjoy the freedom given by this Act. I 

wholeheartedly support the motion. 

Shri Upendranath Barman (West Bengal: General): I also beg to accord 
my whole hearted support to the Bill and its reference to the Select 
Committee. In my mind, I am convinced of one thing. The circumstance that 
stands in the way of our national sense is the caste barrier. So long as 
it lasts, the different sections of the Hindu community and other non-Muslim 
communities cannot unite together and imbibe a sense of nationality in its 
true sense. So long as one knows that he cannot marry his son or daughter 
with the son or daughter of his neighbour, the true sense that they are 
one cannot come. I think that by passing this measure that barrier will be 
won. It is the sense of kinship that is the real basis of national sense and 
I wholeheartedly support this Bill and I hope that it will be passed into 
law as soon as possible. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): With regard 
to this Bill, there cannot be any difference of opinion between myself and 
my honourable friend the mover for the simple reason that the Bill is merely 
a part of the Hindu Code which I am sponsoring. My only objection to the 
Bill is that the Legislature having accepted the principle that the Hindu 
Law ought to be codified, it is wrong now to proceed piece-meal with the 
legislation. I have no objection, as I said, to the principles underlying the 
Bill. In fact those are the very principles which are embodied in the Hindu 
Code and therefore what I will suggest to my honourable friend is that either 
he should withdraw this Bill or postpone the consideration of the Bill so 
that we may know exactly what happens to the Hindu Code. 

I am afraid having regard to the fact that, I am sponsoring the Hindu 
Code and having regard to the fact that there being the motion 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


239 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 239 


before the house for consideration of the Bill as reported by the Select 
Committee, I am afraid I cannot take any other attitude than the one I 
have taken. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh rose — 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras: General) : How can he be 
allowed to speak ? 

The closure motion has been put. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I allowed Dr. Ambedkar to speak and he is not 
the sponsor. The question was not put. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh (East Punjab : General): English translation of the 
Hindi Speech ) Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, I have great pleasure in supporting 
this measure because I belong to that community amongst the Hindus who 
have always believed in the principle of mis Bill from the very outset. If 
there was any community amongst the Hindus which ever established 
relations outside its own sphere and that there existed no differences, it 
was the Jat community. It is true that there did exist some such element 
of difference and social ostracism but that was negligible. The very fact that 
this Bill will go a long way to establish throughout our country a principle 
in which we have believed since centuries past, affords me great pleasure 
to support this. 

Secondly, just as my honourable friend Mr. Tyagi has stated, this will 
banish our mutual differences which were responsible for our slavery. By 
the integration of small states our leader the Honourable Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel has consolidated our country into one and that problem has been well 
solved. This Bill is a very good measure for solving our social problems. 

So far as the Hindu Code Bill is concerned that is a big thing, It is not 
yet known whether or not the country or this House accepts it. It contaias 
some provisions over which our leaders have expressed some sort of 
difference. I, therefore, fail to understand how far it is correct to shelve 
or reject this Bill simply for the reason mat it forms part and parcel of 
that Bill, because if the Hindu Code Bill is passed, this measure will naturally 
be incorporated in it. If that is not passed, this Bill will at least have chances 
of being passed. 

With these words I whole-heartedly support this. 

Shri K. M. Munshi : Is it permissible for me to answer a point made 
by Dr. Ambedkar ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


240 


240 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


An Honourable Member: Pandit Bhargava can deal with it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I am very glad that all sections of 
the House have supported this measure. It is a measure of such a kind that 
I could not foresee with the highest flight of imagination that any sort of 
objection could be raised and I am very glad that this measure is liked by 
everybody. One objection has been raised and that is that since the Hindu 
Code Bill is on the anvil therefore, we should not proceed with this Bill. 
If the principles of this Bill and the principles which are the subject matter 
of the Hindu Code were antagonistic to each other, I could understand the 
objection, but where this measure proceeds on the same basis as the Hindu 
Code Bill, if we pass it in advance, it will really pave the way for the passing 
of the Hindu Code. I cannot understand how the passing of this will obstruct 
the passing of the Hindu Code — really it will accelerate its passage. May I 
enquire where is the law or rule or convention that if a Bill like the 
comprehensive Hindu code Bill is on the anvil therefore another Bill cannot 
be passed. There is no such convention. I cannot understand that if a measure 
is there which covers one of the points covered by another measure, therefore 
the second measure should not be passed. 

Bakshi Tek Chand has pointed out that this measure was a subject matter 
of a Bill in 1919 and this measure is associated with the name of our revered 
President V. J. Patel. Now in point of time I think so far as Hindu Code 
is concerned, this kind of measure is much anterior. In a matter of this kind, 
these technicalities even if they be valid, should not be allowed to stand. What 
would happen to those thousands of men and women if this Hindu Code Bill 
is not passed and I think it is not going to be taken clause by clause this 
session and it may go on to September or October and not passed in this 
Session because it is a controversial measure and it may take a year; what 
would happen to those young men and women who desire to marry according 
to the provisions of this Bill and our activities which certainly conduce to the 
formation and consolidation of one nation ? 

Sir, it is not a matter of joke. I am only helping Dr. Ambedkar 
whose marriage also will be legalised by this Bill. Why should he laugh 
at this ? This may or may not be applicable to him yet the disabilities 
if any will be removed. I know hundreds of people want to marry 
under this and is it wrong to marry under this rule ? I for one 
deprecate that anyone should place any obstacle to this Bill being 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


241 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 241 


passed in this session. If this measure is not passed in this Session all our 
efforts and Gandhiji’s efforts will be futile. So my submission is this and 
I beg Dr. Ambedkar to kindly withdraw his objection and agree to the passage 
of this Bill as soon as possible because this would also help him in getting 
this relevant portion of the Hindu code passed. 

Shri K. Hanumanthiya: Has the honourable member accepted the name 
of Shrimati Annie Mascarene which I have suggested ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, I suppose the honourable the Law minister 
wants to know the number of men on the waiting list. 

The question is : 

“That the Bill to provide that marriages between Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
and their different castes and sub-castes are valid, be referred to a Select 
Committee consisting of Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir, Sardur Hukum 
Singh, Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, 
Shrimati G. Durgabai, Shrimati Renuka Ray, Shri Ramnath Goenka, 
Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand, Lala Achint Ram, Ch. Ranbir Singh, Shri Mahavir 
Tyagi, Shrimati Annie Mascarene, and the Mover, with instructions to 
report by the 28th February 1949, and that the number of members whose 
presence shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall 
be five.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*HINDU CODE— contd. 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava — rose. 

Shri Jaspat Rai Kapoor (U. P. : General): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I have 
to raise a point of order which, if accepted, will bar any further discussion 
on the point of order raised in the previous session by my honourable friend 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. I therefore, submit that I be permitted to place my 
point of order for your consideration. 

Mr. Speaker : As Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava was on his legs, I think 
I ought to hear him first. I do not anticipate what he is going to say; I 
have my own views on the point of order raised but I will consider what 
Pandit Thakur Das has to say, 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab General): Sir, on 
the last occasion when the motion was made by the Honourable 
Dr. Ambedkar, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad took a point of order on the 
point that the Bill considered by the Select Committee was not the 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. I, Part II, 17th February 1949, pp. 614-21. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bill referred to it by the House. While that point was being considered. I 
was submitting for your consideration some grounds why the point of order 
was of great substance. While that was being done, you were pleased to 
stop the discussion and shorten the matter, as would appear on page 778 
of me Proceedings, dated 31st August 1948. At that time, Sir, you were 
pleased to tell us what was passing in your mind and you told us that you 
will consider at the proper time two or three questions which are given on 
page 779 of this report. The two questions which seemed to agitate your 
mind were, firstly, whether the Select Committee went out of its way and 
went beyond the scope, and secondly, whether the Select Committee has 
gone beyond the scope of the reference. These were the two questions. The 
debate was taking place when ultimately you decided as given on page 780, 
that you would study all the facts and then give a ruling. With regard to 
that, I beg to lay some points for your consideration in regard to the point 
of order raised by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Mr. Speaker: As I see from the report, what I stated there was this — 
I have not got the printed report but I have got the proof-sheets here. After 
the Honourable member Shri Biswanath Das had raised a point, I stated 
as follows : — 

“As I said, I am not deciding this matter at all. I am keeping open 
the whole thing including the point of order, because it will be seen that 
it involves large questions of fact and I must study all these things myself, 
which I have not yet done. Shall I leave the matter as it is ? 

Therefore, I left it for me to study it and I can now say that I have studied 

it. Whatever may have been said by honourable members with reference 
to the point of order, I have studied the report of the Select Committee, 
I have studied the first Bill and I have studied, of course, the other draft 
which was alleged to have come before the Select Committee. If the 

honourable member has to say anything with reference to that he may. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It is only with reference to that that 
I propose to speak just now. As a matter of fact, I also raised this very 
point of order, but Mr. Naziruddin was more fortunate in catching your eye. 
Therefore, I have something to say on this point. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam (U. P. : General): On a point of order 
to this point of order, Sir, according to the Rules of Procedure, I do 

not find any provision for any point of order after a report has been 

presented to this House. I would request the honourable member to 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


243 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 243 


quote that rule so that I may consult it and see for myself whether the 
point of order raised by the honourable member is not out of order. 

Mr. Speaker : These are obvious matters which need not be argued. If 
we differ on the substance of the matter, let us devote time to that substance 
rather than take up the time in the technicalities of the matter. If people 
are against the Code then it is a matter of substance. If they are in favour 
of it, even then it is a matter of substance. But let us not take the time 
of the House in technicalities. 

Subsequently, the point of order mentioned was that the Bill which was 
referred to the Select Committee was, on facts, not the Bill which the Select 
Committee considered and that therefore the report is based on something 
else. That is the point of order, put in short, and on that point of order 
arguments were addressed. If the honourable member Pandit Bhargava has 
to address or speak on facts, matters would stand differently; the matter 
is, I believe, covered amply by what Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad has stated. Has 
he to invite my attention to any other facts ? 

Shri J aspat Roy Kapoor : May I respectfully request you, Sir to permit 
me to place my point of order before, you ? It relates to the competency 
of this House, in the present session, to deal with this question at all; also, 
whether the point of order raised by my friend Mr. Naziruddin should be 
discussed in this session at all ? For, if my point of order is accepted it 
will shut out all discussion on the subject in the present session. 

Mr. Speaker: I think I will go step by step. Let the first point of order 
be disposed of. Assumsing that the first point of order goes in favour of 
the Bill, then the second point of order which the honourable member has 
raised is competent and therefore he may raise the point later on. 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor : My submission is that even the discussion 
of the point of order raised by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is a point which should 
be considered by this house and the question is whether it is competent 
to discuss the subject at all. 

Mr. Speaker: I do not agree that I should take that point first. 
It will be for the Chair to decide whether the Select Committee 
considered the Bill that was referred to it or something else, and 
whether, therefore, its report should or should not be taken into 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


consideration. After that is decided, it is perfectly competent for the 
honourable member to point out to me any points or any law or any practice 
by which this House is not competent to take into consideration the present 
Bill. That is the better way. Let us save time. 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor: May I say one word, Sir ? 

Mr. Speaker: No, no Pandit Bhargava. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I only propose to lay before you 
some facts and some law as it would apply to those facts. For instance, I 
beg to point out that the proceedings before the Select Committee was an 
abuse of the rules of this House. The privilege of this House has been violated 
by the Select Committee and by the procedure of the Law Department. 
Secondly, if my facts are correct, another Bill was considered and not the 
Bill which was referred to it by the House. The question which arises then 
would be a question of law, whether such a procedure was justified and 
whether this House should consider this report as a report on this Bill which 
was referred to the Select Committee or whether it is a document which 
is not valid in law and is not a legal document. I will therefore confine 
myself to the two types of questions which I submit are quite related. In 
regard to the substance also, with your permission, I will subsequently have 
something to say provided your ruling is that this question is also relevant. 
In my humble opinion, the question divide itself into two parts. Number 
one, whether the report which has been presented to the House is a good 
report from the procedural point of view. Number two, whether the report 
has gone beyond the scope of the Bill. I propose to address the House on 
the second question subsequently. 

First of all, with your permission, I will address the House on the first 
question before laying certain facts before the House. My humble submission 
is that according to what we have got in the Select Committee’s report and 
from the papers which have been circulated to us and which are found in 
the Library, I have come to the conclusion that after the Bill was referred 
to the Select Committee, the Law department just substituted another Bill 
for this Bill, and this Bill was considered by the Select Committee. I do 
not know whether these facts are absolutely correct, but I have consulted 
some members who were in the Select Committee and they have informed 
me about it and at the same time from the report of the Select Committee 
also it appears that as a matter of fact 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


245 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 245 


Mr. Speaker : I am afraid the honourable member is practically repeating 
what the honourable member Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad has said. It is the same 
thing. I have gone through the report myself bearing in mind the points raised 
and while I would like to give the honourable member the fullest liberty to 
place any other facts not included in Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad’s speech, I do 
not think we should go into the same repetition 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I do not like to repeat. I only want to 
know if these facts are taken to be correct. If ultimately another honourable 
member gets up and says these facts are wrong, then the whole argument 
would fall down. Therefore, I want to place before you how I have come to 
the conclusion that these facts are correct. If you take them as correct, I 
do not want to trouble the House and your goodself. I submit that as a matter 
of fact it appears from the report of the Select Committee itself that the 
substituted Bill was alone considered, because from the majority committee’s 
report as well as the dissentient’s report it appears that no other Bill was 
considered and the Bill which was referred to the Committee was not at all 
considered. 

Now, Sir, Dr. Ambedkar has kindly placed before us a comparative 
statement. If you will kindly see these tables, there are two parts, one shows 
how from this Bill the original Bill was different. He has given another table 
showing the difference between the Draft Bill and the Select Committee report. 
This also shows that only the re-drafted Bill was considered and not the 
original Bill. Any way, taking this to be the right tiling, if it is accepted 
that the re-drafted Bill was only considered, the question arises before you 
whether the re-drafted Bill could be considered by the Select Committee or 
not, and if this action of theirs is not tantamount to the breach of privileges 
of this House as well as abuse of the powers that this House granted to the 
Select Committee. Now, Sir, I may not be taken to say that there was any 
wrong motive behind it; such a course may have been intentional or non- 
intentional; it may have been done with the best of motives or with the 
worst of motives; I am not concerned with that. I am concerned with one 
central fact that the original Bill which this House referred to the Select 
Committee was never considered by the Select Committee. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Minister of State for 
Railways and Transport): On a point of order, I wish to know whether 
this House can go into the manner in which a Select Committee has 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


dealt with a Bill. In that case, it would require verbatim reports of all 
proceedings in a Select Committee. We can reject the report or accept the report 
or do anything with the report but how the Select Committee dealt with it 
is a matter which, I think is not relevant and it is not the practice of the 
House either to go into it. Otherwise, every future Select Committee will have 
to give us a verbatim record of its proceedings, so that we can judge of the 
propriety. . . . 

Mr. Speaker : I am afraid various points of order are being raised and 
stated too widely. As regards the present point, if the position is that the 
Bill which was sent by this House was not considered at all by the Select 
Committee, I think it would be perfectly competent to go into the question 
as to whether the Select Committee did or did not consider. Then the question 
will arise as to how far it would be permissible to go into the proceedings 
of the Select Committee and to that my present reaction is that this House 
or myself will not be sitting as a fact-finding committee or court, but we shall 
take into consideration — we are entitled to take into consideration — what the 
Select Committee itself has stated in its report, and therefore, the matter will 
be more or less one for inference — coming inferentially to some conclusion as 
to what the Select Committee did and not by taking evidence of every member 
of the Select Committee and taking extra evidence. Now, I may point out 
to my friend Pandit Bhargava, that in spite of all that he has said the 
argument is not being advanced any further. Whether you call it a breach 
of the privileges of the House or abuse of procedure, the argument, in short, 
comes to this — that the Select Committee considered a substitute Bill; that 
it did not consider the original Bill sent by this House, and that this conclusion 
is based on certain remarks or observations in the Select Committee report — 
majority as well as the minority report — and therefore he infers — to state 
more correctly — from these documents that the original Bill was never 
considered. That, in short, is the point of order. The question of breach 
of privilege or abuse of procedure will arise, if we come to the conclusion 
that the Select Committee did as he infers, but if we come to the conclusion 
that the Select Committee was not guilty in the manner in which he infers 
it to be, then the question of breach of privilege or abuse of procedure 
does not arise at all. I can assure honourable members that I have carefully 
gone through every point that the honourable member is going to read from 
the report of the Select Committee and, perhaps, something more also, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


247 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 247 


and I have my own conclusions about it. I think I can make the whole thing 
short by stating what I have felt about the Bill and decide the matter rather 
than take up the time of the House. That is my feeling in the matter. (Some 
Honourable Members: “Quite so, Sir.”) Anyway, we are not going to finish 
this Bill today. We can just clear the ground and I think without further going 
into arguments, I may perhaps .... 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I do not want to go further into 
arguments after having heard from you how things have taken place, but I 
do wish to place before you some of the ruling which I have got which go 
to show that this Bill as emerging out of Select Committee is abosultely 
unwarranted, illegal and vitiates the entire report of the Committee and before 
the House there is no report at all. This is my submission. If you will permit, 
I will place some rulings before you. 

Mr. Speaker: However, the rulings follow certain facts. In this case, it 
is alleged that, as a matter of fact, the Select Committee have failed to consider 
the original Bill. If that is established, then we shall have ample time to 
consider the rulings. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Nobody is denying this fact. 

Mr. Speaker : That is just the point, as the honourable member will 
see. When I give my ruling which I have carefully prepared after reading all 
the papers. If any further points arise after the facts as stated by me are 
accepted, then those points of order may be considered. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao (Madras : General): Before you give your ruling, 
is there no other method of knowing the truth except by inference ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): May I, with 
your permission, intervene for a minute to correct an impression which my 
friend Pandit Bhargava has sought to create in this House that the original 
Bill which was referred by this House to the Select Committee was never before 
the Select Committee ? I mink it is a gross mis-representation. If my honourable 
frined were to refer 

Mr. Speaker : I have myself studied the position in great details. I shall 
clarify it by reading out my decision. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava (Ajmer-Merwara): I have addi- 
tional facts. 


Mr. Speaker: Order, order. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: There is one additional fact which 
has not come to the notice of the Chair. I wrote a letter to the Law 
Department to find out whether any re-drafted Bill was printed. The 
information given to me was that only a few copies were printed and they 
were available in the library of the House. I have referred to that Bill and 
it is a fact that a re-drafted Bill was printed in July 1948 prior to the meeting 
of the Select Committee. That Bill was considered clause by clause by the 
Select Committee and that is the Bill that has emerged from the Select 
Committee with its report. The report mentions this. Therefore my respectful 
submission is that that re-drafted Bill may be taken into consideration to 
find out whether the Select Committee applied its mind to the Bill that 
was referred to it or some other re-drafted Bill that was printed under the 
signature of Dr. Ambedkar, after scrutiny of the original Bill and absolutely 
in a different form. That is a very important material and additional fact 
which I respectfully bring to the notice of the Chair before the ruling is 
given. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I have got a copy of that Bill with me. 
Mr. Speaker: I have some facts which honourable members do not have. 

The Point of Order that the Honourable the Law Minister’s motion for 
consideration of the Select Committee Report on Hindu Code is incompetent 
as raised by the honourable member Mr. Naziruddin and supported by a 
few other members on 31st August 1948, is based on a narrow limit of facts. 
The objection raised is presented as a chain of reasoning in the following 
form : 

“What the Select Committee considered was a ‘substitute’ of the original 
Bill in the form of ‘a revised draft’. Therefore the Select Committee did 
not consider the Bill referred to it, but ‘a new document’, and the present 
report of the Select Committee, being a report on a new document, there 
is no Select Committee Report on the original Bill. The Honourable the 
Law Minister’s motion for consideration of the Bill, as it emerged from 
the Select Committee, is, therefore, incompetent”. That is the substance 
of the Point of Order. (Shri Mahavir Tyagi: “Is that your ruling ?”) I believe 
I have stated the point correctly. 

None of the members, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava and Srijut Biswanath Das, who raised or supported the Point 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


249 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 249 


of Order, were members of the Select Committee and naturally, therefore, have 
no personal knowledge as to what was considered at the meetings of the Select 
Committee. They, therefore, relied upon some statements in the report of the 
Select Committee and inferred that the original Bill, as referred to the Select 
Committee, was not taken into consideration by them. 

The question thus raised is purely a question of facts, namely, whether 
the Bill referred to the Select Committee, meaning thereby the various 
substantive provisions thereof, as distinct from the form or sequence in which 
they were put, were or were not considered by the Select Committee; whether 
the Select Committee did or did not apply their mind to the substantive 
provisions of the Bill as referred to them. 

It is not disputed that the Select Committee had a right to add, to or 
to delete from or to improve upon the provisions of the Bill as referred, provided 
the additions, deletions or improvements, etc. suggested by the Select 
Committee are within the scope of the Bill I need not therefore, enter into 
this aspect, as no such question about the Select Committee having gone beyond 
the scope of the Bill is raised before me. 

I may now examine, in the light of the written as well as oral evidence 
before me, the statement of facts as formulated by the honourable members 
who have raised the Point of Order. 

I may shortly state the facts as to how the Bill that was introduced came 
to be framed. As stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Central 
Government, by their Resolution dated the 20th January 1944, ‘appointed a 
Hindu Law Committee for the purposes of formulating a Code of Hindu Law, 
which should be complete as far as possible.’ This was done in pursuance of 
‘a growing public opinion in the country in favour of a consolidated and uniform 
Code dealing with the different topics of Hindu Law for all the provinces 
and for all sections of the Hindu Society 1 . It was also felt that, in view of 
the ‘present conditions and trends in Hindu Society’ there is a great need to 
alter the law so as to make it fit the new pattern, to which the Hindu society 
seems to be rapidly adjusting itself.’ 

When the motion for reference of the BiU to the Select Committee 
was carried on 9th April 1948, there was hardly any time for honourable 
members to express themselves on the substance as weh as the form 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


250 


250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and the drafting of the Bill. The Ministry of Law, having felt that the Bill 
‘as drafted by the Hindu Law Committee did not conform to the canons 
of a Code’, decided to revise the draft of the Bill and to remove those defects, 
so as to enable one to have ‘a full and complete picture of the provisions 
of the Code’. They, therefore, undertook the task of re-arranging the parts 
and divisions of the original Bill in consecutive sections and in a logical 
sequence, and also made some further suggestions as they thought proper 
for consideration by the Select Committee. The Ministry of Law simply placed 
before the Select Committee a sort of a proper form in which the original 
Bill could have been shaped by the Select Committee themselves at their 
meetings or they could have directed the draftsmen to carry out the changes. 

It may be noted here that, while circulating the Code in a revised form, 
the Ministry of Law supplied to the members of the Select Committee an 
index also giving therein, for facility of reference, the place of a section in 
the revised Code with the corresponding section in the original Bill, as 
prepared by the Hindu Law Committee. The members of the Select 
Committee had thus before them, at all times and at every stage, the 
provisions of the Code as contained in the original Bill. The Ministry of Law 
further invited the attention of the members of the Select Committee to 
changes of substance suggested by them in the revised draft. It was, 
therefore, clear that at all stages of deliberations by the Select Committee 
of the provisions of the Bll, both the revised and the original were before 
them and the deliberations had proceeded on a comparative study of the 
original provisions and the provisions contained in the revision as suggested 
by the Ministry of Law. 

Coming to the question of evidence as to the above facts, the only member 
of the Select Committee who spoke with reference to the Point of Order 
was, Pandit Balkrishna Sharma. Pandit Balkrishna Sharma stated in the 
House: “The Bill which the House asked us to consider was always before 
us.” The evidence on record consisting of the main report, as also the 
dissenting minute, amply support this statement. The honourable members, 
who have raised this objection, relying upon passages in the Select 
Committee Report or the Dissenting Minutes seem to take certain passages 
out of the context and by themselves. This is what the main report says: 

“We, the undersigned, having considered the Bill” — not the revised 

draft — “have now the honour to submit etc.” This is how they begin the 

Report. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


251 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 251 


They speak of having considered the Bill and not the revised draft. But 
further they say as follows : — 

“The Draft Hindu Code, as introduced in the Legislature did not receive 
any departmental scrutiny prior to its introduction and the Ministry of 
Law have now produced a revised draft, which, in our opinion, is more 
satisfactory in several respects. This revised draft does not make any 
substantial changes in the body of the original Bill, but within the 
framework of the original Bill, it has recast it so as to be in the form 
in which Bills are usually presented to the Legislature.” 

So it will be clear that the Select Committee had applied their mind to 
the original Bill and had come to the conclusion that there was revision 
thereof, not in substance but in respect of the form only. 

They also mention the reasons why they considered the revised draft as 
better than the original one, and then they say: 

“Consequently we decided to confine our deliberations to the revised 
draft of the Bill.” 

The word “consequently” is important. Having seen the substantive 
provisions of the original Bill and the revised draft, it was natural and more 
appropriate to deliberate on the revised draft, which was nothing else than 
the substance of the original Bill in an improved form. The Select Committee 
further say : 

“References are given in the margin to each section indicating the 
corresponding section in the original Bill.” 

This is a further cogent proof that, though their deliberations were 
confined to the revised draft for finalising their conclusions, they had before 
them the view of each and every clause of the original Bill. This is made 
further very clear in the notes on clauses in which they deal with various 
parts and clauses of the Bill and state with reference to each part or clause 
the corresponding part or clause of the original Bill. 

The joint minute of dissent of Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand and Pandit 
Balkrishna Sharma says, in passing at one place, that what the Select 
Committee considered was the revised draft and not the original Bill. This 
has to be interpreted in the light of what has been said above. The place 
where they make a mention of the revised draft being considered, the point 
of their contention is that the changes suggested by the revised draft were 
not merely changes of form, but related to matters of substance. It may 
be remembered that, in their detailed and able minute, they did not make 
any point that the original Bill was not considered by the Select Committee. 
Whether the changes suggested by the revised draft are good or otherwise, 
is the point they are making in their minute of dissent. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On the facts, therefore, as disclosed by records, I am clear that the Select 
Committee had given full and due consideration to the substantive provisions 
of the Bill that was referred to them? and the present motion of the 
Honourable the Law Minister is, therefore, competent, and in order. 

Now, this being the decision on facts, what is the point of order of Mr. 
Kapoor ? 

An Honourable Member : We may adjourn now; it is past five O’clock. 
Mr. Speaker : The house may now adjourn. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Friday the 18th February 1949. 


(11-45 A.M.) * HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We will proceed to the consideration of the Hindu 
Code. 

Sbri Jaspat Roy Kapoor (U. P. : General): May I raise a point of 
order ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : A point of order has been raised by 

Mr. Kapoor. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law) : I was going 
to refer just to that. Sir, the Order Paper contains sixteen different motions, 
some of them raise points of order and some of them are siubstantive motions. 
I was going to express myself on them before I actually spoke on my motion. 
However, if my friend has to say something, let him do so. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us hear his point of order. 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor : Sir, on the previous occasion when the motion 
was being taken up I stood up to raise a point of order. I was then directed 
by the Honourable Speaker to wail until the point of order raised by my 
friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad had been disposed of. That point of order was 
disposed of that day exactly at 5 p. m. thereafter the House rose for the 
day. I hope you will be kind enough to allow me to raise that point of order 
now. But before I do so I want to assure the House that my object . . . 

*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 24th February 1949, pp. 821-52. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


253 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 253 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member will kindly state his point 
of order. There need be no apology or argument. I should like to hear the 
point of order. 

Shri J aspat Roy Kapoor : My point of order relates firstly to the rights 
and privileges of the members of this House and secondly to the competency 
of this House in the present Session to deal with such an important and 
controversial measure as the Hindu Code Bill when a large number of 
members of this House are not attending and cannot attend, not for personal 
reasons, or party reasons, but for reasons of state and in the interest of 
the country as a whole, being at present busy in the provincial legislatures 
with the budget sessions, although they are very anxious and eager to attend 
this House and participate in the discussion of this motion materially affects 
the whole Hindu society. 

Honourable Members : This is no point of order at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am here to decide whether it is a point of order 
or not. You will kindly bear with me. I expect he will conclude his sentence 
soon. 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor : I know many of my friends here are very 
impatient to proceed with the Bill. It was therefore, Sir, that I at the outset 
wanted to assure the House that my object is not to sabotage the Bill with 
many provisions of which I am in agreement. My object is that things should 
be done constitutionally, the right thing should be done at the right time 
and in the right manner. As you are aware .... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I have heard the point of order. The honourable 
Member feels that this House is not competent to proceed With this Bill. 
This is number one. Number two is that certain members, whom he would 
like to have in this House, are not here. Neither is a point of order against 
the motion for consideration being taken up. This is a sovereign Legislative 
Assembly fit to pass any legislation it likes. I have heard the point of order 
and do not want to hear any more arguments in favour of it. As regards 
the absence of some members, it is no doubt true that a number of members 
could not be here both from the Provinces and the States. But it is always 
open to them to come here and take part. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar : General): May I say,.... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: So far as the Chair is concerned and so far as 
this House is concerned, no such direction has been given and therefore the 
House is competent to proceed with its business. Honourable Members can 
come in at any time and take part in the debate. I rule out this point of 
order. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Babu Ramnarayan Singh : With all respect to you . . . 

Honourable Members : Order, order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I would not hear anything more. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : The previous ruling given by your 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have considered all the previous rulings. I have 
got them here. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): I wish also to raise one point of 
order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is it any point of order? 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Honourable Member will kindly briefly state 
the point of order. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : I shall be very brief. My point of order is this : 
That for the purposes of this Bill the provisions regarding publication have 
not been satisfied. It is due to the Chair to see that those provisions are 
observed. I refer to rule No. 20 which says : “As soon as may be after a 
Bill has been introduced, the Bill, unless it has already been published, shall 
be published in the Gazette .” There is also a provision that a report of a 
Select Committee has to be published with the amended Bill. My submission 
in this case is this : that the Bill was published originally sometime in April 
1947 before the Independence day. The political set-up of India has since 
changed and changed for the better. What I wanted to draw your attention 
to is this : That the Indian States which were not a part of the then British 
India were not to be affected by this Bill. Subsequently some States have 
merged and some have acceded to the Union in all subjects in August 1948. 
This is subsequent to the publication. There has been a Covenant of these 
States as the Chair may know sometime in August 1948. The result of 
that Covenant is that the States would now be automatically governed by 
any legislation which the Centre passes either in its powers of exclusive 
jurisdiction or concurrent jurisdiction. I therefore submit that it is the duty 
of the Chair to protect and guard the rights of the people of these States 
concerned who are affected by any Bill. I submit that the object of this is 
two-fold. Such provision enjoining publication enables the constituencies or the 
people affected by any Bill to express their reactions, their opinions and their 
feelings about it. I believe this is a fundamental principle of democracy that 
no Bill shall be passed unless the people affected thereby are given 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


255 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 255 

an opportunity to express their opinion thereon. Secondly, the object of this 
publication is that the members of this Assembly may have an opportunity 
to ascertain what their constituencies feel about it. I need not say that it 
is the duty of the members here not to represent their individual views. They 
have to represent the views of their constituencies when important matters 
are concerned. As far as details or minor matters are concerned they may 
have discretion to express their views. But when a measure affects the whole 
life, the whole structure of society, then in such cases, in such vital matters 
it is the duty of the members to ascertain the views of their constituencies 
and represent them here correctly. They should not state what they feel. They 
should state what their constituencies feel. For this purpose, it is necessary 
that the Bill should be published. I submit that the Bill was published in 
the Gazette, but it was not published at the time when the people of the 
acceding States and merged States were in a position to give that serious 
consideration to this Bill, which this Bill deserves. Therefore I submit it was 
not a proper publication, as far as those people are concerned and now, since 
the Chair is here to guard their interests, I appeal to the Chair to order 
that the Bill be published before it is taken up for consideration. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My reply to the point of order 
raised by my honourable friend is two-fold. In the first place, there is never 
any obligation cast upon this House for circulating any Bill for publication 
before the House can take the matter into consideration. It is only in special 
cases, when the House by a Resolution or the Government by any executive 
action desire that the Bill is so important that public opinion might be invited; 
that public opinion is invited. There is no such right, no obligation at all on 
the Legislature or on the Government and therefore, from that point of view 
the point of order is no point of order at all. 

My second submission with regard to the point of order is this, that we 
have deliberately confined the operation of this Bill to the provinces of India, 
and so far as the Provinces are concerned, the opinion has been canvassed 
three times, and I do not think any more purpose would be served by canvassing 
public opinion for the fourth time. When the occasion comes for the extension 
of the Bill to the Indian States, no doubt, this Legislature when a proper motion 
is placed before it, or the Government of the day, will take care that the wishes 
and the intentions of the States which have come into the Indian Union, will 
be consulted. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


256 


256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I agree with the Honourable Law Minister 
that inasmuch as the scope of this Bill is confined in the first instance 
only to Provinces of India and it is highly problematical whether it 

will be extended to the acceding States and if so, on what terms and 
conditions of accession, it will be time for them to consider whether 
they can come in or not. As regards the other one, it is not obligatory 

to send the Bill for circulation unless by a motion accepted by the 

12 NOON House. The Select Committee has considered this matter and 
has found tliis has not been so materially altered as to 

necessitate a republication in the Official Gazette. For these reasons I rule 
out the point of order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, before I proceed to speak 
on my motion, I think it would be desirable if I 

Shri B. Das (Orissa: General): There is obstruction everywhere. Everybody 
rises to a point of order. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad rose six months ago. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): It is a different point of 
order. My honourable friends should have a little patience. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can only state that honourable members will kindly 
consider well before they raise a point of order. I also expect they will 
consider that if it should turn out to be a dialatory motion, they will invoke 
upon themselves the criticism of the House. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My point of order is not dialtory. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is open to any honourable member to raise a 
point of order. An honourable member can take as many points of order 
as are reasonable and proper. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The objection to the point of order is dilatory. 
My point of order is this : the honourable Minister for Law has already 
spoken on this motion. He completed the first part of the motion and then 
the subsequent stages began. He has a right to reply at the end of the debate. 
Now the motion has been made that the Bill be taken into consideration 
and a speech has been delivered on the 31st of August, 1948. We have on 
the agenda a list of amendments. We have to proceed straight to the agenda 
and then when a motion is made the Honourable Minister ceriainly has a 
right of reply, and in the end a general right of reply. At this stage, the 
Honourable Minister can not make a second speech on the motion. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


257 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 257 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I find from the proceedings on the 31st of August, 
1948 the following : — 

“T/ie Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): Sir, I move : 
“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 
as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): Sir, on a point of order. 

Mr. Speaker : I shall hear the Honourable Minister first and then take 
the point of order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, in view of the urgency of other 
Government business which is on the agenda and to which Government 
feels it must give precedence, I do not propose to make a speech in support 
of my motion, because it is quite obvious that if I were to make a speech 
in support of my motion, that is bound to give rise to a debate which 
will result in the consumption of a great deal of the time of the 
Government. We have already few days let before the House is due to 
rise, and I, therefore, request you to allow this motion to stand over for 
further consideration in the next session of the Assembly.” 

In view of this, the Honourable Dr. Ambedkar is entitled to proceed. I am 
exceedingly sorry that this point of order has been raised. It is only a dilatory 
motion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I was going to say, it would 
facilitate my work a great deal if I were to know from you what procedure 
you propose to adopt with regard to the 16 motions that have been tabled 
as against the motion which I have made, and about which I propose to speak 
during the subsequent period. These 16 motions fall into three different 
categories. There are certain motions which propose that the Bill be further 
circulated for eliciting public opinion. There are certain motions which propose 
that the Bill be referred to a Select Committee, which is different from the 
Select Committee which already reported on the Bill. And there are motions 
which propose that the Bill may be re-committed to the same Select Committee 
which has already reported. 

There was one other or rather two other motions, one standing in the name 
of my honourable friend, Shri Prabhu Dayal Himatsingka and the other 
standing in the name of my honourable friend, Shri Biswanath Das, which 
propose that the Bill should be circulated to people residing in the acceding 
States, before the Bill could be taken into consideration. With regard to these 
two motions, a point of order was raised recently by my honourable friend, 
Shri V. S. Sarwate, which you have been good enough to dispose of and I 
therefore take it that motions Nos. 7 and 8 must be taken to have been deleted 
from the agenda of today. The other motions remain and I want to know 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


whether it is your desire that these motions may be put simultaneously along 
with my motion, so that all of them may be debated together and ultimately 
each motion may be put to the House separately, or whether you propose to 
have these motions taken up before my motion, so that they may be disposed 
of and the ground may be cleared for my speech on the motion, which I have 
tabled. 

I might say one or two points with regard to the motions that have been 
made. There are certain motions which you are bound to put, I agree, unless 
the movers of these motions by themselves voluntarily desire not to move these 
motions. There are certain motions which are within your discretion, and unless 
you are satisfied that these motions are not dilatory motions but have behind 
them certain points of substance, it would not be open in accordance with the 
rulings which have been given by previous speakers, who have dealt with these 
questions, to put these motions to the House, Because the Chair must be 
satisfied that they are motions behind which stand substantial grounds and 
they are not purely dialtory. For instance, the motion that, the Bill should 
not be taken into consideration now, but should be taken into consideration 
at some later stage is one of those motions, I submit, which according to the 
rulings of the Chair heretofore could fall within your discretion, where you 
are satisfied that the reasons advanced by my honourable friends are 
substantial reasons, and therefore, you should put the motion to the House. 
For instance, the motion for recommittal is one such motion, because if you 
will kindly refer to these two volumes of Rulings, — I am sure you have 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What I propose to do is this. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I should like to have your 
guidance in this matter. 

Mr. Deputy Sopeaker : I have considered this matter and the number 
of motions that have been tabled. So far as motions 1 and 2 are concerned, 
motion 1 is that the Bill as amended by the Select Committee be withdrawn. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): I do not propopse 
to move it at this stage: not that I am not entitled to move it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then it is not necessary to go into the question 
whether it is in order out of order. The second motion is 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not moving it at this stage. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


259 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 259 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then there is the amendment by Master Nand 
Lai that the consideration of the Bill be postponed to the Budget Session of 
1951. 

Master Nand Lai (East Punjab : General): I am not moving it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : These three withdrawals clear the ground. By 
whatever name they may be called, these three motions, substantially are for 
adjournment of the debate. I thought that, before the Honourable Law Minister, 
the mover of the Bill proceeds the movers of these motions must have risen 
in their seats and pressed for the taking up of these motions, because, before 
their motions are disposed of, the honourable mover could not be allowed 
to speak. Inasmuch as they were not moved, I kept quiet. Now it is clear 
they are withdrawn. The other motions viz, those for re-circulation or for 
reference to Select Committee, whatever their nature might be, they are 
motions which under the Rules any person is competent to make. It is a 
question for the House to deal with them. So far as the Select Committee 
motions are concerned, I must be satisfied in the first instance, about their 
need. Apart from that, there is a motion for recirculation with respect to which 
some such requirements have not been laid down, so far as I can see in any 
rule or rulings. Therefore, I propose at this stage to allow the mover of the 
Bill to make his speech and after he concludes his speech, allow the motions 
for Select Committee and Circulation to be moved without any speech. Then, 
the discussion will go on on all the motions and I will put them one after 
another to the House. 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am obliged for your guidance, 
Sir. As usual when presenting a motion for the consideration of a Bill as 
reported by the Select Committee it is the duty of the Chairman of the Select 
Committee, in the first instance, to draw the attention of the house to such 
changes as may have been made by the Select Committee in the original Bill 
which has been referred to the Select Committee. I propose to follow that 
procedure in the first instance. 

Sir, the first part of the Bill deals with marriage and divorce. So 
far as this part of the Bill is concerned, the Select Committee has 
added two clauses which relate to the restitution of conjugal rights 
and to judicial separation. These provisions specifically absent from 
the original Bill. The draftsmen of the original Bill felt themselves 
content by reference to the Indian Divorce Act of 1869 which contains 
provisions relating to the restitution of conjugal rights and judicial 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 24th February 1949, pp. 826-43. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


separation. The original draftsmen of the Bill felt that a reference in this Bill 
to the Indian Divorce Act would be quite sufficient to invoke these two 
provisions which were contained in the Indian Divorce Act and consequently 
it was not necessary expressly to mention these two matters in the Code. The 
select Committee felt otherwise. The select Committee felt that as this was 
going to be a complete Code of Hindu Law, it was wrong to leave the code 
incomplete, and so to say, legislate by reference. They therefore thought that, 
instead of leaving this matter to be invoked by reference to the Indian Divorce 
Act, it would be desirable to embody in the Code itself the provisions 
contained in the Indian Divorce Act relating to these matters and consequently 
the part dealing with marriage and divorce has been expanded by the Select 
Committee by the addition of the clauses relating to these two matters. The 
House will see that there is no change as a matter of fact between the original 
Bill and the Bill as drafted by the Select Committee. AH that is done is that 
what was done by reference to the Indian Divorce Act has been done expressly 
and positively by the inclusion in the Code of specific sections relating to 
these matters. 

With regard to adoption, the Select Committee has introduced a few new 
changes. The first change that they have made is that when a father is 
disqualified by reason of the fact that he had changed his religion and ceased 
to be a Hindu, the mother has been given the right to give a boy in adoption. 
In other words, change of religion by the father from Hinduism to some other 
religion has been introduced as disqualification in the matter of the right to 
give in adoption. Consequenly, a mother in those circumstances has been 
empowered to give a boy in adoption. Similarly, if a widow was there and 
there was a boy, that boy certainly could be given in adoption by the mother 
when the father was not living. There again, a disability has been introduced 
to the effect that if the widow ceased to be a Hindu, she would lose her right 
of giving the boy in adoption, which she would otherwise have. 

Another change which has been made by the Select Committee is 
with regard to the different modes of taking a boy in adoption. Hitherto, 
as the House knows, there are various forms of adoption. The main 
form of adoption which is recognised by the Smritis is what is 
known as the Dattaka form of adoption. In addition to the Dattaka 
form of adoption, there have prevailed in the various parts of India, 
customary forms of adoption such as Godha Adoption, Kritrima 
Adoption, Dwyamushyayana Adoption. The Select Committee felt that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


261 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 261 


as they were codifying the law, it is desirable not to allow any room for customs 
to grow, because the effect of customs being permitted would be to eat into 
the Code and make the Code after certain time null and void. Therefore, the 
Select Committee decided that if anybody wants to adopt under this Code, 
nobody can make any adoption except in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code, and Dattaka shall be the only form and no other. 

Then, Sir, we come to the question of the right of the adopted boy to 
divest the persons in whom property has been invested before the adoption 
takes place. As every member of this House, who is aware of the provisions 
of the Hindu Law, will know, under the existing Hindu law, it is permissible 
to a boy who has been adopted, no matter at what stage he has been adopted — 
he may have been adopted forty years after the death of the father — time 
makes no change at all in his rights — to file a suit to set aside any alienation 
or transfer of property made by the widow who has adopted him. Any amount 
of litigation goes on on this particular point. In fact, if anyone were to examine 
the total amount of litigation among the Hindus on the various points of Hindu 
law, I am sure they will find that litigation on the question of divesting the 
property by the adopted boy would be the largest volume. It is therefore 
desirable that this matter should be settled once and for all. The Rau 

committee adopted the procedure of dividing adoption into two categories — 
adoption made three years before the death of the father and the coming into 

operation of the Code: and adoption made after the Code. They laid down that 

a boy, if he was adopted three years before the death of the adoptive father 
would be entitled to the original rights which an adopted son had under 
the Hindu Code. But if he were adopted three years after he would not 
be entitled to set aside alienation. 

The second thing that happened as a result of adoption under the 

Hindu Law was that he completely divested the widowed mother who 

made the adoption, with the result that the entire corpus of the property 
passed into the hands of the adopted boy, who, in a certain sense 
was a stranger, and notwithstanding the notional change that he entered 
into the family of the adopted father, he practically continued his 

affiliations with the members of the natural family. The result was 
that after the adoption had taken place, instead of the adopting mother 
getting any kind of security for hereself as a result of adoption which 
a natural mother would get from a natural son, she found that this 

new adopted boy ran away with the property and left the mother with 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


noting but the right of maintenance. We thought that that was not a desirable 
state of affairs from the point of view of giving security to women, and 
consequently certain changes were made. The original distinction that was 
adopted in the Rau Committee was deleted and a provision was made that 
the rights of the adopted son shall accrue to him not form the date of the 
death of his adopting father but shall accrue to him form the date of his 
adoption, so that any alienation that may have been made prior to his adoption 
were beyond his reach, were unchallengeable by him. 

The second provision that we have made was that the adopted son shall 
not as a result of adoption deprive the adopting mother completely of her right 
of property. What the Bill says in its altered form is that only one half of 
the property of the widow will go to the adopted son. The other half, 
notwithstanding the fact that the widow has adopted will continue to be in 
the possession and enjoyment of the adopting mother. The result is that the 
Committee has permitted adoption which the Hindu community feels is a 
necessary thing for the purpose of perpetuating the family. But at the same 
time we have taken care to see that the adoption does not beggar the mother 
altogether. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is not that the result under the Deshmukh Act? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No. As I say, she gets only the 
maintenance. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: She gets half the share of the property. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As soon as the adoption takes 
place all that passes to the son. 

Shri Prabhu Dayal Himatsingka (West Bengal : General): According to 
the 1937 Act she is a co-heir with the son. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras : General): The son comes later 
on. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That may be so. Now 

I am coming to minority and guardianship. Here there are only two 
changes made by the Select Committee in this part of the Bill. The 
first change is that the power of the Hindu father as a natural guardian 
of his minor son has been taken away if he renounces the world or 
ceases to be a Hindu. The original law was that the father was the 
natural guardian and no matter what change took place in his condition 
either by his religion or in any other way, he still continued to be 
the guardian of his minor son. The Committee felt that as this was 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


263 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 263 


a Code intended to consolidate the Hindu society and their laws, it was desirable 
to impose this condition, namely, that the father shall continue to be the 
natural guardian so long as he continues to be a Hindu. The Code in its 
altered form also has introduced another change, namely, that a Hindu widow 
has been given power to appoint a testmentary guardian if her husband has 
not appointed anyone. She had not any such power and this power has been 
given to her by the Select Committe. 

Now, Sir, I come to the part of the Bill which deals with succession and 
I will first refer to changes made in the succession to males. Now so far as 
what are called the compact series of heirs under the Hindu Law, which are 
placed in category I by the Rau Committee is concerned, the Select Committee 
has made no alteration at all. The compact series remains as it is, both in 
the line of heirs as well as in the order of heirs. That matter has not been 
altered at all. But with regard to persons which are included in clauses 1 
to 4 of the Rau Committee, certain changes have been made both in the 
matter of the line of succession and also in the matter of priority of succession. 
The Committee has followed both the principles, namely, propinquity as well 
as natural love and affection, and it is on that basis that the Select Committee 
has made certain alterations in the heirs set out in clauses 1 to 4 of the 
original Bill. The select Committee has also done one thing more : it has 
curtailed the number of degrees of agnates and cognates who can become heirs 
to the deceased, and also it has removed the other heirs, such as for instance, 
heirs which are not related, such as Sam Brahmchari Guru and so on. The 
reason why the Select Committee has curtailed the number of heirs as provided 
for in the original Bill is this. We are under this code giving the right to make 
a will to every Hindu. A line of criticism has been levelled in a very important 
journal, namely, the journal of Comparative Legislation, in which a very 
eminent lawyer has made the point that when you give the right to make 
a will, it is unnecessary to provide such a long list of heirs which extend to 
the fourteenth degree from the deceased. If the deceased is interested in a 
man which is related to him in the fourteenth degree and is alive at the 
time of his death, it is open to him to make a will and to give a part of 
his property to the particular person in whom he is interested. 

If the deceased himself during his lifetime has not chosen to 
remember a relation who is related to him by the 14th degree there 
is no particular reason why because of mere intestacy he should be 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


264 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


permitted to come in for a share. That is one of the reasons why the Select 
Committee adopted this provision. 

I might also draw the attention of the House to the fact that with regard 
to widows a disqualification has been introduced by the Select Committee which 
says that a widow on remarriage shall lose her right of inheritance. 

Then with regard to the daughter’s share, which of course existed in the 
original Bill itself, the Select Committee has made a somewhat important 
alteration. The original Bill said that the daughter shall get a share equal 
to half the share of the son and in order to make equity equitable in devising 
the line of succession to the Stridhan property of the woman they had also 
provided that in that case the son will take one half of what the daughter 
takes, so that the daughter will take one half in the father’s and the son 
will take one half in the mother’s property. I cannot say that that was an 
inequitable proposition but somehow the Select Committee and I believe I 
can say against the best part of their judgement increased in their enthusiasm 
the share of the daughter in father’s property from one half to one full share, 
equal to that of the son. (An honourable Member: “The son is also given.”) 
I am aware of that. With regard to succession to females there are only two 
changes which the Select Committee has made. Under the existing rule the 
husband of a woman in the case of succession to females comes much later 
under the Hindu law and that provision was included by the old Rau 
Committee. The Select Committee felt that that was rather unjust, because 
it may be (it is often possible) that much of the property which is called Stridhan 
property or property which comes into the hands of a woman may, and perhaps 
does, to a very large extent come from the husband and if the husband is 
the principal source of the property, that comes into the hands of the woman, 
it is not proper that it should be postponed to other heirs. Consequently the 
Select Committee altered the provision and brought the husband in line with 
the other Stridhan heirs, so that the husband now shares simultaneously with 
the heirs of a woman, who share in the Stridhan property. As I said that 
because that increased the share of the daughter in the father’s, they also 
pari passu made the share of the son in the mother’s Stridhan property 
equal to that of the daughter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They balanced the son and daughter. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No change has been made in 
the law relating to maintenance which is worthy of requiring any mention 
to this House. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


265 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 265 


Then I come to the question of the joint family. It has been said that 
the provisions contained in the Bill as it has emerged from the Select Committee 
contained provisions relating to joint family which are absolutely new. I would 
like to take this occasion to repudiate that suggestion. No change has been 
done by the Select Committee. The provisions of the Mitakshara joint family 
were originally contained in the Bill as drafted by the Rau Committee and 
it was placed before this House on the 9th August, which the House accepted 
and sent to the Select Committee. (Honourable Members: 9th April) Therefore 
my first submission is that no new change has been made by this Select 
Committee. All that the Select Committee has done is to add two new clauses — 
clause No. 88 and clause No. 89. Clause 88 deals with the doctrine of what 
is called pious obligations. Clause 89 deals with the liability of the joint family 
to pay joint family debts. It was unnecessary to include these clauses, because 
once you break up coparcenary property it is not necessary to make any express 
provision with regard to the doctrine of pious obligation, because the doctrine 
of pious obligation is necessary where there is survivorship property : because 
by survivorship where A takes the property of B and the property of B is 
encumbered with debts, no special doctrine is necessary to impose an obligation 
upon B; because in hereditament which a person gets, he takes both the profit 
and the burden of it. But in view of the theory of the Mitakshara that every 
coparcener gets the property by survivorship, which does not belong to the 
deceased, the Patna high Court, if I may say so, as well as the Bombay High 
Court Bar pressed upon us very strongly that it was very desirable that these 
two things which were implicit, so to say, in the Mitakshara doctrine of 
joint family, shall be stated expressly in the Code, so that when the question 
of judicial interpretation arises there may be no occasion for any kind of 
dispute, doubt or controversy. As one of the objects of the code was to make 
the law clear not merely to the lawyers but to the ordinary citizens and 
as it is a suggestion which came from such a weighty authority as the 
Patna High Court and the Bombay High Court Bar, we thought it desirable 
to introduce these two things, namely no obligation to pay debts on the 
original ground of pious obligation and the liability to pay primary debts 
which belong to the family. Besides that there has been no change at all. 
If my friends have some doubt still on the subject that we have made 
fundamental changes in regard to the joint family of the mitakshara, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I would like to draw their attention to section 86 (Part v : Joint Family 
Property). Section 86 of the new Bill as it has emerged from the Select 
Committee is the same word for word, except for ordinary verbal changes, 
as part III-A section 2, on page 12 of the original Bill as drafted by the Rau 
Committee. Similarly section 87 which also deals with joint property is word 
for word the same as part III-A, section 2, page 12. Anybody who compares 
the two I am sure will accept the proposition which I have enunciated in 
this House that this is not an innovation by the Select Committee at all but 
they form part and parcel of the original Bill as drafted by the Rau 
Committee. 

I should like to dispel any further doubt that may exist on this point 
by referring to the Rau Committee’s Report (page 13). This is what the Rau 
Committee says (paragraph 51): 

“Turning now to the contents of the Draft Code the main proposals on 
which differences of opinion have manifested themselves in varying degree 
are the following : 

(1) the abolition of the right by birth and the principle of survivorship 
and the substitution of the Dayabhaga for Mitakshra in the Mitakshra 
Provinces; 

(2) giving of half a share to the daughter; 

(3) the conversion of the Hindu woman’s limited estate into an absolute 
estate; 

(4) the introduction of monogamy as a rule of law; 

(5) the introduction of certain provisions for divorce.” 

I think Hon. Members will see that the Rau Committee in setting about 
its work made it perfectly known to everybody in this country that the Code 
that they had framed and which subsequently was embodied by them did 
contain the specific provision. I have no doubt about it that anybody who has 
read the volumes of evidence which have been collected by them previsouly 
by the joint Select Committee appointed by this House, by the Rau Comittee 
and by this Government by an executive order — would find that there is no 
person either in this House or outside, who has paid any attention to this 
part of the Code, who will be under any wrong impression that the Rau 
Committee had decided or propsoed that this co-parcenary should not be 
abolished. It is therefore not a new innovation of the Select Committee at 
all. 

The Select Committee has made some changes with regard to the 
application of the Hindu Code. The Rau Committee’s Bill contained a 
provision that the Bill should not extend to areas to which the 
Marumakkattayam and Aliyasanthanam laws apply. Somehow the Select 
Committee in its enthusiasm transgressed, if I may say so without 
any disrespect, the bounds of reasonablnness and came to the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


267 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 267 


conclusion that there ought to be no area which ought to be exempt from 
the operation of this Code. Consequently they deleted the provision. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In the interests of uniformity. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know whether it was 
done rightly or wrongly; that is a matter which the house will consider at 
a later stage. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava (Ajmer-Merwara): May I ask whether 
the honourable speaker was dissenting from that view ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will dissent at a later stage 
perhaps. I have no empty mind but I have still an open mind. 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar: General): Not a vacant mind ! 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : On every question I hope. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, in the ordinary course a 
speech of the sort which I have made is generally regarded not only 
appropriate but sufficient for the occasion. But it would be futile on my part 
to disguise the fact that there is a section — if not a large section, a section 
in the house — which feels a certain amount of compunction over certains parts 
of the Bill. Neither can I disguise from myself the fact that outside the House 
there are many people who are not only interested in the Bill but, if I may 
say so, very deeply concerned about it. I therefore think that it is only right, 
if you will permit me, to add a few general observations with regard to the 
points of controversy which I have noticed in several newspapers which I have 
been persuing ever since the Bill has been on the anvil. I will take this matter 
also part by part and section by section. I will deal only with what I regard 
have been considered as points of controversy. Let me take marriage and 
divorce. Here I find that there are three points of controversy. — The first point 
of controversy is abolition of castes as a necessary requirement for a valid 
marriage; the second point of controversy is the prescription of monogamy; 
and the third point of controversy is permission for divorce. 

I will take the first point of controversy, namely — abolition of caste 

restrictions. So far as this Bill is concerned, what it does is to arrive 
at a sort of compromise betweeen the new and the old. The Bill says 

that if member of a Hindu community wants to follow the orthodox 

system which requires that a marriage shall not be valid unless the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

bride and bridegroom belong to the same varna, the same caste or the same 
sub-caste, there is nothing in this Code which can prevent him from giving 
effect to his wishes or giving effect to what he regards as his dharma. In 
the same way if one Hindu who is a reformist and who does not believe 
in varna, caste or sub-caste, chooses to marry a girl outside his varna, outside 
his caste, outside his sub-caste , the law regards his marriage also as valid. 
So far as the marriage law is concerned there is therefore no kind of imposition 
at all. The vydhikas, the orthodox, are left free to do what they think is right 
according to their dharma. The reformers who do not follow dharma but who 
follow reason, who follow conscience, have also been left to follow their reason 
and their conscience. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P. : General): Are they permitted to marry 
outside their religion also if their conscience directs them in that manner? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, we will have another Bill 
for that. I do not know whether my honourable friend Mr. Tyagi is unmarried. 
If he is I will hurry it up. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : I want to make way for others. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Consequently, what will happen 
in Hindu society so far as marriage law is concerned if there will be a 
competition between the old and the new. And we hope that those who are 
following the new path will win subsequently. But, as I say, if they do not, 
we are quite content to allow two parallel systems of marriage to be operative 
in this country and anyone may make his choice. There is no violation of 
a shastra, no violation of a smriti at all. 

With regard to monogamy it may be that it is a new innovation. But I 
must point out that I do think that any Member in this house will be able 
to point out having regard to customary law or having regard to our shastras 
that a Hindu husband had at all times an unfettered, unqualified right to 
polygamy. That was never the case. Even today, in certain parts of South India 
there are people who follow this, a section of the Nattukottai Chettiyars — 
the case has been reported in the Reports of the Privy Council itself, I 
am not depending on mere heresay evidence — but among the Nattukottai 
Chettiyars there is a custom that a husband cannot marry a second wife unless 
he obtains the consent of his wife. Secondly, when a consent is obtained, he 
must allot to her certain property which I think in the Tamil language 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


269 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 269 


is called moppu. That property becomes her absolute property so that if after 
her consent the husband marries and ill-treats her, she has a certain amount 
of economic competence in her own hands to lead an independent life. I cite 
that as an illustration to show that there has not been an unqualified right 
for polygamy. 

A second illustration which I would like to give would be from the 
Arthashastra of Kautilya. I do not know how many Members of the House 
have perused that book, I suppose many of them have. If they have, they 
will realise that the right to marry a second wife has been considerably limited 
by Kautilya. In the first place, no man can marry for the first ten or twelve 
years because he must be satisfied that the woman is not capable of producing 
children. That was one limitation. The second limitation imposed by Kautilya 
on the right of second marriage was that the husband was to return to the 
woman all the stridhan that she had acquired at the time of marriage. It 
is only under these two conditions that Kautilya’s Arthashastra permitted a 
Hindu husband to marry a second time. 

Thirdly, in our own country, in the ligislation that has been passed in various 
Provinces, monogamy has been prescribed. For instance in the 
marumakkathayam and the aliyasanthanam law both of them prescribe 
monogamy as a rule of marital life. Similarly, with regard to the recent 
legislation that has been passed in Bombay or in Madras, similarly in Baroda, 
the law is the law of monogamy. 

I hope the House will see from the instances I have given that we are 
not making any very radical or revolutionary change. We have precedent for 
what we are doing, both in the laws that have been passed by various States 
in India, also in the ancient shastras such as Kautilya’s Arthashastra. If 
I may go further, we have got the precedent of the whole world which 
recognises monogamy as the most salutary principle so far as marital relations 
are concerned. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi) : What about the Mohammadan Law? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We shall come to Mohammadan 
law when we discuss the Mohammadan law. 

Coming to the question of divorce, there again I should like to 
submit to the House that this is in no way an innovation. Everybody 
in this House knows that communities which are called shudra have 
customary divorce and what is the total of what we call shudra ? 
Nobody has ever probably made any calculation as to the total number 
of shudras who go to compose the Hindu society, but I have not the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


slightest doubt in my mind that the shucLras form practically 90 per cent of 
the total population of the Hindus. What are called the Regenerated classes 
probably do not fill more than ten per cent of the total population of this 
country, and the question that I want to ask of honourable Members is this : 
are you going to have the law of the 90 per cent of the people as the general 
law of this country, or are you going to have the law of the 10 per cent 
of the people being imposed upon the 90 per cent ? That is a simple question 
which every Member must answer and can answer. 

So far as the ‘regenerated’ classes are concerned there was a time, if one 
refers for instance to the time when the Narada smriti or the Parashara smriti 
were written, when the smritis recognised that a woman can divorce her 
husband when he has abandoned her, when he died, when he has taken 
parivrija, and she was entitled to have a second husband. Consequently, it 
may be that at a later stage I shah read to you some extracts from your shastras 
to show. (An honourable member: “Your shastras”). Yes, because I belong to 
the other caste. 

I shall read the extracts to show that what has happened in this country 
is that somehow, unfortunately, unnoticed, unconsciously, custom has been 
Allowed to trample upon the text of the shastras which were all in favour 
of the right sort of marital relations. My submission, therefore, to the house 
is that so far as any new principles have been introduced in the law of 
marriage or divorce, whatever has been done is both just and reasonable and 
supported by precedent not only of our shastras but the experience of the world 
as a whole. 

With regard to adoption, there are again three points of controversy. One 
point of controversy with regard to adoption is this, that like the old Hindu 
law we do not make similarity or identity of caste a requisite for a vahd 
adoption. We follow the same rule that we have fohowed with regard to 
marriage. Here again, I may say that if a Brahmin wants to adopt a Brahmin 
boy, he is free to do so. If a Kayasth wants to adopt a Kayasth boy, he is 
free to do so. If a Shudra wants to adopt a boy of his own community he 
is free to do so. If a Brahmin is so enlightened as not to adopt a boy belonging 
to his own community but adopts a Shudra, he is also permitted to do so. 
There is therefore no kind of imposition. 

Seth Govind Das (C. P. and Berar: General): Why do you consider such 
a Brahmin enlightened ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, I do not know. From 
my point of view certainly he is enhghtened; from your point of view he may 
be a very dark man, but that is a difference of opinion. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


271 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 271 


With regard to the question of the limitation on the right of an adopted 
son to challenge all alienations made by the widow before adoption, I do not 
think that there can be any controversy at all. There is no reason why we 
should continue the notion that a boy when adopted becomes the son of the 
adopted father right from the time when the adopted father died. This is 
a pure fiction. It has no value at all. It is not merely a fiction; it is a fiction 
which gives rise to tremendous litigation and tremendous difficulties. It is 
therefore right that the adoption should be simultaneous with the vesting 
of the property. I do not think any member of the House will think that 
this is a proposition which we ought not to accept at this stage. <$hri B. Das : 
“We all accept”.) 

Similarly, as I have stated, the limitation upon the right of a boy who is 
adopted to divest the mother completely and to make her nothing more than 
a dependant waiting for such maintenance as the adopted boy may give, I 
do not think that there is any member of the House who will think that such 
a situation can be justified on any ground whatsoever. I think it is right that 
we preserve the right of adoption which the orthodox community cherishes 
so much, but, Sir, I do not understand why there should be adoption. Most 
of us who make adoptions have no name to be recorded in history. Personally, 
I myself certainly would not like my name to go down in history, because 
my record is probably very poor. I am an unusual member of the Hindu 
community. But there are many who have no records to go down and I do 
not understand why they should indulge in adopting a son — a stupid boy, 
uneducated, without any character — not knowing his possibilities and fastening 
him and fathering him upon a poor woman, whom he can deprive of every 
property that she possessed. Therefore, my submission is this, that if you do 
want to cherish your old notions with regard to adoption at any rate make 
this provision that the adopted boy does not altogether deprive the mother 
of the property which is her mainstay. I do not think that that limitation 
can be at all a point of controversy. 

With regard to the question of the abolition of customary adoption, 
I would like to say two things. There is a general argument which 
the House will be able to appreciate. It is this. A Code is inconsistent 
with customary law. That is a fundamental proposition. If you allow 
a Code to remain and at the same time permit custom to grow and 
custom to plead against the Code, there is no purpose in having a 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


272 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Code at all, because a custom can always eat into the Code and make the 
Code null and void. With regard to this particular matter of customary 
adoption such as Krithrim adoption, Godha adoption and Dwaimushayan 
adoption, my submission is this, that these are really not adoption at all. 
As the Privy Council in one of its rulings has definitely stated, adoption 
is purely a religious affair. The getting of property by the adopted son is 
a secondary matter. He may get property, he may not get property, and 
even though he may not get property his adoption from a religious point 
of view may be valid. Therefore, my submission is this, that all these 
customary adoptions are nothing else but devices to keep property within 
the two families which enter into this bargain, and in my judgement, since 
we have passed the Constitution and included in the Directive Principles 
one article saying that the State should take steps not to allow property 
being concentrated in the hands of one or a few, such devices like the 
Dwaimushayan where two parties merely agree to share the property and 
keep it with them ought not to be tolerated. Besides, there is no reason 
why parties who want to make a genuine adoption should not conform to 
the rules and regulations regarding the Dattaka adoption which is permitted 
by the law. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is now one o’clock. The honourable Minister 
may continue after Lunch. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till half Past Two of the Clock. 


The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of the Clock, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) in the Chair. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I want not to take up 
the points of controversy relating to the topic of co-parcenary law. The 
question is raised : Why does the Bill wish to seek to abolish the 
co-parcenary which is prescribed by what is called the Mitakshara law? 
Now, Sir, having applied my mind in the best way I can for the 
proper exposition of this subjects, I think this is a question which 
required to be considered from three different points of view. One is 
how large a volume of property is included within the ambit of what 
is called co-parcenary property. If the volume that is comprised 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


273 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 273 


within what is called co-parcenary property is a very large part of the 
property which a man in these days holds, then no doubt some serious attention 
will have to be paid to this question. Therefore, that is the first aspect of 
the question that one has to examine. 

The second aspect that we have to consider with regard to the retention 
of what is called co-parcenary property is whether any coparcener had 
individually the right to alienate property. Thirdly, whether any cop-parcener 
has a right in himself to break up the coparcenary. Obviously, if the property 
included within the class of property called co-parcenary property is a small 
part of the property, different questions will arise. Similarly, if any co-parcener, 
under the present existing Hindu law, has already got the right to alienate 
his share in the property, then obviously, the question whether this law or 
this Bill is abrogating co-parcenary property would stand on a different footing. 
Similarly, if under the existing Hindu law a coparcener has an inherent right 
to break up a co-parcenary, then my submission is that the question that this 
Bill breaks up the co-parcenary becomes very much less momentous than 
is thought of by most members of the House as well as people outside. 

Let me therefore take the first question : What is the extent of the non- 
co-parcenary property which a co-parcener may hold, notwithstanding the fact 
that he is a member of the co-parcenary ? Now, my friends, who have paid 
attention to this subject and know what the position is under the Hindu law, 
will know that there is no disqualification upon a co-parcener to hold separate 
property while he continues to be a co-parcener. A co-parcener may have 
capacity to hold two different sorts of property — property which belongs to 
the co-parcenary and property which does not belong to the coparcenary, but 
belongs to himself and does not go, by what is called survivorship. 

Let me give the House some idea of the extent and nature of the property 
which a co-parcener can hold, although he is a co-parcener. I have taken from 
the existing text books on the Hindu law, the following categories of property 
which a co-parcener can hold, notwithstanding the fact that he is a co-parcener. 
Firstly, property inherited by a hindu from a person other than his father, 
grand-father and great grand-father. If a Hindu gets property from a person 
who is not his father, grand-father or great grand-father, that property is 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


274 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in his hand and is separate property and does not belong to the coparcenary. 
Secondly, property inherited by him from his maternal grand father, thirdly 
gift of ancestral moveables made to him by his father and fourthly property 
granted by government to an individual who is a member of the co-parcenary 
becomes his personal property and not the property of the co-parcenary. Then 
fifthly we have ancestral property lost to the family and recovered without 
the aid of the family property. That also, although originally co-parcenary 
property, becomes his private property. Then sixthly, there is the income 
from separate property and purchases made from the income of such 
property. They are also private property. 7, share of a co-parcener by 
partition if he has not male issue. 8, property held by a sole surviving co- 
parcener when there is no widow with the power to adopt. 9, separate earning 
of a member of a joint family co-parcenary and 10, gains of learning. Such 
vast amount of property included in these 10 categories is today under the 
Mithakshara law the private property of a co-parcener. It does not become 
the property of the co-parcenary. 

Let me illustrate this by one plain illustration. There are hundreds and 
hundreds of clerks in our Secretariat, some drawing small salaries, some 
drawing huge salaries more than the salaries of the Members of the 
Cabinet — Rs. 4,000 (Honourable Members : “Clerks ? Are they clerks ?”) I 
mean officers. In a certain sense they are glorified clerks. 

The point I want to put to the house is this : that such large income 
as gains of learning, which come up in individual cases to Rs. 4,000, if there 
was a joint family in the true sense of the word, ought to go to the joint 
family for the joint maintenance of that family. What happens ? Under the 
Gains of Learning Act passed only a few years ago, this very Assembly, 
not I mean the Members, passed a law that such gains of learning, 
which form, as I say, the principal part of the income of a joint family 
and which a member is enabled to earn by reason of the education 
that was given to him out of the family income, have now been made his 
personal and private income. My submission to the House is this : when 
so large a property, as I have mentioned, included in these ten different 
categories have already been made in modification of the original laws of 
Mitakshara private property, what is the balance of property that is left 
which can be said to comprise the co-parcenary property ? My submission 
is that really very, very small volume of property is left to comprise within 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


275 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 275 


what is called the co-parcenary. Let me take the other question. It is said 
that the co-parcenary — I hope Members understand that coparcenary is 
something very narrow and very limited and it is not the same thing as 
a joint family, which is quite a different matter — system enables the Hindus 
to preserve the property, to retain it, that there can be no break-up, there 
can be no squandering of money so to say on the part of any member of 
the family. A question that I want to put to the House is this : Is it true 
under the existing law of the Mitakshara that this property cannot be 
alienated, cannot be squandered ? The answer is completely in the negative. 
Let me give you one or two illustrations. I am taking the case of the father. 
The father can alienate joint property for antecedent debt. All that the father 
has to do is to first of all create a debt, say one thousand or two thousand 
rupees on a personal promissory note. Subsequently, after six months he 
becomes entitled to sell the whole of the co-parcenary property, if that becomes 
necessary for the purpose of meeting that antecedent debt. Now, a submission 
that I want to make to the House is this : Does the lodgment of such enormous 
power in the hands of a father to sell the property for purely antecedent and 
personal debts ? I want the house to bear in mind that the Mitakshara law 
makes a distinction between the father and the manager so far as the alienation 
of property is concerned. True a manager cannot alienate a property belonging 
to the co-parcenary unless and until it is proved that there is a family necessity 
for which alienation is necessary. But with regard to the father, there is no 
such obligation at all. A father can create a debt personally for himself and 
he becomes entitled to alienate that property for a purely personal debt which 
has not been incurred for the pruposes of the family. The only limitation that 
is imposed upon the right of the alienation of the father under the Mitakshara 
law is that the debt must not be impious, must not be for an immoral purpose 
and if it is not immoral, then the father can alienate the whole of the property 
of the co-parcenary. There is no limit at all. 

Similarly, take the case of the son. It is also under the Mitakshara 
law within the competence of a son to demand the partition of the 
family property at any time he likes. I could have well understood 
the argument for the conservation of the co-parcenary property if the 
rule of Hindu Law was that no co-parcener was entitled to alienate 
the property, that the property must remain the property of the 
coparcenary, but that is not the case. The root of dissolution, the root 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of destruction of the co-parcenary property is in the co-parcenary itself, because 
it is the co-parcenary law that gives a vested right, a right from the very 
birth to demand partition of the property and disrupt the whole of the society. 

Thirdly, even if a son does not alienate his property, he can create a debt 
on the property for his own personal pruposes and the creditor who has 
advanced that money under Mitakshara law has a perfect right to sue for 
the partition of the co-parcenary in order to recover his debt. A stranger, 
therefore, under the Mitakshara law has a right to break up the co-parcener. 
I would like to ask my honourable friends, who are worried about this matter, 
where a large part of the estate, of the assets lies outside the co-parcenary 
property and so far as the co-parcenary property is concerned, the father has 
a right to alienate without any kind of limitation except the immorality of 
the debt, the son has a right to break up the property at any time he likes 
and the son has a right to create a charge on the property enabling the creditor 
to sue for partition, is it something which might be called a solid system, 
which is fool-proof and knave-proof ? My submission is this, that the co- 
parcenary property law as it stands, contains within itself the elements of 
disruption. Therefore, the Bill is doing nothing very radical in saying that the 
share shall be held separately. As we all know to-day the condition is such 
that everybody wants to live separately. The moment a father dies, the sons 
claim that there shall be a legal recognition to facts, as they exist to-day. There 
is nothing that is radical at all in this part of the Bill. 

Of course, I should say one thing which I think is generally not realized. 
I started by saying that a distinction has to be made between co-parcenary 
and joint family. This Bill while it does away with coparcenary, maintains 
the joint family. It does not come in the way of the joint family being 
maintained. The only thing is that the joint family in the Mitakshara law will 
be on the same footing and of the same character as the joint family under 
the Dayabhaga law. It must not be supposed that because the mitakshara law 
docs not prevail in Bengal that there is no joint family. There is a joint family. 
The only distinction will be that the members of the joints family instead of 
holding their rights as joint tenants, will hold them as tenants in common. 
That will be the only distinction that will be between the existing law in the 
Mitakshara and the future law in the Mitakshara. 

Now, I come to woman’s property. I do not know how many members 
of this house are familiar with the intricacies of this subject. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


277 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 277 

So far as I have been able to study this subject, I do not think that there 
is any subject in the Hindu Law which is so complicated, so intricate as the 
women’s property (An honourable Member: “As the woman herself ”) : As the 
woman herself. If you ask the question, what is stridhan, before answering 
that question, you have to ask another question and find an answer for it. 
You must first of all ask, ‘is she a maiden’ or ‘is she a married woman’. Because 
what property is stridhan and what property is not stridhan depends upon 
the status of the woman. Certain property is stridhanam if she has obtained 
it while she is a maiden; certain property is not stridhan if she has obtained 
it after marriage. Consequently, if you ask the question what is the line of 
inheritance to the stridhan, you have again to ask the question whether the 
stridhan belongs to a maiden or the stridhan belongs to a married woman. 
Because, the line of succession to the stridhan of a maiden is quite different 
from the line of succession to the stridhan belonging to a married woman. 
When you come to the question of succession to married woman’s property, 
you have again to ask the question, does she belong to the Bengal School or 
does she belong to the Mitakshara School. If you ask the question whether 
she belongs to the Mitakshara school, you will never be able to find a definite 
answer unless you probe further and ask whether she belongs to the Mithila 
School or the Benares School or some other School. This is a most complicated 
subject. At the same time, I should like honourable members to bear two 
things in mind. One is this : so far as women’s property is concerned., generally 
speaking, it falls into two categories. One category is called her stridhan 
and the other is called widow’s property. The latter property is property which 
she inherits from a male member of her family, and according to the existing 
law property which she owns only during her fife time and subsequently that 
property passes to the reversioners of the male heir. That is the position. 

Therefore, so far as women’s property is concerned, we have two 
different sorts of inheritance and two different sets of property, stridhan 
property and widow’s property. The heirs to stridhan property are quite 
different and distinct from the heirs to the property she inherits from 
a male member. The question, therefore, we have to consider in 
codifying this particular branch of the Hindu Law is this. Are you 
going to maintain the two principal divisions which exist at present, 
namely, stridhan property and widow’s property? Secondly, are you going 
to maintain the double line of succession; one fine of succession 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


278 


278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


for the stridhan property and another line of succession for widow’s property ? 
These are the two principal questions which arise when one begin to codify 
this law. The Committee came to the conclusion that so far as codification 
was concerned, its purpose would be defeated if we allow the present chaos 
to continue. We must either decide that a woman will not be entitled to have 
absolute property or we must decide that a woman should have absolute 
property. We must also decide what should be the line of heirs for a woman: 
whether they should be uniform or they should be different. The Committee 
came to the conclusion that so far as right to property is concerned, there 
should be uniformity and uniformity should recognise that the woman has 
absolute property. 

I know a great deal of the argument that is always urged against women 
getting absolute property. It is said that women are imbecile; it is said that 
they are always subject to the influence of all sorts of people and consequently, 
it would be very dangerous to leave women in the world subject to the 
influences of all sorts of wily men who may influence them in one way or 
another to dispose of property both to the detriment of themselves as well 
as to the detriment of the family from which they have inherited the family 
property. The view that, the Committee has taken is a very simple one. In 
certain matters or certain kinds of property which is called stridhan property 
the Smritis are prepared to invest woman with absolute right. There can be 
no question at all that a woman has an absolute right over her stridhan 
property. She can dispose it of in any way she likes. My submission to the 
House is this. If the woman can be trusted to dispose of her stridhanam 
property in the best way she likes, and nobody has ever raised an argument 
for the obliteration of that rule of Mitakshara, the burden of proof lies upon 
the opponents who say that the other part of the property, namely, widow’s 
estate, which the woman has inherited, should not become her absolute 
property. It is they who must prove that while the women are competent to 
dispose of a certain part of the property which they possess, they are not 
competent to dispose of a certain other part. The Committee, on a very careful 
examination, failed to find a satisfactory solution of this dilemma. The 
Committee, in my judgement, very rightly, came to the conclusion that if in 
certain cases women were competent and intelligent to sell and dispose of 
their property, they must be held to be competent in respect of the disposal 
of the other property also. That is the reason why the Committee have made 
this rule that women should now possess absolute property. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


279 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 279 


The other question that arises on this issue, namely women’s property 
is the share of the daughter. I know it would be a very great under-statement 
to say that this is a ticklish question; it is a very anxious question. There 
are many people in this world, in India today, both orthodox and unorthodox 
who cannot help producing daughters; they do. I do not know what would 
happen to this world if daughters were not born. At the same time, they 
do not want to extend to the daughter the same love and affection which 
a parent is bound to extend both to the male and female issue. But, I am 
not going to use any such high level of argument in favour of the proposition 
which has been enunciated by the Select Committee; I am going to speak 
on a much lower tone. The first thing that. I would like to address myself 
to this house is this. The inclusion of the daughter among the heirs is not 
an innovation which is made by this Committee. Honourable members who 
are familiar with the law of inheritance as it prevails both under the 
Mitakshara and Dayabagha, I am sure, will admit that the daughter is 
included by both of them under what is called the compact series. As 
members will know, Hindu heirs are divided into several. categories. The first 
category, is called, compact series. After that, there is a series of heirs spoken 
of as Sapindas, then comes samanodaks. After that comes the bandhus. 
Bandhus are divided into three categories : Atma bandhus, Pitru bandhus 
and Matru bandhus. The compact series is really a special class of heirs 
which does not conform strictly to the basic principles of heirship surrounded 
round gotraja, samanodaka and bandhus, because it is a mixed category. 
It is a category which is based on double foundation. It is based on 
propinquity; it is also based on religious efficacy. They do not conform to 
any of the criteria which have been laid down for determining the categories 
of sapindas, samanodakas and bandhus. 

If you take both the laws, the Mitakshara as well as the Dayabhaga, you 
will see that the daughter is included within the category known as compact 
3 PM series. The only distinction between the Mitakshra and the 
Dayabhaga is this. According to the Dayabhaga the necessary 
element in heirship is the capacity to offer oblation. Consequently the 
Dayabhaga makes a rule between a daughter who is unmarried, a 
daughter who is married, a daughter who is married but has a son, 
and a daughter who is a widow. They give preference to a daughter 
who is married and has a son. Next to that they give preference 
to a daughter who is married. The unmarried daughter comes 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


280 


280 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


third. But it is within that category, the reason being that a daughter who 
is married and has a son, is ready there to offer oblation, because her son 
can offer oblation. A daughter who is unmarried, has no son, and therefore 
his possibility of offering an oblation does not exist. That is why she has been 
kept down. But the point I want to emphasize, and which I want the House 
to bear in mind is that there is no innovation as such in the inclusion of the 
daughter in the category of compact series. She has always been there both 
according to the Mitakshara and according to the Dayabhaga. The only 
innovation which the Bill seeks to make is to raise the status of the daughter. 
Under the Bill she becomes simultaneous heir, along with the son the widow, 
the widow of the predeceased son, son of a predeceased son of a predeceased 
son, widow of a predeceased son of a predeceased son. 

The point is this that originally, and particularly according to the Mitakshara 
Law, no female was entitled to any kind of share at all. This law was changed 
in the year 1937 whereby the widow of the deceased, the widow of the 
predeceased son and of his grandson and great-grandson — they were all made 
simultaneous heirs along with the son. The only omission that was made 
was in respect of the daughter. The government at that time was not prepared 
to lend its support to put the daughter on the same level as the widow and 
the widows of the predeceased son and the predeceased son’s son. This is 
therefore the only innovation that the Bill makes. It merely raises it up in 

the order of heirs. It is not that for the first time she has been made an 

heir. 

Now I come to the question of her share. As the Rau Committee 

has pointed out, and as many of the witnesses who know the Shastras 

have pointed out, that it is impossible to deny the fact that the daughter 

according to the Smritis was a simultaneous heir along with the son 

and that she was entitled to one-fourth share of her father’s property. 

That has been accepted as a text from the Yagnavalkya and also from 
Manu. I once counted 137 Smritis and I do not know why our ancient 
Brahmins were so occupied in writing Smritis and why they did not 

spend their time doing something else it is impossible to say, assuming 
that that occupation was a paramount occupation of the day. There 
is no doubt that the two Smritikars whom I have mentioned — 
Yagnavalkya and Manu, rank the highest among the 137 who had tried 
their hands in framing Smritis. Both of them have stated that the 
daughter is entitled to one-fourth share. It is a pity that somehow 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


281 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 281 


for some reason custom has destroyed the efficacy of that text: otherwise, the 
daughter would have been, on the basis of our own Smritis, entitled to get 
one-fourth share. I am very sorry for the ruling which the Privy Council gave. 
It blocked the way for the improvement of our law. The Privy Council in 
an earlier case said that custom will override law, with the result that it 
became quite impossible to our Judiciary to examine our ancient codes and 
to find out what laws were laid down by our Rishis and by our Smritikars. 
I have not the least doubt about it that if the Privy Council had not given 
that decision, that custom will override text, some lawyer, some Judge would 
have found it quite possible to unearth this text of Yagnavalkya and 
Munusmriti, and women today would have been enjoying, if not more, at least 
one-fourth of the share of their property. 

The original Bill had raised the share of the daughter to one-half. My Select 
Committee went a step further and made her share full and equal to that 
of the son. 

I am not entitled to disclose what happened at the Select Committee and 
how this provision came to be made. I am perfectly 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal: General): Unanimously ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Was it a compromise between twice the share of 
a son claimed and half the share provided in the Bill ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It was not a compromise. My 
enemies combined with my enthusiastic supporters and my enemies thought 
that they might damn the Bill by making it appear worse than it was. 

Shri. H. V. Kamath : Have you any enemies. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : However, this is the position, 
namely, so far as the daughter’s share is concerned, the only innovation that 
we are making is that her share is increased and that we bring her in the 
line with the son or the widow. That also, as I say, would not be an innovation 
if you accept my view that in doing this we are merely going back to the 
text of the Smritis which you all respect. 

I might also say that in discussing this question about the share 
of the daughter, myself, and the members of the Law Department 
examined every system of inheritance. We examined the Muslim system 
of inheritance : We examined the Parsi system of inheritance : We 
examined also the Indian Succession Act and the line of succession 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that had been laid down and we also examined the British system of 
inheritance, and nowhere could we find any case where a daughter, was 
excluded from a share. There is no system anywhere in the world where a 
daughter has been excluded. 

Now, Sir one question has been brought forth constantly — that the giving 
of the share to the daughter means disruption of the family. I must frankly 
confess that I cannot appreciate the force of that argument. If a man has 
twelve sons and one daughter, and if the twelve sons on the day of the death 
of the father immediately decide on partition and obtain a twelfth of the total 
property of the father, is the partition going to be much more worse, if mere 
was a daughter, the thirteenth, who also demanded a share ? 

Twelve share or 12 fragments is not a better situation than 13 fragments. 
If you want to prevent fragmentation we shall have to do something else, not 
by the law of inheritance but by some other law, whereby property shall not 
be fragmented so as to become less useful from a national point of view for 
purposes of national production. 

Shri T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar (madras : General): Is the Hindu Code 
applied to agricultural land ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is not. I am saying generally. 

I think I have, so far as I know, exhausted what I have to say on the 
various points of controversy which I had seen raised both by members of 
this House as well as by the members of the public. I hope that the 
clarification which I have given on the various points will allay the fears of 
members who are not well disposed towards this measure. They will realise 
that this is in no sense a revolutionary measure. I say that this is not even 
a radical measure and I should like to draw the attention of the members 
of this House to one important fact, namely the consitution and composition 
of the Rau Committee. There were four members of that committee but I should 
like to point out that two of them who have signed the report are far from 
radical members of the Hindu community. My friend Mr. Gharpure, whom 
I have known for a long number of years, is one of the most conservative 
members I know 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Politically or Socially ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Politically and socially 
also. In fact I have no hesitation in saying that he may on certain 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


283 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 283 


occasions find it very difficult to touch me even with a barge pole. He is 
so conservative. My friend Mr. T. R. Venkatarama Sastri is no doubt a liberal 
but he is certainly not a radical so far as I know. If these people conservative 
in their attitude have signed the report I think we can take it for granted 
that the measure to which they have put their signature could not be 
revolutionary and certainly could not be destructive of the foundations of 
the Hindu Society. So far as I am concerned I am a very conservative person : 
Although some people may not accept that fact, I am indeed very conservative. 
All I say is that I am a progressive conservative and I should like to tell 
the House one important fact which I think every one of us must bear in 
mind, particularly the conservative members of this House. The great 
political philosopher Edmund Burke who wrote a big book against the French 
revolution because of its radicalism and revolutionism did not forget to tell 
his own countrymen who were very conservative, one very important truth. 
He said that those who want to conserve must be ready to repair and all 
I am asking of this house is this : that if you want to maintain the Hindu 
system, the Hindu culture, the Hindu society, do not hesitate to repair where 
repair is necessary. This Bill asks for nothing more than repairing those 
parts of the Hindu system which are almost become dilapidated. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Sir, on a point of reminder, the Honourable Dr. 
Ambedkar promised some citations from the Smrities. Will he keep 
promise ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R, Ambedkar : I shall do so at the end. 
Fortunately for me I have secured a copy of Mr. Dwarkanath Mitter’s own 
book “Rights of Hindu Women”. I was going to cite certain text, which show 
that the rights which the Vedas had given to women were taken by the 
Smrities in the meantime and some other smrities tried to restore those 
rights. I shall cite them in the course of my speech. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : Could the Honourable Minister enlighten the 
House as to the evidence which was produced before the Select Committee? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As Honourable Members know 
two bodies came to us and asked for evidence to be taken. The Committee 
decided that their evidence be taken. One body came and one body sent 
in a written reply. That body was the Dharma Nimaya Mandal. In general 
they are absolutely in agreement with the provisions contained in the Bill. 
The other gentleman who came obviously was not. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-05 MKChandan 17-10-13 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


284 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 

as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration”. 

Two amendments were not pressed. What about the next amendment ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I am not in a position to move any 
of my amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : As I have already stated in answer to the suggestion 
made by the Honourable the Mover of the Bill I shall allow those motions 
to be made without any speeches at the time of moving the motion. After 
all the amendments are moved whichever are relevant and are admitted, there 
will be discussion on them as also on the original motion. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : On a point of order, Sir, is it open to an 
honourable Member to say that he is not in a position to move his 
amendments? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I am directed 

An Honourable Member : By whom ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am directed to move my amendment without 
a speech at the first instance. An honourable Member; 'Who has directed you?”) 
I am directed by the Honourable Deputy Speaker. I find that honourable 
members are extremely impatient. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar: General): No, we are not. Proceed. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have been directed, I repeat, to move my 
amendment without a speech. On account of the eloquence of my honourable 
friend the Law Minister I was already speech less 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : You are already disobeying your 
mandate. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : There are the bright ladies who have also created 
a profound impression upon me and just before I stood up Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava, a very powerful member, said that he was not in a position to 
move. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is this preamble necessary for moving his 
amendment? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I was already rendered speechless and that is 
why I was expressing my gratitude for suggesting that I should not make 
any speech. 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


285 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member will speak later. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, I beg to move with considerable amount 
of nervousness : 

“That the Bill be circulated for the purpose of obtaining further opinion 
thereon by the end of 1949.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment moved : 

“That the Bill be circulated for the purpose of obtaining further opinion 
thereon by the end of 1949.” 

Shri B. Das: Sir, as this is a dilatory motion I suggest it may be ruled 
out of order. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi: On a point of order; in the morning also there 
was some ruling about dilatory motions. I submit, Sir, that they are the 
privilege of a Member. Although I stand by Dr. Ambedkar in many respects 
with regard to this Bill, I submit that dilatory motions are the privilege 
of those Members who are not in power — of individual Members as well as 
parties. Let it not be tabooed. It is a democratic right of Members to delay 
business if they choose to do so. Therefore a motion should not be disallowed 
because it is considered to be diatory. Dilatory motions are the privilege 
of a House of democracy. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not see any point of order in what Mr. Tyagi 
has said. He wants full discussion to be allowed on this. As regards the 
point raised by Mr. B. Das I am not able to understand it. Does he mean 
to say that under any of the Rules such a motion is not allowable ? If so 
when Report is presented, the procedure is this. (An honourable Member: 
“What Rules are they ?”) The rules that we adopted last session. 

The Rule says : 

“If the member in-charge moves that the Bill be taken into consideration, 
any member may move as an amendment that the Bill be re-committed 
or be circulated or re-circulated for the purpose of obtaining opinion or 
further opinion thereon.” 

Therefore under the Rules this kind of motion is allowed. I want to know 
how I am expected to disallow this motion. 

Shri B. Das : I am aware of that Rule. But I was guided by the ruling 
of this morning that no dilatory motions would be allowed. I therefore raised 
the point of order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: May I be permitted to say 
something ? I think the point raised by my friend Mr. B. Das is a perfectly 
correct point of order, because of this 

Honourable Members : No. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: When the Deputy Speaker has given 
a ruling it cannot be questioned. 




286 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Members will not speak all 
together. They will rise in their seats and speak one at a time. Let me 
hear the Honourable the Law Member. I will allow an opportunity to 
every Member to speak on this point provided he is able to make a proper 
contribution to the debate. Nobody need be impatient. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, as you will recall the 
motions which are permissible under the Rules of Business fall into two 
categories : One set of motions are such that the Speaker must put them 
to the House; the other set of motions are such that the Speaker must 
first be satisfied that they are proper motions before he can put them 
to the House. Let me illustrate this by reference to a motion for 
adjournment. Under the Rules every honourable Member is permitted 
to move an adjournment motion. But merely because a certain member 
has tabled an adjournment motion that in itself does not authorise, 
enable or empower the Speaker to put it to the House, because it is 
laid down that unless the motion is held to be admissible by the Speaker 
the motion shall not be put. I can give various other illustrations. With 
regard to a motion like this, namely, the adjournment of the consideration 
of the Bill and circulations for further opinion, my submission is that 
such a motion falls within that category of motions where the Speaker 
is required to be satisfied before he can put the motion to the House. 
It has been the universal practice in this House that any such motion 
for the postponement of the consideration of the Bill or for circulation, 
made after the Select Committee has made its Report, is prima facie 
dilatory. Unless the member who makes the motion advances substantial 
reasons for such a motion and the Speaker is satisfied that the reasons 
advanced are substantial such a motion will not be admissible. There 
are many rulings in these books but I should like to draw attention to 
ruling No. 1 in book No. 1. In regard to this motion no substantial reasons 
have been given. 

An Honourable Member: But he has not spoken at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let the honourable the Law Member conclude. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I was only drawing your 
attention to a ruling (No. 1) in this book. There are various others also. 
It says: 

“During the discussion on the Cotton Excise Duty Abolition Resolution 
a motion was moved to adjourn the debates on the Resolution. ( Which 
practically means sending it away for circulation or to leave it up.) 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


287 


“The President while accepting the motion on this particular occasion 
without creating a Precedent remarked : 

“The Chair cannot allow a motion to adjourn consideration of a 
proposition to be moved merely in order to enable another item of business 
to come forward. It must be supported on substantial grounds.” 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The ruling says it is not a precedent 
but you want to make a precedent of it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The President says T am ruling 
but I am not creating a precedent.’ 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In this matter I would call your 

attention to page 81 of ‘ Decisions of the Chair ’ which says that there are 

certain motions which can be stated to be of a dilatory nature. The question 
of circulation is not certainly one of such nature. But there are motions 

of a dilatory nature and it is in the discretion and power of the Chair to 

allow them or not to allow them. One page 81 of this book in regard to 
re-committal of motions it has been held that though to start with, it may 
be regarded as a dilatory motion, if something happened in the Select 
Committee or some events have transpired since, the Chair is perfectly 
authorised to say that it is not a dilatory motion. Now the honourable 
Member has not been asked what the reasons are and before that my 
honourable friend gets up and says that it is a dilatory motion. It is absolutely 
wrong for him to suggest at the very outset that it is a dilatory motion. 
A circulation motion is not a dilatory motion. Unless the Speaker comes 
to the conclusion that nothing has transpired in the Select Committee or 
no further events have taken place which justify him to retard that motion 
I think the Speaker is not entitled to say that any of the motions are also 
dilatory. Ordinary motions countenanced by the rules cannot be regarded 
as dilatory motions. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, I think matters can be cut short in a 
minute. The precedent relied upon by the Honourable the Minister of Law 
does not apply to this situation at all. The heading is, “Adjournment of 
Debate”, .... 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: This is an adjournment of debate, 
if the motion is carried. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : No, it is entirely different as I shall show. 
The sub-heading is “Adjournment of Debate: Motion when allowed to be 
moved:”. I do not move for an adjournment of this debate, which certainly 
could be done under amendment No. 2, that is: 

“That the consideration of the Bill, as reported by the Select Committee 
be postponed.” 




288 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


My object is continuance of the debate, consideration of the motion, and 
I want the consideration to be taken along with my motion. A further reading 
of the ruling relied upon by Dr. Ambedkar will make it absolutely clear: 

“During the discussion on the Cotton excise Duty Abolition Resolution 
a motion was moved to adjourn the debate on the Resolution. 

“The President while accepting the motion on this particular occasion 
without creating a precedent, remarked : The Chair cannot allow a motion 
to adjourn consideration of a proposition to be moved merely in order to 
enable another item of business to come forward. It must be supported 
on substantive grounds.” 

As I understand it, there was at the time one motion before the House 
and there was another perhaps more interesting or more important in 
advance. A Member proposed the adjournment of the discussion of a 
resolution which was under consideration so that another more interesting 
Motion may be taken up. It was the attempt to adjourn the first Motion 
that was said to be unacceptable. Here I do not propose adjournment of 
the debate. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It all comes to that. 

Mr. Naziriruddin Ahmad: Here we are concerned with the interpretation 
of Rule 52. The plain reading of this rule would show that the motion is 
in order. Without abrogating the rule it cannot be held that it is out of 
order. 

Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru (U. P. : General): This Bill admittedly 
has created a great deal of feeling and it would be most undesirable to add 
to it by restraining the discussion in any way. I think the only way of making 
every section of the House feel that full opportunity was being given to it 
to express its opinion on this and to allow the discussion. Whatever our 
individual views regarding the merits of the Bill before us may be, that 
should be no ground for opposing the Motion of my honourable friend 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Dr. Ambedkar quoted a ruling of the Chair in regard to a matter that 
is not on all fours with that under consideration now. In the first place the 
ruling was given in regard to a Resolution and not in regard to a Bill. In 
the second place, the rules lay down clearly that so far as a Bill is concerned 
a Motion may be made not merely that the Bill be circulated but that it may 
be recirculated, not merely that it should be referred to a Select Committee 
but that it should be recommitted to it. The language is therefore absolutely 
clear. If, whenever a Motion is made for the re-committal or re-circulation 
of a Bill, it is opposed on the ground that it is a dilatory Motion, the clear 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


289 


rights, the rights most unequivocally given to Members by the Rules will 
be completely null and void. We may feel impatient that a Motion like that 
of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad may be ruled out. We may be ready to turn it 
down, but that is no reason for not allowing it to be moved. In my humble 
opinion, it is most assuredly in order and we shall be doing a great injustice 
if in order to pass a law in which we are keenly interested we whittle down 
the rights of Members and try to interpret the Rules in a manner convenient 
to whatever may happen to be the majority at any particular time. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : Sir, the only point is that under 
Rule 52(2) no doubt every Member has a right, but the important point is 
that it is subject to admissibility which is at the discretion of the Speaker. 
All that Dr. Ambedkar said was, that we have no doubt the right to ask 
interpellations, but that certainly does not mean that all interpellations 
should be put on the Agenda Paper; it is subject to admissibility. There being 
the discretion, all that you have got to decide now is, whether it is in the 
nature of a dilatory Motion. You may ask Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad to give 
his reasons. If you are satisfied that he has a good ground to move his Motion, 
then you have got the discretion to allow him to move it. Therefore, it is 
now for you, Sir, to ask him and be satisfied; and if you are satisfied that 
he has valid grounds, certainly he can move the motion. That is a point 
which Dr. Ambedkar raised. Every Member is entitled to speak and take 
his chance. All that you are concerned with, is a matter of procedure; the 
procedure being that a Motion is subject to admissibility, which is within 
your discretion. I may suggest that you may ask Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
to give his grounds and it is ultimately for you to decide whether it is in 
the nature of a dilatory motion, in which case you have to rule it out of 
order; but if you are satisfied about the grounds then, you may allow the 
motion to be moved. 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain rose — 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Sir, I have something important to say. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : On the point of order ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : All right. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain (Bihar : Muslim): Sir, I caught your eye first. I 
have also got a point of order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : After this point of order is disposed of Mr. Tajamul 
Husain’s point of order will be considered. 




290 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Sir, you have already quoted the rule. 
I am sure no ruling can be given by any President against a Rule. The 
thing is this : there may be a subject under discussion in the House 
on which opinions may be divided — it is quite natural. One section of 
the people may look upon the subject as a boon, and the other section 
may look upon the subject as a danger, as a plague, as a curse. That 
section of the people who look upon the subject as a curse has the right 
not only to delay the Motion, but even to kill it. Here also, I think this 
section has the right to move the Motion and I think justice demands 
that they may have all the privileges and all the rights. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is another point of order which the 
honourable Member is raising, I will come to it next. 

I am afraid the honourable Member Mr. Naziruddin has himself invited 
all these points of order because he started one this morning. Apart from 
any technicalities we may ask Mr. Naziruddin what his purpose is and 
what important points he has in view in making his motion for 
circulation. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I think this question 

Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru : May I ask you, before Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad replies, whether you have come to the conclusion that the right 
of the member to move the re-circulation of the Bill is subject to the 
discretionary power of the Chair ? 

Honourable Member rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. Members must respect the Chair. 
When I stand up, they will kindly sit down. I think I have heard 
sufficiently. Is it not open to the Chair to ask for reasons ? It does not 
mean that I have come to a conclusion one way or the other. I am trying 
to make up my mind. I have heard Mr. Bharathi’s point. Apart from 
the question as to whether the Chair, under the rules, has got the right 
to allow or disallow, I want to know on what grounds — if there are any — 
this motion should be accepted. After hearing that, I shall give my ruling. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My reply to that is two-fold. The first 
is the admissiblity of the motion as a matter of law, and secondly 
as to the reasons for the motion, they are matters of merit. At present, 
I have been asked by the Chair not to make a speech and I have 
been entirely prevented from giving the arguments on the merits as 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


291 


to why this motion should be accepted. I submit a distinction should be made 
between the legality and admissibility of the motion and the grounds on 
which it is based for the acceptance of the same by the house. I submit 
that at this stage, in order to admit the motion which I have made, I think, 
Sir, I may not say anything at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have heard sufficiently on this matter. So far 
as Mr. Das, point that this motion is one of a dilatory nature, I consider 
that this motion differs materially from the one referred to by the Honourable 
the Minister for Law. He quoted the rulings of the Chair and gave the 
instance of ruling No. 1 on the postponement or adjournment of the debate. 
When motions for postponement for which there are no particular rules of 
procedure are made, it is open to the Chair to treat them as dilatory motions 
and require to be satisfied on what substantial grounds an adjournment of 
the debate is necessary. So far as. the present motion for circulation is 
concerned, it is one for which provision is made in Rule 52(2). The honourable 
the Minister for Law referred to the analogy of adjournment motions, but 
regarding adjournment motions there are specific rules laid down here, giving 
power to the Speaker to come to a conclusion as to whether prima facie 
a motion is in order or not. I am referring to rule 36. The right to make 
adjournment motions depends upon certain conditions as in the case of 
questions. Unless a question comes under one or other categories provided 
for under the rules it is open to the Speaker to disallow it; similarly, with 
respect to adjournment motions also, there are six conditions which must 
be satisfied. There is provision also for asking for leave. First of all, it is 
open to the Chair, if it so chooses, to say that a motion is not in the public 
interest, it is old and so on. Secondly, even if he chooses to admit it, he 
must ask if the motion has the support of at least twenty five members 
of the House; then leave is granted. In such cases special provisions have 
been made. This present motion for circulation does not fall in the same 
category as the others. 

As regards ruling 120 on page 81, it refers to Select Committee 
motions. I do not find any ruling of the Chair till now, in either of 
these two books “Decisions of the Chair” in point stating that a motion 
for re-circulation is a dilatory motion. In these circumstances, I do 
not want to curtail the powers of the house. It does not mean, if I allow 
the motion, the House is obliged to accept it. Even if it is moved, 
the House may reject it after debate if it is not satisfied. Under these 
circumstances, inasmuch as the rulings are not clear on this point, 




292 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I do not want to throttle this motion. The honourable Member may proceed. 
I have already said that honourable Members will first move the motions 
standing in their names and then there would be a debate on all the motions 
together. The next amendment stands in the name of Pandit Mukut Bihari 
Lai Bhargava and Shri Jhunjhunwala. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : The motion moved by my 
honourable friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is substantially the same. Therefore, 
I would like to support his motion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He need not give his reasons for not presenting. 
What about Mr. Jhunjhunwala ? 

Shri B. P. Jhunjhunwala (Bihar : General): I join my friend 
Mr. Bhargava. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So he does not press. Nos. 7 and 8, I have already 
said are out of order. The scope of the Bill is confined to the provinces and 
not to any acceding State. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In regard to States which have entirely united 
themselves within the Indian Dominion, they stand on a different footing. 
The Eastern States have combined with the province of Orissa. They are 
now part of India. The bill will apply to them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can understand it only this way, — Whether they 
have become part of a province or not if they are parts of a province, the 
Bill will apply. It is not necessary that a copy of the Gazette should be 
sent to every village and every corner of the country. If the State has become 
a part of province, it takes all the rights and liabilities of the province. I 
do not see any reason why the Bill should be once again circulated. Therefore 
I rule admenment No. 7 is out of order. No. 8 is also out of order. No. 9, 
does Mr. Bhargava move ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have already said that I do not propose 
to move. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then the next amendment. Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I beg to move as an alternative to the 
one which I have already moved: 

“That the Bill be re-committed to the same Select Committee, to which 

it was sent, for a further report thereon with reference to the original 

Bill which was referred to it on the 9th April, 1948.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“That the Bill be re-committed to the same Select Committee to which 

it was sent for a further report thereon which reference to the original 

Bill which was referred to it on the 9th April 1948.” 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


293 


Shrimati Renuka Ray : In view of the Speaker’s ruling, it is out of 
order. It goes against the Speaker’s ruling. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The re-circulation motion is before the House. 
Why should the House not consider this motion also after all ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : It goes against the Speaker’s ruling of the other 
day. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I ask the Lady Member how it goes against 
the Speaker’s rulling ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : The Speaker ruled that the Bill is the same 
as committed to the Select Committee and therefore there cannot be a motion 
for recommittal to the Select Committee. There has been no substantial 
change in the Bill. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : There are many substantial changes as I shall 
show. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No speeches across the benches please. So far 
as the arguments advanced by the Lady Member are concerned, what I feel 
is this. The Speaker certainly said that the Bill considered by the Select 
Committee is not different from the one committed to it. But recommittal 
may be on various other grounds. Therefore, unless any objection is taken 
on other grounds 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : The words “original Bill” are there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Original Bill is the same as the other Bill. 
Therefore, he has said “original Bill”. We will drop the word “original”. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I would humbly submit that the word “original” 
is there. Therefore, we cannot drop it now from the motion, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Speaker ruled that the Bill that came out 
of the Select Committee was the original Bill and therefore there is no harm 
in using the word “original”. The objection taken was that the original Bill 
was not considered by the Select Committee. Hon’ble the Speaker ruled that 
it was the original Bill itself that was considered by the select Committee. 
Therefore, the honourable Member has stated in his amendment that the 
original Bill be recommitted to the Select Committee. The argument 
advanced by the Lady Member is against her own objection. I find there 
is nothing wrong in this motion. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : The Mover’s intention is quite different. He does 
not consider this Bill as the original Bill and therefore he wants this to 
be sent to the same Select Committee. 




294 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri H. V. Kamath : Though the intention of the Mover is clear, I think 
my honourable friend Pandit Naziruddin Ahmad, in drafting the amendment 
has slightly over-reached himself. I would suggest to him that he may 
reconsider the whole matter and bring it up again sometime later. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not consider that the use of the word ‘original’ 
affects the position at all. On the other hand, the Speaker’s ruling was that 
it was the original Bill that was referred to the Select Committee and that 
it was that Bill that came back in a modified form. I cannot accept that 
as an objection. There is no good, spending more time over this matter. 

Amendment No. 13 may be moved. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : My amendment is substantially 
the same as the one moved by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. I will speak in support 
of it and not move mine. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member will then have to take 
his turn after that of the Movers of the other amendments. 

Amendment No. 14 is not moved. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I intend moving my next amendment if my 
amendment No. 10 is passed. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I rise to a point of order. Amendment No. 15 
goes against the Speaker’s ruling. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Speaker’s ruling does not cover this point. 
This House may not be satisfied with the re-arrangement made by the Select 
Committee. Therefore the original motion that it be referred to the Select 
Committee can stand. There is no point of order so far as this matter is 
concerned. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Then, Sir I move: 

“That the Bill be re-committed to the Select Committee with instructions 

for report on the original Bill as presented to the House restoring the 

original arrangement of self-contained separate Parts and Chapters for 

enactment separately”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am afraid, I must disallow this amendment. 
As there can be no objection to the re-arrangement of Parts and Chapters, 
I rule this amendment out of order. 

Shri B. Das : Sir, before the next amendment is moved, I want your 
ruling as to whether one member can move five amendments ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Alternative amendments can be given notice of. 
The honourable Member has been sufficiently long in this house to know 
this. 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


295 


In the next amendment of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, the only adddition 
is of the words “31st December 1949”. I do not think he need move 
amendment No. 16. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Select Committee referred to there 
is a separate select committee. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not think I can allow this amendment 
to be moved. The honourable Member must have given the names of 
the Members for the Select Committee at the time of giving notice of 
the motion. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have divided it into two parts. First of 
all there is the idea of the Select Committee. If it is acceptable . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The house cannot be asked to give its opinion 
first in a matter of this kind. As the honourable member has not given 
the names of the Members for the select committee to the Chair earlier, 
his amendment is ruled out of order. 

Discussion on the general motion may now be resumed. I call upon 
Seth Govind Das to speak now. 

Seth Govind Das : Sabhapathiji 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : During general discussion the 
honourable Member who has moved an amendment has the first right 
to speak. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member will leave it to the 
Chair. The Chair knows the procedure. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I have been trying to raise a point of order 
for a long time. Sir, I shall be very brief. The honourable member 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad who is very keen on punctuation, on commas 
and full stops etc. has given notice of this amendment that this Bill be 
circulated. This is absolutely out of order. The honourable member should 
have worded his amendment thus. This Bill be re-circulated. That is my 
point of order. This is what the relevant rule says : ‘any member may 
move as an amendment that the Bill as reported by the Select Committee 
be re-committed or re-circulated as the case may be for the purpose of 
obtaining opinion or further opinion thereon’. Therefore, the honourable 
member who is very keen on commas and full stops etc. should have 
put the words “re-circulated for further opinion”. My point of order, 
therefore, is that as the wording of this amendment is not according 
to the rules, it may be ruled out of order. 




296 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is true that the honourable member who 
has tabled this motion, who is ordinarily careful with reference to 
punctuations has committed there error of not putting the word ‘re’. 
I ought not to decide it is a matter of form, but as one of substance 
and this motion for circulation comes after the report of the Select 

Committee has been received. Therefore, it means under 

4 PM 

the circumstances only ‘re-circulation’. I have already 
given the ruling. The ruling will stand. The debate will be continued by 
Seth Govind Das. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, I want to bring to your 
notice that I have already given a motion for re-circulation and it is based 
on those two motions. I do not know, why it was omitted in the consolidated 
list. These two motions are dated the 21st August 1948. I do not wish to 
take further time of the house. I will read the motion so that it can be 
taken up for further discussion. The motion stands thus ; 

“That the Bill as reported by the Select Committee be re-ciurculated 

for the purpose of obtaining further opinion thereon” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Have honourable members got copies of this 
notice? (An honourable Member: “Yes, Sir”) I will ask the honourable member 
to read it out. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : The motion runs as follows : 

“That the Bill as reported by the Select Committee be re-ciurculated 

for the purpose of obtaining further opinion thereon” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : When was this notice of amendment given ? 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : Notice was given on 1st August 1948. The 
amendment forms part of Supplementary list No. 2. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The motion was made on the 1st August and 
the 12th of August is the date of the Select Committee’s report and possibly 
a week later it was presented to the House. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : The motion was made on 31st of 
August. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The motion need not be made. It is after the 
presentation of the report. But all notices lapse after the session is over. 
A fresh notice should have been given. I do not know if honourable Members 
have got copies of this. 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor : I have got a copy of this. It is a 
consolidated list; Notice of Amendments This was sent from 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


297 


the office on the 28th August 1948. There are twenty-four amendments 
mentioned in this list and Mr. Sarwate’s amendment stands as the fourth 
on this list. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : These notices were all for the last session. 
These notices have all lapsed at the end of that session. Only those 
amendments, copies of which have been placed on the table before each 
honourable Member now, these only will have to be taken for consideration. 
The other notices have lapsed. Therefore further debate will be continued 
by Seth Govind Das. 

* Seth Govind Das : (English translation of the Hindi speech) Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I find that the supporters and opponents of this Bill 
can be divided into four groups. One of the opponent groups consists 
of those persons who oppose this measure with the same viewpoint 
as was exhibited by certain antagonists at the time of enactment of 
law for the abolition of Sati, the law which was got passed by the 
late Shri Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar for widow-remarriage and the 
measure put forth by Mr. Sharda for the prevention of child marriages 
being brought on the Statute Book. At the time of Sharda Bill, I was 
a member of the Council of State and I personally know the opposition 
that was then meted out to this Bill. This group is of the opinion 
that no change can be made in that what has been prescribed in the 
text of our Vedas, Shastras and Smritis. I do not belong to that group. 
It would be noticed even from reference to our Dharmashastras that 
if one Rishi (Sage) said something from time to time, the other said 
something else. Had this not been the case, our Rishi would not have 
written. Smritis numbering more than one hundred. If you go through 
these Smritis, you will find that the tenets laid down in one Smriti 
differ those contained in the other. Each of these Smritis enunciates 
a different principle. Then just as I have stated, I am not one of 
tliose groups who have opposed almost all the reforms that have been 
introduced hithertofore. 

The second opposing group is that which on the one hand believe 
that there is obviously a necessity for making reforms in these affairs, 
but on the other hand, it holds that this is not the proper time for 
the enactment of such a legislation. This should be brought forth only 
after the new elections have taken place, and when our new 
representatives have been elected. I would like to say that there will 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol II, Part II, 24th February 1949, pp. 861-71. 




298 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


not be any harm if instead of making any change in the Hindu Law 
at present, we do this even three years hence. This is a subject over 
which the whole country has got to think; all of us have to think, 
all of those who are sitting here have to think and those who are 
likely to occupy these seats in this House in the future shall have 
to think. Therefore, I feel that there is a good deal of force in the 
arguments advanced by the second group that it is neither the proper 
time nor the place to bring forth such a measure, and for this reason, 
I would urge that we should consider this aspect. 

Just as I have stated, even the supporters of this Bill can be divided 
into two groups, one which does not at all like to see any of our old 
traditions, and does not want to recognise the fact that this country 
is one of the ancient countries having a brilliant past, glorious 
history, high culture and great traditions. Such type of reformers do 
not at all care as to what our past heritage is and how are we to 
reconstruct our country today ? These reformers have been considerably 
influenced by the Western education, and have scant regard for the 
ancient history, culture and even the old traditions in the sphere of 
social reforms. I would like to say that if such sort of reforms are 
introduced in this ancient country, this Bharatvarsha (India) will not 
longer remain as Bharatvarsha — but it would become something else. 
The other group of reformers is that which believe in the necessity 
of reforms being introduced but after having due regard to our ancient 
history, culture and traditions. I do not belong to the first group but 
to the second. I admit that it has become absolutely necessary to 
introduce reforms, but in spite of all this, we should carry out the 
reforms after keeping in view our old traditions, ancient culture and 
civilisation. 

At this time when we are framing our Constitution, when we have 
already passed the clauses relating to the fundamental and justiciable 
rights and when it is hoped that our Constitution will be finally adopted 
sometime during the period intervening between the 16th of May and 
15th of August next, it would have been quite in order had this measure 
been brought forth in consonance with the provisions of the new 
Constitution. Today when we call our country a ‘ Secular State ’, when 
we admit that all the persons in this country — whatever religion they 
believe in, to whatever community they may belong, may be Hindu, 
Muslim, Sikh, Parsi — whoever he may be — he should be given equal 
rights of citizenship. Therefore, I would say that the Honourable 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


299 


Dr. Ambedkar should have presented to this House such a Bill which would 
have concerned not the Hindu’s alone, but would have been made applicable 
to all the citizens of this country. While admitting this country as a ‘Secular 
State’, the idea of introducing a Hindu Code Bill seems to me quite 
inappropriate. Then again if we now see this Bill, we shall have to admit 
this that it 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar referred to the ancient 
Shastras. You may also point out which of the Shastras go against the 
provisions of Hindu Code ? 

Seth Govind Das : Now if we see this Bill, we find that it contains 
many such Clauses to the acceptance of which there should not be any 
objection. And if at all this Bill is not postponed but is passed into Law, 
I am sure we shall accept these Clauses without indulging into any sort 
of controversy. But along with this, we also feel that it contains many 
such Clauses the acceptance of which is succeptible of being considerably 
harmful. The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar has himself admitted today that 
many of the Clauses arc of controversial nature and he has also thrown 
sufficient light on these controversial issues. The first controversial issue 
is ‘ marriage’ and ‘ divorce ’, If we take up the ‘ marriage ’ and ‘divorce’, 
I would be prepared to accept one thing at least that we should make 
some such change in our legislation which would do away with the Caste 
System. And if any Brahmana wants to marry a Sudra or a Sudra a 
Brahmana; or setting aside the case of Brahmana and a Sudra, if any 
Hindu wants to marry a Muslim or any Muslim a Hindu, or if the 
members of any community wants to have inter-communal marriages, 
there should not be any bar to such marriages being solemnized. This 
Caste System has ruined our country. It has resulted in the remification 
of our country and society into small parts — may even the smallest 
sections. All of us are very well aware of the disabilities that exist in 
the marginal sphere today and which are the outcome of this 
dismemberment. The old people also know this and even today — they 
look upon the solemnization of such marriages with abhorence. They say 
that they have to marry their sons as well as daughters against their 
wishes. But I fully support such a freedom being given. I am even a 
supporter of ‘divorce’. I would submit that notwithstanding the fact that 
no ‘Marriage Code’ has so far been invented in the world which may 
be regarded as the panacea for the removal of all ills, still we have got 
to see that if the husband and wife cannot live a harmonious life, they 
should be given the right of divorce. The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar 




300 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


has stated that the system of divorce already prevails among 90 per cent 
of the people in this country. These 90 per cent, are called Sudras. I, 
on my part, do not find any difference between the Brahmana and Sudra, 
and feel that it would be the greatest crime to call them Sudras 
even .... 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram (Minister of Labour): Does it 
not cut at the root of Hindu religon ? 

Seth Govind Das : Divorce exists amongst the 90 per cent, of the 
Sudras. In this case too, it so looks to me that if we pass this legislation 
in utter disregard of their customs and usages, then 90 per cent, of the 
people .... 

Shri Raj Bahadur (United State of Matsya): Sir, may I request the 
honourable member to use any Hindi equivalent for the word “Talaq” 
(divorce) ? 

Seth Govind Das : I feel that the honourable member does not 
understand the implications of the Hindi language. All those words which 
have been included in Hindi belong to Hindi alone — may it be ‘talaq’ 
or anything else. If he still wants to know the Hindi equivalent of talaq’, 
I would tell him that this can be substituted by the word “Vivah Vichhed” 

( r=l=ll6-r=l-e<0 (dissolution of the conjugal rights). 

I was just telling you that if this legislation is passed after brushing 
aside the customs and usages prevalent amongst those 90 per cent, of 
the people, then it would mean that they would not be able to divorce 
in their traditional manner and they would thus be confronted with many 
difficulties. Therefore, it is bound to give rise to a very great difficulty 
inasmuch as it runs counter to the wishes expressed by the honourable 
Dr. Ambedkar that everybody should be given the full liberty to marry 
and divorce. I am in favour of such sort of liberty being completely given 
to all the men and women. 

The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar also pointed out that 10 per cent, of the 
people amongst us who are called Caste Hindus Viz., Brahmana, Kshatriyas, 
or Vaishyas want to thrust some thing upon those who form the 90 per cent. 
It so looks to me that those of us — who are ten per cent, in number — who 
form the intelligentsia want to load a few things on those comprising of 
90 per cent. It is not the Brahmana, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas who put the 
burden, but this is done by those people who have managed to come to this 
Assembly in some way or the other. I would also tell my sisters that I am not 
prepared to accept this view that my sister members, Shrimatis G. Durgabaiand 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


301 


Renuka Ray and other lady members who are sitting in this House represent 
the women; or those sisters who sit in the visitor’s galleries represent them. 
I admit that those who are not present here, those who do not come in 
the visitor’s galleries can represent this country better than those who are 
sitting here. We shall have to admit that the allegation which is being made 
today that some high-caste people want to thrust their opinion upon the 
low-castes is not correct. But in reality the position is that the ten per cent, 
educated people want to thrust their opinion upon the remaining 90 per cent. 
Without knowing anything as to what is the will of the people in this country, 
they should not thrust their opinion upon them. I do not want that any 
legislation should be passed in this House which is against the wishes of 
the people. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Do 90 per cent, of the people know that you 
are drawing up a constitution ? 

Seth Govind Dast : We know that the people are with us. To talk as 
if this is your own concern is not correct. We have come with a mandate 
from the people in that respect. 

The other thing which has been mentioned here is in regard to ‘Succession’. 
It has been stated that we are required to carry out drastic reforms in the 
law relating to Succession. I agree that there is a great scope of reforms 
being made in the Succession System. And I also admit that it would amount 
to the greatest possible injustice being done to the females if they are not 
conferred upon the right of succession and thus precluded from inheriting 
the property. The women should be given the right of succession. Now the 
question arises as to what extent should such right of succession be vested 
in the females. The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar has in support of this quoted 
from the Smritis of Manu and Yagnavalkya and pointed out that these 
Smritis also confer upon the females the right to inherit property to the 
extent of one fourth. I would like to say that in my opinion some improvement 
should necessarily be made in the domain of succession even if these are 
the views held by Manu and Yagnavalkya. There was a time when the 
matriarchal system existed in this country or even in the world. But in the 
present day society, the matriarchal system has been replaced by the 
partriarchal. So long as the matriarchal system existed in this country as 
well as in the world and the husband used to come and stay at the bride’s 
house after marriage, it was quite appropriate that the daughter should have 




302 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a share in her father’s property. But according to my viewpoint now when 
the patriarchal system is in vogue and the girl leaves her father’s house 
for that of her father-in-law; it would not be proper to give her any share 
out of the father’s property. In my opinion the daughter-in-law should be 
given the right to share her father-in-law’s property. As soon as the marriage 
is consummated, the daughter-in-law should be given the share equal to 
that of the son. Today the son enjoys the full right, and if any woman becomes 
widow, she is entitled to the right of maintenance only viz., rood and clothing. 
I am totally against it. Therefore, I would urge that the women should 
undoubtedly be given the right to share in the property, but that should 
be restricted to her father-in-law’s property only and not that belonging to 
her father. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam (U. P. : General): If there is no father- 
in-law ? 

Seth Govind Das : Then in the husband’s house. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam : If there is no husband. 

Seth Govind Das : Then in the son’s house. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam : And if there is no son ? 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : And if she is not married then what would she 
do ? 

Seth Govind Das : That is a separate thing. They do get from some 
source or the other. In the example which has been cited here that when 
there are twelve sons and thirteenth a daughter, and the twelve sons have 
got the right to distribute their father’s property, then why should not the 
thirteenth daughter be given the same right ? I would say that all the twelve 
sons live in their father’s house. The distribution which the twelve sons make 
is made at the same place. 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (U. P.: General): If the daughter also 
wants to live in the father’s house ? 

Seth Govind Das : Since the daughter has got to adopt another 
house, this cannot be made applicable in her case. Another thing that 
has been added in respect of succession to property is that the right 
of succession will not be governed in accordance with the contents 
of the will. In cases, where the wills are not executed, disputes will 
arise. Not only this, disputes will arise even otherwise. The Honourable 
Dr. Ambedkar who is a renowned lawyer is aware of the fact as to 
what percentage of the will executed hithertofore were brought up 
before the Courts and on how many wills were the suits instituted ? 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


303 


I am afraid that as soon as the will comes in, neither the sons nor 
the daughters would be able to share the property under the provision 
of this law which seeks to confer upon them the right of succession. All 
that property will be grabbed by the lawyers. 

Then again another thing will happen. The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar 
wants that the daughters should also be given the right of succession 
to the property. Then I would submit that in our society which is 
undivided at present, when the fathers execute the will, they will not 
bequeath anything to their daughters, but would give to the sons alone, 
and thus this would defeat the very object with which you want to confer 
the right of succession on the women. In regard to succession, I would 
like to say that just as Dr. Ambedkar has himself admitted, it is a very 
intricate subject. It so looks to us — we might or might not be Socialists 
or Communists — that on the one hand the industrialists have raised the 
voice that the industries are not being developed in this country and 
on the other hand the question of succession has been mooted out. 
Therefore, the best thing would be that you should abolish the system 
of private property. If after the liquidation of this private ownership, 
a new society is evolved — I do not say that the structure of that society 

should be based on the principles of Socialism and Communism — but I 

have since formed this opinion that a new class of society should be built 
after the liquidation of the individual holdings. If our capitalists see to 
this they will no doubt find that this wealth is no longer a source of 

solace to them. I belong to that very class which can be termed as 

capitalist. But we see who is deriving the real pleasure out of this 
hoarded wealth ? I have not come across any such capitalist who can 
fill his belly by eating and digesting 10 or 20 seers, while a poor man 
can be satiated by taking half a seer or three quarter of a seer. I have 
also not seen any such capitalist who puts on about 100, 200 or 400 
yards of cloth at a time, while a poor man can cover his body with only 
five or six yards. 

The Honourable Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad (Minister of 
Education): Some people do war ! 

Seth Govind Das : I am accustomed to live in palaces, and I would 
like to say that if any capitalist is made to sleep in one of the large 
halls of his palace, he cannot enjoy the sleep. For sleeping purpose, 
only one room measuring about 12 or 14 feet is required. Now-a- 
days wealth has become an affliction — for the wealthy too. Those 




304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


people who do not get this, they desire to acquire it and those who have 
got it suffer great hardships and on account of that they cannot live 
peacefully. 

The Honourabel Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad : And they do not 
want us to give up also ! 

Seth Govind Das : They do not want to give up because the man 
who discards that wealth is looked upon with great esteem in the society. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo (Madhya Bharat) : The man who renounces 
this or gives it in charity is also equally respected. 

Seth Govind Das : It is alleged by our Socialists and Communists 
that all the capitalists are robbers, dacoits and wayfarers. Some of the 
Socialists, Communists might differ from this. I cannot ascribe this to 
all of them. But many of them would renounce their Socialistic and 
Communistic creed if they can acquire this wealth. The hoarders of 
wealth are even today held in esteem by the society. We should try to 
overhaul the conceptions and values of the society in such a manner 
so that the capitalists may in reality be treated as dacoits and robbers; 
and then only I would say that no capitalist would like to wear this 
collar around his neck. Therefore, with a view to tackle this knotty 
problem of succession, I would urge that our Honourable Law Minister 
Dr. Ambedkar may bring forth such a measure which should seek to 
abolish the system of private ownership and thus ameliorate the 
condition of those people who have fallen a victim to this. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras : General): Will you not oppose that? 

Seth Govind Das: In my opinion these are the only two points in 
this Bill which are subject to good deal of controversy. I am also of the 
opinion that keeping in view the trend of the time and without indulging 
into any sort of controversy, we postpone the enactment of this Bill till 
the formation of the new Assembly and in the meantime invite the 
opinion of the people in this connection; and after ascertaining the wishes 
of the people, we should bring forth this measure as soon as the fresh 
elections are held. We should not present this measure in the form of 
a Hindu Code but the proper course would be to pass it in the same 
manner in which we have passed our constitution which provides for 
the rights of every citizen in the country. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal; General): On a point of 
order, Sir, is there no time limit for allowing this kind of discussion ? 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 305 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no time limit. 

Seth Govind Das : With these words I would conclude, and say that 
I feel it absolutely necessary that reforms should be made in our social laws. 
I also admit this that those people who oppose this Bill in the same manner 
in which they behaved at the time of the enactment of laws relating to the 
abolition of Sati, widow-marriage and prevention of child marriges are not 
following the right course of action. But along with this I also admit that 
this Bill has not been moved at the opportune time and we should postpone 
its consideration at the moment. We should present it only after ascertaining 
the public opinion. With these words, neither I support this, nor oppose this. 

* Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani (U. P.: General): Sir, ever since we 
had a sovereign legislature, no piece of legislation has given rise to 
greater excitement and controversy than this Hindu Code Bill. If all this 
controversy had been based on reason and on the merits of the changes 
proposed in Hindu Law it would have been to the good but much of 
the controversy is clouded by irrelevent issues. The argument of Religion 
in Danger has inspired much of the propaganda against the Code. It 
is urged that it will shake the foundation of the Hindu religion. Those 
who put forward such argument do a great injustice to their own religion. 

Hindu religion is primarily concerned with the spiritual emancipation 
of the individual, his progress towards self-realisation. The self-fulfilment 
of an individual stands in need of certain moral and spiritual principles 
as truth, justice, non-violence, etc. These are embodied in our scriptures. 
These are unchangeable and fundamental. The social arrangements, 
institutions, conversations and customs that have evolved through the 
ages are not religion. The Hindu Code does not seek to disturb the Hindu 
religion but to amend and modify the Hindu civil law. The law has 
changed from time to time. It is different from religion and has never 
been unchangeable and static. The authors of the Dharma Shastras 
changed the law from time to time according to the consciousness of the 
community at the time. The right to make changes was well recognised 
by the Dharma Shastra. The Hindu law became rigid and static only 
after the advent of the British. 

It has been the boast of Hinduism that while the fundamentals have 
remained unchanged, the Hindu social institutions have changed to 
suit changing circumstances. Continuous adaptability has been the 
strength and essence of Hinduism. Unless Hindu society is to remain 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 24th February 1949, pp. 866-924. 




306 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


static and dead the law must change to fit with the changing circumstances. 
We also know that the Smrities have not remained unchanged. The 
smrities did include other branches of law besides those of succession 
and marriage. These have been dealt with by the Indian legislature and 
some of them have been superseded. Hindu religion did not flounder. 
Hindu religion has survived that shock. If Hindu religion could survive 
the shock of these changes I am sure Hindu society and religion can 
survive the shock of a little more change. 

We have also brought in social legislation of great importance. We have 
abolished the Sati : we have abolished child marriage : we have also 
abolished to a great extent untouchability. Hindu religion is a very 
catholic and liberal religion. So the argument of religion in danger does 
not behave us. Within the fold of this liberal and catholic religion people 
of various views, customs and manners have found shelter and lived. 
Today what has happened ? Why have we lost our faith in our own 
religion that we are raising the cry of religion in danger ? It does not 
mean that I want to say that all those who oppose us are orthodox and 
are reactionaries. I only want to point out that in forcing your point 
of view, you are only doing injustice to your religion when you put 
forward this argument. 

Another argument is this that this Bill should not have been taken 
up for consideration now and that we have not given the country 
sufficient opportunity to get acquainted with the provisions of the Bill. 
As far as I know this Bill has been before the House and before the 
country for about the last ten years. Some of the measures embodied 
in the Bill as Succession Bill and Marriage Bill, I think, were introduced 
in the House in 1943. The Hindu Law Committee was appointed in 
1944. Its Report was published, I think, in 1945 or 1946 and the draft 
Bill has been translated into thirteen Indian languages. Thousands of 
copies of this draft Bill have been circulated. Even after this if we do 
not know the provisions of the Hindu Code Bill, then, it is our 
fault and not the fault of the Government. Besides that the Bill won’t 
be passed in a day here. We will take a lot of time to consider it. 
It will take a good deal of time when we consider it in detail. At 
that time we will have enough opportunity to go to the public, to 
acquaint them with the provisions of the Bill and also to ascertain 
their opinion. There is a whispering propoganda, a very strange 
propoganda, that this Bill should be postponed till after the next general 
election. Why should it be postponed ? Because this may adversely 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


307 


affect our party’s popularity ? Is it befitting or worthy of the Congress 
to put forward such arguments ? Have we ever considered our popularity 
before our duty ? If we think that a Bill is just, if we consider that 
a Bill is for the good of the people then it is our duty to go ahead with 
it. To shelve a Bill just in order to catch votes for the next election is 
not right. I think it is not even honest. For us the good of the people 
has always been the supreme consideration. If we don’t take this point 
of view, if we don’t keep this attitude before us, we will never be able 
to sponsor any radical change. Whatever be the field of our life when 
a radical change is sought to be made, we are bound to come against 
some vested interests and some established custom. There is always 
bound to be a cry against such changes. If we give up reform on that 
score then we shall never change anything. 

I would like to say this. Much has been said about the volume of 
opinion against the Hindu Code Bill. I would like to say with all humility 
that there is also a very good group — an intelligent, thoughtful group — 
supporting the measure too. And that intelligent, thoughtful group does 
not consist of women alone. We have a lot of brothers with us in this 
measure. We have also seen in history in other countries whenever a 
radical change was introduced, whenever any reform was sought to be 
brought into being, it was a small conscious minority that forms up the 
cause, that educated the public, that did propioganda and after some 
time public opinion veered round it. So I am sure though it may be that 
there is a volume of opinion against the Hindu Code, if what we are 
trying to do is just and right, I am more than sure that public opinion 
will come with us. Not only will it come with us but it will bless us 
after a time for the good (An Honourable Member: “It is already with 
us”) measure that we have passed. They say, they have got the majority 
with them. So this is my answer. 

In the heat and controversy many times we forget that the Bill does 
not consist of merely the Succession and the Marriage provisions. We 
have tried to make a uniform and entire system of law. In this entire 
system of law or Code we have tried to put right a lot of discrepancies, 
inequities, and injustices. For instance this morning Dr. Ambedkar in 
his learned speech told us how the provisions regarding guardianship, 
maintenance, adoption etc. are going to be beneficial to the society. Those 
who are totally opposed to the Bill have been forgetting the good side 
of the Bill, the non-controversial side, and have concentrated all their 
attack on such the entire Bill. 




308 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Let us come to the question of Succession itself which is greatly 
opposed by large sections of the people. 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain : It is opposed by vested interests only. 

Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani: It is opposed by large sections. They 
had levelled two points — against the breakage of the joint family and 
the grant of absolute rights to women. I will take the second point first. 
We are seeking to have a society where men and women should be equal, 
where people of all castes will be equal. We are trying to bring about 
a perfect democracy of which we have dreamed all these years. We are 
pledged to give women equal status in society. We are pledged to do 
away with all sex discrimination and this peldge does not start from 
the time when we bring into effect the New Constitution. I would like 
to remind you that in the Karachi resolution these peldges are embodied. 
After that when we accepted office, then also we again reiterated that 
there shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex. If men and women 
are to work equally, if they are to function as equal citizens of the state, 
if they are to fulfil their obligations towards the state, how can we have 
such discriminatory rules in the matter of property rights of women ? 
Unless woman gets her full share of property you cannot expect her to 
fulfil her obligations to the state. Of course whenever we make any 
changes, established custom and established rules are disturbed. It 
causes a certain amount of dislocation and inconvenience, but we have 
to tolerate them and take them as inevitable. We must not try to enlarge 
the importance of the inconvenience that is caused to us. Dr. Ambedkar 
and others have told us that the Smritis recognize the right of property 
of women. What law gave us practice denied us. In practice the right 
was abrogated. What we are trying to do today is only this. — We are 
not going against the fundamentals of Hindu religion or Hindu custom 
or Hindu law; what was granted to us by Hindu law but which was 
arbitrarily denied to us, we are now trying to take back — or rather you 
are giving it to us, this which has been denied to us by society all these 
years. It is merely justice done — long deferred justice. 

If you come to modern times, by the Act of 1937 you have given 
property right to the wife, to the daughter-in-law, to the grandson’s 
wife and so on and so forth. The only person who is left out is the 
poor daughter. It is but in the fitness of things that now it should 
be included here. Therefore I do not see what is there to argue much 
about it. If we have given to other women tills right, if women can 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


309 


inherit from the husband’s side let her inherit from the father’s side which 
is very natural and right. 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram : They want her to develop to 
the other stages. 

Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani : In regard to joint family there is a very 
great feeling about it. I do not know why there is such a feeling. Most of 
the people I come across are anxious to get out of the joint family. The 
sons do not like to stay with the father. I see most of the families distributed 
all over the country. So joint family is a very rapidly crumbling institution 
according to me. Even the legal position of the joint family is very faulty 
as Dr. Ambedkar has pointed out to us in the monring. Even under 
Mitakshara system a member of the joint family merely by expression of 
his will can bring about a partition. 

I would therefore like to ask you where is the joint family about which 
you are crying so loudly ? 

Much was said about the protection that is given to the unportected women 
in the joint family. I know in the past in the joint family unprotected women 
did get protection. Even now some of them do get protection but at the same 
time we know hundreds of women who, failing to get any shelter in the 
joint family, having no economic resources of their own, are hounded to a 
life of degradation and shame. Many of us women, who are doing social 
work, come across innumerable such cases. Therefore, not only is it right, 
not only is it just to give woman her portion but it is absolutely essential 
to give her the share if you want to safeguard the Hindu society about which 
you speak so loudly. 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram : And something more. 

Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani : So much the better. Give us a little more. 
You have denied us in the past, make it up now. 

As regards marriage, the Bill merely seeks to introduce uniformity of 
practice to avoid confusion and uncertainty. This may entail a little difficulty 
to those classes which are governed by the customary law but the proposed 
sacramental and civil marriages are such that it can be put into practice 
by the poorest and the most backward classes. So I do not think it will 
create any great difficulty. There is some objection to the registration of 
sacramental marriages. I think it is purely sentimental because registration 
is only permissive. If you do not want to avail of the registration you are 
free not to avail of it. 




310 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


An Honourable Member : It is compulsory. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No compulsion. 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain : No compulsion, either would do. 

Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani : If I am wrong, Dr. Ambedkar will correct 
me. It has been put there as a safeguard; that is all. 

We come to the question of inter-caste and sagothra marriages. I was 
hearing my friend who preceded me. I do not know how we can wax eloquent 
over the objection to sagothra and inter-caste marriages because I find a 
very large number of such marriages taking place in the society. If we did 
not have such marriages it was all right, but when a very large number 
of such marriages are taking place, either we compel them to have irregular 
marriage or we drive them out of the Hindu fold or we make them go 
somewhere or they have to go to the civil registration office and get it done. 
When it is there, why not accept the fact ? When it is a practice why not 
recognise it and give it legality ? Therefore, it is but right at this stage, 
when Indian society has changed so considerably to allow inter-caste and 
sagothra marriages within the Hindu fold. 

About monogamy, here also I feel that the society has on the whole 
accepted monogamy. Polygamy is looked down upon; polygamy finds no 
favour in our society, though cases do occur. Again, we recognise the current 
practice amongst an overwhelming majority of Hindus and we legalize it. 
Moreover as we are trying to bring about a society where men and women 
are equal, we cannot afford to have a double set of morality for men and 
women and I should think the men should be happy to have this introduced 
because by the provision of monogamy we are levelling up the standard of 
men’s morality to that of women. I should think that the men should be 
thankful to us. 

An Honourable Member : Very thankful. We can get easy divorces and 
marry again. 

Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani : As for divorce, though we do not 
deny the sentiments of the orthodox, men and women, analysing it, 
we find, that divorce did exist in our ancient scriptures. The grounds 
of divorce that we have allowed are extremely reasonable and just. 
We have not allowed any divorce on frivolous grounds as it has been 
in some parts of the Western world. Care has also been taken to 
formulate such a procedure that divorce would be resorted to only 
under very grave circumstances. If we see the records of Baroda, 
Travancore, Cochin and Malabar where divorce is allowed, very few 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


311 


people have availed themselves of the law. Only under exceptional 
circumstances it comes to help the people to get of a very difficult situation. 
Hindu social tradition is such that we will not on flimsy grounds rush to 
the court and break up a marriage. The people who fear that the grant 
of the right of divorce may amount to disruption of the family life of the 
Hindus are absolutely injustified. 

Then I take Dr. Ambedkar’s argument of the morning that divorce prevails 
among 90 per cent, of the Hindus, so why not extend it to the other 
10 per cent. It will be very right and just when we see that these 10 per cent, 
divorce cases are occurring. If there had been no divorce cases 
then I would have understood it, but we see that whenever our men and 
women want a divorce, they leave the Hindu fold and become Muslims or 
Christians and by doing so they insult those religions of which they make 
a mere utility. Therefore, we should recognise the existing circumstances 
and allow divorces. 

Sir, I have nothing more to say except that I want to tell my brothers 
here that we women even when we pressed for our rights have never 
forgotten the greater good, the larger good. We have been very conservative 
in this matter. You know even for our political rights we have never 
encouraged things which we have considered wrong. Even when the British 
were there, we have always stood for joint electorates. Even in the new 
Constitution we have never pressed for separate rights for overselves. We 
would have pressed for these if we did not think that they go against the 
benefit of the entire society. If Hindu women benefit, I am sure the Hindu 
society stands to benefit. This is for the larger good; that is why we are 
pressing this point. 

Here, I would also like to say that our men on the whole been very co- 
operative and helpful to us. They have not stood against our progress. It 
may be that this is due to the benevolent influence of Mahatma Gandhi. 
You all know that Gandhiji was one of the greatest supporters of women’s 
rights. The tradition that he has established has been followed by our men; 
because of Gandhiji’s influence, because of the sympathetic attitude of our 
leaders, we have never had to fight for the political rights as women of 
other countries had to fight. Therefore, I am more than sure that now we 
will follow the good traditions, we will keep up the spirit of co-operation 
that we have had all these years and all my brother Members will support 
this Bill and consider this Bill not as a measure of right for the women, 
not as a measure of justice that you are giving to the woman, but as justice 




312 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


done to the society. This is a measure by which we are trying to make Hindu 
society healthy and wholesome. The Hindu society is full of defects. We are 
now independent. If in the world we have to take our status, we have to 
set our house right; unless we do it we cannot take our position in society. 
Therefore, let us get together and remedy the defects that are in the house. 
I only appeal to you and I am sure we will have the support of all of you 
for this good measure. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Friday the 25th February, 1949. 


* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the following motion moved by the Honourable Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar on the 31st August 1948 : 

That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 

as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal : Muslim): Sir, I have moved 
amendments and I think, it will be proper for me to advance arguments 
and for others to speak. Instead of that if I have to listen to them now 
and then speak, where would be the scope for them to reply ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think the honourable member who has moved 
an amendment to the motion will be in a better position if he speaks later 
because as he knows he won’t have an opportunity to reply. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not wish to reply. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In that view it will be right that the honourable 
Member should hear certain speeches for and against his motion so that 
he may be able to reply and he may speak once for all. I have called Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava ( Interruption ). The duty of regulating the order of 
speakers is with the Chair. I feel it right to call upon Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. 

* Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): (English 
translation of the Hindi speeches) Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, the Hindu Code 
Bill that has throughout India .... 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 25th February 1949. pp. 877-78. 
*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 25th February 1949, pp. 895-936. 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


313 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: In English please. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : As this matter is of vital importance 
so for this very reason I wish to speak in Hindi. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal: General) : We can understand the 
Hindustani spoken by the honourable the Minister of Education. It is entirely 
different from the Hindi or Hindustani spoken by Seth Govind Das or 
Pt. Thakur Das Bhargava. As beginners we do not know which is Hindustani. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no set standard which is copied here. 
Whatever is spoken is Hindustani. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Before I begin my speech, (Honourable 
members ): “English please”) as a number of honourable members desire that 
I should speak in English I have not the least hesitation in paying deference 
to their wishes. But all the honourable members know that it is easier to 
express oneself in his own mother tongue rather than in English. So, if they 
allow me I wish to speak in Hindi. But if they would insist on my speaking 
in English then I would not have the least objection in commencing my 
speech in English. (Honourable members: “Hindi, Hindi”). As I think that 
a majority of the honourable members do not insist upon my speaking in 
English so I like to speak in Hindi. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras: General) : Kindly speak in simple Hindi 
so that we also may be able to understand. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I will try to speak in simplest 
Hindi. Today when I have stood up to deliver a speech before the 

House about the Hindu Code Bill a number of conflicting thoughts 
are clashing with one another in my heart. At the very outset I beg 
to submit that I am not one of those people who declare this Hindu 
Code Bill to be the death knell of the Hindu culture, and Hindu 

Civilization. I wish that the Hindu culture, the Hindu Society and the 
Hindu Civilization may survive till eternity, till the end of this world. 
I am, in no way, an opponent to this. I am not at all afraid that this 
Bill or any another Bill would in the least be able to put the Hindu 
Culture or Civilization to harm. I wish that those evils that have 
crept in the Hindu Society since long, and about which 

Dr. Ambedkar made an appeal before the House in the concluding 
parts of his speech, may be eradicated; and the appeal may be 
considered over very thoughtfully with a cool heart. But in fact if 

the Hindu Society is to be preserved then there is no doubt that if 




314 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


necessity would be felt for repairing the society then repairs will 

12 Noon have to be done. I strongly oppose those persons who 
hold that this Bill would put the Hindu Culture to an end. 
I am not prepared to acknowledge even for one moment the fact that 
this Assembly or the Honourable members of this house, who have the 
same ability as the Smritikars of the old, do not have the right of making 
any changes in our Shastras or Laws. I hold that the members of each 
and every community have got the fullest rights to frame laws according 
to the needs of the time. Today if some one makes an appeal that this 
being an old custom so we must act accordingly; then about such an 
allegation I would submit that there is not a single custom that India 
has not experimented with. There are certain places in India where the 
system of inheritance is quite different from the other parts of India. 
Do we not know that among the Khasi tribes and in some parts of 
Southern Punjab the entire institution of inheritance depends upon the 
fact that the entire property devolves upon the daughters instead of sons. 
There are certain parts in India where instead of the girl going to her 
father-in-law’s place the husband of the girl is imported into the wife’s 
family.. India is such a country where every type of custom and law 
has been in vogue. Is there any such social system that we have not 
tried. Only yesterday Dr. Ambedkar told that in some Smrities it is 
mentioned that daughters should be declared similar heirs along with 
sons. So this provision was present since long. Apart from this I do not 
know of any other law that can be called a new one. Divorce is customary 
in many places even today. On going through the old Smrities it is 
found that divorce is mentioned there also. I am not prepared to 
accept that we must revert to those old ideals simply because for the 
reason that they are mentioned in the old Smrities. If we think that 
those ideals do not suit our present day society then why should those 
ideals be kept up. I know that in India there was a time when even 
the institution of marriage itself was not in vogue in India, and the people 
did not know anything about marriages. In olden days the system of 
Niyog continued for a long time in India. The Hindu Law mentions 
8 kinds of marriages. Some of those kinds of marriages cannot even be 
called marriages. Can anyone assert that those ideals should be re- 
introduced in the present times. I do not think there is any. So I do 
not want to consider the question that is before us today from this view 
point as to what was in vogue in the olden days, how our ancestors used 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


315 


to regulate the society by framing laws of their own. The question before 
me is that in the present times what things we require after fully taking 
into consideration our needs, our legal conceptions and our necessities. This 
Code has created throughout the whole country a great deal of unpleasantness, 
restlessness and uneasiness. Some women declare that they would have 
rights equal to those of men. This Code favours the women. Some declare 
that women have no rights. Very humbly I beg to submit to this House, 
that till the time the Bill is under consideration here, we must never pay 
any attention to the various slogans or any such things like the allegations 
that this Bill is favourable to women or it is favourable to men. With a 
cool heart we must think over whether this Bill is appropriate or not. Which 
man can say that he has not been born of a woman, and which woman 
can say that she is not the daughter of a man. So in a matter like this 
will we not treat our sisters, our daughters, and our mothers with kindness. 
Do our mothers, sisters and daughters demand that they will not behave 
properly with their husbands, their brothers and sons. So it is not necessary 
to introduce any bitter controversy in this matter. I know that this is a 
very delicate problem. We ought to consider it in the proper manner and 
with a cool head. 

Before I discuss this point any further, I wish to submit a few things 
about a question so that at least the honourable, members of this House 
and my honourable sisters in particular may not think that I oppose or 
support this Bill with some set ideas. At the very outset I wish to submit 
that I belong to that school of thought who believes that till the women 
are not given their proper rights in both the immovable and movable 
properties their personality will not attain full development. I very strongly 
oppose the economic dependence of women. I do not like that sloka of Sitaji 
wherein she has said: 

ffcrfl qcpld % fdcTT "facl ^IT?H IhcI TjcT: 

31 R-l rl LM d ^TraTf cFT ^ II 

I hold Ramayan in a very high esteem but I am not, for one moment, 
prepared to accept the principle that the women should always be 
kept dependent. I am not, for one moment, prepared to accept the 
verdict of a few of the Smrities that a woman till she is not married 
must remain under the control of her father, and after marriage under 
the control of her husband, and if she becomes a widow then under 
the control of her son. I oppose this verdict of the Smrities not for 
the reason that it is painful to women. I know that till the women 




316 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of India will not attain a strong personality, till the women will not 
improve their condition economically and till they will not have an all 
round development our genealogy will not, improve. Like men the women 
also should be given all kinds of opportunities for their development. 
I think that it is not at all justifiable to look at this question from a 
narrow angle of vision. We have to decide this question very prudently 
and keeping in view the welfare and advancement of our entire nation 
and country. 

Since thousands of years we have been believing in certain prevailing 
customs and rites and have also been preserving them. But along with 
this we have also to decide our line of action as to how we should act 
upon the slogans that are being raised in the present day world like 
“women must have rights equal to men” We may not accept this principle 
in toto but we at least stand committed to afford them scope and facilities 
equal to men for their development. We will have to keep this principle 
in view. Therefore, I wish to submit without any reserve that women 
must get their lawful rights in the movable and immovable properties. 
I am strongly in support of this. I also congratulate Dr. Ambedkar for 
his accepting in this Bill the principle of the Abolition of Caste in 
marriages and adoption. I do not possess sufficient eloquence to let you 
know how important I consider this question to be. I look upon this 
question in this light that it is question of nation-building. It is a question 
of our life and death. This pertains to basic principles. If any thing has 
ruined India, marred her progress and became an instrument in creating 
Pakistan, it is this caste system. If there is anything that has entered 
our society and is eating into the vital: that has made Brahmins enemy 
of others, the Jats enemies of non-Jats and the Kshattriyas the enemy 
of all other communities, it is this caste system only. I do not know 
how can we refuse to follow the path of formation of a class-less 
society, the path pointed out to this country by Mahatma Gandhi, 
the Father of the Nation. The two things, that are instrumental in 
uniting the people of this country, are inter-dining and inter-marriages. 
As far as the question of inter-marriages is concerned, till this 
question is not resolved the problem of nation building in India cannot 
be solved. Therefore, as far as this question is concerned, I am strongly 
in its favour. 

As far as the question of monogamy goes there may not be a single 
member against it. As far as the consequences of monogamy are 
concerned I know that its passing would badly affect the area I come 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


317 


from. Because even today, according to the circumstances, it generally 
happens that when some one dies-leaving his widow, the widow is re- 
married to the younger brother. I know that in the coming times we 
should not continue these out of date-customs. I think that if the defects 
of this out of date system would be told and explained to those people 
whom it will affect then they would also readily agree to renounce it. 

As regards the question of monogamy and the people about whom I 
am talking I wish to submit that these people according to their needs 
and intelligence thought out and adopted this principle in that time when 
widow remarriage was not in vogue in India. Without any reservation, 
I wish to submit that as far as the questions of monogamy, abolition 
of caste system and giving of the fullest rights to women, are concerned 
I am fully in support of them. 

As regards the question of divorce I know that the system of 
divorce exists in a major portion of India. These days to some 
people this system of divorce appears to be bad. In fact in a country 
like ours where according to our customs the women used to commit 
Sati, the opposition of the system of divorce is not a thing to be wondered 
at. According to our beliefs marriage constitutes an indissoluble 
relationship, and from this point of view the right of divorce should not 
be given. But I like to submit that the system of divorce has always 
been in our country and is still present to this day. If the people wish 

to walk with their eyes closed, if they do not want to see as to what 

is happening in the world around them., then it is upto them to do so. 
Dr. Ambedkar told us that this system is found in 90 per cent, of the 
people of this country. I beg to submit that these figures are under- 
estimated rather than over-estimated. As regards the question of divorce 
and as far as it is in practice in India I am entirely in support of it, 
not for the reason that it is in vogue in the present day society but 
for the fact that it is one of our own customs. Therefore I am in favour 
of divorce. 

The question arises that in this Hindu Code Bill, as it has emerged 

from the Select Committee the main defect is mat it does not go far 

enough. In fact the customs prevalent in our country and the reforms 
suggested by the Select Committee fall far too short. The people in 
Punjab are not so backward. As regards social reforms the people 
of Punjab are far ahead than those of the rest of India. This Code 
does not go to that extent even. For them this Code is not a kind 




318 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of social reform but it draws them back instead. If this Code would be 
shown to any Hindu or Sikh of the rural areas of Punjab then he would 
say, “Oh Sir, what are you doing ? You are retrogressing us to a 
great extent. We are far ahead of all this. You want to take us still 
backward.” The people of Punjab will not be benefited by this Code. The 
present Code has emerged from the Select Committee in such a form 
that the needs of the people of Punjab have lagged far behind; the needs 
have not only been left behind but certain things in this Bill compel 
us that we will have to throw this Bill out if it remained in the present 
form. If we want to preserve our institutions then they cannot be 
preserved in the present form of the Bill, and thus this Bill becomes 
annoying. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam (U. P. : General): Quote any example. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I just give an example. After this 
introduction, with your permission Sir, I beg to submit the objections 
that I have to raise against this Bill and say to what extent I have 
to support this Bill. There are many such provisions in this Bill 
about which no one may have any objection. There would be a very few 
persons who would say that they are against all the provisions of the 
Bill. But Sir, if you were to go through the Bill you would find that 
there are notes of dissent from 11 out of the 17 members of the Select 
Committee, and who are they ? Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan and 
Shrimati Renuka Ray are among them. Notes of dissent from both of 
them are there. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal: General): These notes are not 
on fundamental principles. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am coming to that. To tell the 
truth these 11 members who have written notes of dissent, themselves 
oppose this Bill as it has emerged from the Select Committee. I was 
submitting as to who have written notes of dissent. One of the notes 
of dissent is from Bakshi Tek Chand who has worked for social uplift 
throughout his life and is prepared to go to any extent for social reforms. 
When he also writes a note of dissent then it is for us to think as to 
where are we going ? If these notes of dissent he carefully read then 
it would become clear that out of 17 members at least 11 strongly oppose 
this Bill as it has emerged from the Select Committee, After this 
introduction I beg to state why I am prepared to move such motions, 
which are generally considered dilatory against this Bill as it has 
emerged from the Select Committee. 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


319 


Mr. Tajamul Hussain (Bihar : Muslim): Sir, I beg to raise a point of 
information. The honourable member has stated that 11 out of 17 members 
of the Select Committee have written note of dissent. If they are opposed 
to this Bill, then I would like to enquire from the honourable members how 
this Bill came to be recommended by the Select Committee so that we may 
pass it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, in my opinion 
this question is neither a point for information nor a point of order even. 
You may go through this Bill yourself Sir. Mr. Bharathi has also written 
a note of dissent. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : (Madras: General): Mine is little 
ahead of the Bill. I want to enlarge the scope of the Bill. That is my dissenting 
minute. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Should honourable members go on explaining 
every remark and every sentence ? It is not necessary. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : No, Sir, I was .... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable member’s note of dissent is in 
print. He will have his turn if he wants to offer any explanation. It is no 
good going on interrupting a speaker and other honourable members also 
by simultaneously standing up. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : May I say, Sir .... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have heard the honourable member sufficiently. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : On a point of personal explanation, 
Sir ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, I would not give Mr. Bharathi 
the trouble of explaining his viewpoint before the House. I myself present 
his view point. The note of Mr. Bharathi is that he is no way against the 
fundamental principles of this Bill. He wants that as a logical consequence 
the women must be given the right that all these women who own limited 
estates, he wants that they at once be made absolute owners. I am correct, 
I think. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : I am not permitted to reply. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable member Pandit Bhargava may 
go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : For this very reason Sir, I was 
submitting that a number of members of the Select Committee have 




320 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


written notes of dissent on that form of the Bill as has emerged from the 
Select Committee. With what intension these notes of dissent were written, 
I will submit later on, but I wish that I may not be interrupted in the course 
of my speech. 

Sir, I was submitting that although this Bill does go to a certain extent 
and I am prepared to go even beyond that in social reforms yet still I do 
not find myself in a position to fully support this Bill. And this is quite 
natural. Even Dr. Ambedkar himself, by whose kindness the Bill has taken 
this form and who has delivered such a speech of which every Indian and 
especially every Hindu must feel proud, is not in support of all the provisions 
of this Bill. Therefore he told that at places the Select Committee has gone 
out of reason. I do not want to use harsher words. But I say that he also 
is against this Bill and in this way there are 12 notes in its dissent. So 
I was submitting that when 12 out of 17 members are against this Bill then 
in such a condition the House should not feel astonished if I wish to support 
the amendment moved by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. The reason is quite clear. 
I do not wish that any of you may misunderstand me. There are many such 
sections of this Bill about which I do not wish that their passing be delayed 
even by a minute. Had his motion been dilatory I would not have supported 
him. Many of my motions also were not dilatory. I know that this Bill is 
not going to be passed in this Assembly i.e. in this Session of the Assembly. 
A special session of the Assembly will have to be called to pass this Bill. 
The next session will come off after about 6 months. The objection that I 
am raising can very easily be decided in this period of six months. With 
your permission Sir, I wish to submit that I do not want that the Bill may 
not again be sent back to Select Committee : and for such a move my reasons 
are quite different. Perhaps some of the honourable members might be 
thinking that I wish this Bill may anyhow come to an end. I do not want 
to kill this Bill. I wish mat this Bill be passed. I wish that all the good 
points of this Bill be accepted. So it is necessary to look upon this Bill with 
a cool heart. It is not necessary to infuse heat. Therefore, I wish that 
whatever I want to submit, you must hear it with a cool heart and I think 
that Dr. Ambedkar will not misunderstand it. I wish to submit all this very 
humbly and not with the spirit of antagonism. But I must have the courage 
to say what I want to say and I wish that others must interpret it at least 
fairly if not generously. I submit all this very respectfully and attach 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


321 


no less importance to this. Now I wish to submit that as each and every 
honourable member of the house knows that new elections are to be held. 
All the present members have come here by indirect election. The members 
that are to come after us will come from direct election and adult sufferage. 
According to the resolution passed by us in the Constituent Assembly the 
elections will be held in 1950. Only then I would be prepared to call that, 
as you yourself Sir, had said, an absolute sovereign body. Yet still on the 
principle of propriety I beg to submit that instead of us deciding a matter 
that concerns the daily life of 30 crores of people it would be better that 
those people, who are to come from direct election and adult sufferage, should 
decide this issue. I would submit that this will be the proper course. I wish 
to submit on the principle of propriety. Some people feel that this Assembly 
can frame the constitution only. This is the same argument that was 
advanced yesterday that when fragmentation does not take place on dividing 
a property among twelve sons then there cannot be any if it is further divided 
so as to include a daughter as well. But I say that “one wrong cannot justify 
another”. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam has said that this Assembly is not also competent 
to frame the constitution even. I do not agree with his views but if you 
do agree then why are you repeating the mistake ? This is quite wrong. 
If you do not hold this view then it is another thing. In my opinion this 
constitution framing Assembly is a sovereign body. It is perfectly legal and 
in the same way this house is fully authorised to pass today any laws that 
it likes. Yet still the sense of propriety, the sense of proportion, demands 
of us that we must not make haste in this matter. We have been following 
these principles since thousands of years and therefore I wish to submit 
that in the next 6 months the sky will not fall down upon our heads, so 
that we may pass the Bill immediately with undue haste. Therefore I would 
very humbly submit that as you Sir, have written in your dissenting note: 
out of these twelve persons, the twelve signs of the Zodiac — you are one 
of them; and along with you Babu Ramnarayan Singh has also mentioned 
on page 11 : 

“The members have been elected indirectly and have no mandate from 
the electorate. The mass of opinion and the majority is against most of 
the provisions of the Bill and the Bill seeks to alter the fundamental 
structure of the Hindu Society.” 

I very humbly beg to submit that justice demands that the 
representatives of direct election after being elected to this Assembly 




322 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


should be given the opportunity of deciding this matter. Our much respected 
and a true leader of the country Dr. Rajendra Prasad, agreeing with this 
principle, had also written a letter that this Bill as a whole be presented 
before the coming representative Assembly. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : What it was that the Governor-General had 
written ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, whatever you say about the 
Governor-General has been mentioned here. But I very respectfully beg 
to submit that I highly honour and esteem the opinion of the elders. 
This matter today concerns me, concerns every woman who lives in any 
distant village. Everybody will be affected by this and so every one has 
got a right to express his opinion. Why I do not agree is that yesterday 
my honourable sister Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani had said that in this 
manner centuries would pass. This Bill has been on the anvil for the 
last ten years. It was drafted in 1941. This argument does not appeal 
me. May I ask how much literacy is there in this country ? May I ask 
how many women of this country are literate ? I wish to address my 
honourable sisters here, who are the members of this house and whose 
opinion I highly esteem; but I would say whether thousands of their 
sisters who live in villages and towns have the right to express their 
opinion in this matter. For this reason I would urge my honourable 
sisters here that they should have patience in this matter and exercise 
some restraint. If I were to submit that the opinion of those also be 
included, who have full right to express their opinion, then this may 
not be considered a crime. Very respectfully I beg to submit that the 
people living in towns and villages are not at all aware what the Bill 
is and what its provisions are. Some honourable members say “Hear” 
“Hear”. Very respectfully I beg to submit that those people who have 
not studied the provisions of this Bill and a number of members of this 
House have not at all realized what its importance is. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : When you consider women of this country 
fit enough to understand the provisions of your other Bills for reform, 
don’t you think they will be able to understand the provisions of this 
Bill? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I welcome this interruption, 
because it gives me an opportunity to explain the real point. Sir, an 
objection has been raised that once upon a time the Sattee Bill was 
passed, widow marriage Bill was passed, Sharda Act was passed; and 
the Bill that is before the House today is also of the same category 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


323 


which, according to Shrimati Durgabai, is something higher in level from 
those that can be passed taking into consideration the opinion of the common 
people. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : May I be allowed to move a point of order ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What is the point of order, please ? 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : My point of order is this, Sir, that the contempt 
of the whole House has been committed by my honourable friend in this 
way; you heard him out and he says that there are members of this House 
who have not understood the Hindu Code Bill. This amounts to a contempt 
of this House and I want a ruling on this. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not think that there is anything in this point 
of order. All that the honourable member means is that the full implications 
of the Bill may be understood differently by different sections of the people. 
According to him they have not been understood in the manner in which 
he would like honourable members to understand it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Besides this Sir, I do not claim and 
I am not at all prepared to say that I have understood the provisions of 
this Bill any more than the other honourable members of the House About 
myself I am prepared to say that I have not understood fully all the 
provisions, all the clauses and all the implications of this Bill and this I 
can say about all the honourable members and myself in particular. The 
honourable members here, who are not lawyers, can say that they have fully 
understood the Bill; but the lawyers present here cannot say with confidence 
that they have understood all the provisions of the Bill as has emerged from 
the Select Committee. I am not permitted in this House but, if I be permitted 
then I like to put two or three questions to Mr. Tajamul Husain and he 
should give an answer whether he understands or not. It is not at all my 
intentions to commit contempt of the House. Very respectfully I beg to submit 
that it is not at all my intention . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Every citizen is presumed to know the Law, every 
honourable member is presumed to have read this Bill. The honourable 
member can go on with his speech. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I was submitting Sir, after this 
introduction, I was submitting why I am in favour of Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad’s amendment. Sir, I submitted some facts for your 
kind consideration, that this House is not so representative as it is to 
be tomorrow and this is not to take much time, in a few months the 




324 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


new house will come into being and therefore it would have been 
proper to (postpone the discussion on this Bill till the new house comes 
into being). 

A still stronger argument in favour of my submission is that you, Sir, 
are well aware of the fact that today property includes two different types 
of thing. One is lands and the other houses. As far as the landed property 
is concerned this Bill does not affect it. What will be its effect on 
succession in a country like India which is mainly an agricultural country 
and where 90 per cent of the people live in villages. After the death 
of a person his lands will be governed by one law and his house in the 
village will be governed by another law. What will happen to me ? If 
I have some property in Delhi then this property will be overned by 
one law and my landed property in Bahadurgarh will be governed by 
another law. My house built in my fields at Bahadurgarh will be governed 
by one law and my house at Delhi by another law. Is this uniformity? 
If such a thing is being maintained then what the result would be ? 
The appointment of an heir takes place at Bahadurgarh whom the Hindu 
Code does not recognise, then that boy, who is the appointed heir, will 
of course inherit the landed property at Bahadurgarh but on the 
residential house of the deceased some one else would have a claim. The 
boy will get the landed property but will have no claim on the house, 
then after all where the boy will go ? The effect of this Bill would be 
that it will not apply on landed property. I think that Dr. Ambedkar 
wishes to pass a Bill whereby economic holdings could be made and the 
landed property of average man may not be partitioned. But when this 
Act will come into being and when the abolition of zamindari takes place, 

I am not aware of this. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : You can introduce such a Bill immedi- 
ately. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Respectfully I beg to submit that 
intentions are not so easily fulfilled in this world as my honourable 
sister thinks that simply by introducing a Bill this intention will be 
accomplished. This is a Bill for the benefit of the country, but how 
many obstacles this Bill is encountering. How much time the Land’s 
Bill, whereby the rights of everybody will be usurped, will take and 
where will it be passed ? This is under the power of the Provincial 
Government. I wish that we may make such changes in our constitution 
whereby, as far as the question of lands is concerned, under 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


325 


the constitution, this may also be within the powers of the Central 
Government. If this Bill is passed then I see in it the defect that 
it does affect the residential property and does not include the landed 
property. This is a great confusion. A change has now been made 
in the original Bill that now this Bill will also apply to the lands 
in the Centrally administered areas, i.e., it will be applicable on both 
the residential and landed properties of Ajmer Merwara and Delhi. 
In other provinces this Bill does not apply to lands. In Delhi and 
Ajmer-Merwara this will apply to both the rural and urban properties. 
This is a great defect of this Bill and which knock out its bottom. 

As yet the people are not aware how this Bill would affect them. 
For this reason only I had submitted that full publicity has not been 
given to this Bill. I know that if today people were to know that 
through this Bill such far reaching and fundamental changes are 
being made in their law of inheritance, changes which will have affect 
on each and every family of India, then at one time the people of 
the whole of India on coming to Delhi would present their applications 
that this law may not be passed. Many people are not aware of this. 
The knowledge is shared by the members of this House. Bar associations 
and a few of those who read newspapers. You can well understand 
how small the number of such persons is. Such a Bill, which affects 
the entire Hindu Society, has not been given sufficient circulation 
and no opinions on this have been taken. A committee was set up, 
it took evidences at many places and the report of the committee is 
with me. If you would see as to where the members of this Committee 
went, what they did and whose evidences they recorded; then you 
would find that the committee has asked the opinion of some well 
placed and educated persons only and they have not taken the opinion 
of a major part of the country. In this there is no question of 
education. For this Bill every mother and father, who fully realize 
their responsibilities, can give their opinions. Everybody is affected 
by this and so every person is competent to give his opinion. Besides 
this I would submit that nobody has the knowledge of the changes 
that have been made-by the Select Committee in the original Bill. 
Only the members of the Assembly have information of these 
changes, the rest of the people do not know what changes the Select 
Committee has made. Now the question arises that as the Select 
Committee has made changes in this Bill so its circulation has become 
very necessary. Leave aside the old question that no law should make 




326 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


rapid changes in the customs of the people till the opinion of a majority 
of those people, who are to be affected by it, be not taken. The Bill that 
is being introduced today is one wherein the Select Committee has made 
such changes as are of vital importance and about which everybody must 
have full information. For this reason only its circulation is all the more 
necessary. 

Before I submit anything about these changes, I wish to draw the attention 
of the House towards one point. I regret to say that the Law Department 
itself which is an embodiment of law because its name even is Law 
Department, these same people do not respect the law. When these people 
themselves establish such a procedure that they must not have established, 
then I will have to say — 

TTl™"* ^ 1*7 "Vr ^2 

I do not want to touch the question that has been decided by your 
predecessor. That question has been decided. That ruling is final for me. 
I do not question it. I highly honour that ruling although I know that this 
ruling according to my opinion was not correct, yet I do not want to question 
it. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : No one can say inside the House that the ruling 
of the Chair is wrong. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am sorry the honourable member has not 
understood Mr. Bhargava at all. What he says is that he does not agree 
with the ruling but he cannot question the ruling here. It is open to any 
member to think for himself and also to say that in his opinion he does 
not accept it, but he is bound by the ruling. I think there is nothing wrong. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very sorry that whenever 
my honourable friend Mr. Tajamul Husain raises any point of order 
it does not survive even for a minute. I wish that he may raise 
such a point of order which I may also be able to reply. I know 
that at this time he is enquiring from another honourable member 
whether this Bill applied to lands or not but he pretends and says that 
he understands this Code Bill. Then I like to submit that I am perfectly 
within my rights if I say that on the ruling I hold a different opinion. 
I wish to submit a few other fundamentals that have not at all been 
touched by the Honourable the Speaker’s ruling. Most humbly I beg to 
draw the attention of the House particularly towards the fact that 
this House which is a constitution making House, is a master of her 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


327 


laws. None of our matters can be referred to any court in the country. 
If this house forsakes its principles for the sake of passing a certain 
Act then we commit such a mistake that we cannot be absolved of 
its responsibilities. I beg to submit that in this redrafted Bill, reported 
by the Select Committee, the mistakes that we have committed therein 
are of three types. Firstly when a Bill comes before the House, comes 
in the possession of the House, and is introduced in the House, then 
after this except for the House no member of the House, however big 
he might be, however good he might be, cannot even change a comma 
therein without the consent of the House. If there be any electrical 
mistakes then it is another thing; and if that also be a material mistake 
then it will have to be printed again and re-circulated and after again 
being introduced in the House can be referred to any committee. Very 
respectfully I beg to submit Sir, that I am presenting two or three 
technical points for your kind consideration., About these points I 
will have to submit very humbly to the other honourable member, 
but not to Dr. Ambedkar as he is familiar with technical rules and things, 
and he knows how much injustice can be done by forsaking 
these technical rules. So I was submitting that by forsaking these 
technical rules except injustice and unlawful things nothing beneficial 
can be accomplished. Mr. Oslow has been a very famous speaker of the 
house of Commons. He had said that no work should be done in 
contravention of the technical rules. For the protection of minorities, for 
the protection of the House as a whole, there are technical rules, and 
these rules are of such a fundamental character that whenever the limits 
will be transgressed nothing except mistakes can be accomplished. This 
principle has been laid down in the May’s Parliamentary Practice, which 
is the convention of the mother of Parliaments. The convention is that 
as soon as Bill is introduced it passes out of the hands of the member 
introducing it and comes within the power of the House. I am translating 
the words of May’s Parliamentary Practice which I will soon read out 
to you. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not think anybody in the House doubts 
that any honourable member even though he may be the mover has got 
the right to change the Bill when once it has been placed before the 
House. As I understand it, the Honourable Speaker’s ruling is that 
the very same Bill was considered in the Select Committee. Therefore, 
there is no good canvassing that position. The Honourable the Law 
Minister did not say that another Bill was considered in the Select 




328 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Committee though the other draft which he placed before the Select 
Committee was considered along with the original Bill. As any honourable 
member is entitled to place amendments before the Select Committee 
instead of sending piecemeal amendments, according to him, he 
printed all his amendments and placed them before the Committee. 
That is the ruling of the Honourable the Speaker. Barring that, 
the honourable member can go on. Nobody doubts the position stated 
in May’s Parliamentary Practice that it is not open to a member even 
though he may be the mover of the Bill, to change the Bill when the 
house is seized of it. The Honourable the Speaker has said this has not 
been done. We are bound by that; otherwise the honourable member may 
go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I wanted to submit only this much 
that after hearing your opinion I have become still more staunch on 
my belief. You have decided that if it is somehow proved that in 
fact no amendments on this controversy came before the Select 
Committee then it should be accepted that the redrafted Bill should not 
have been considered. For this reason I would submit that I have no 
need to quote the ruling again before you. Sir, I have got a ruling of 
Hansard Vol. 215 of 1873 wherein at page 302 it has been laid down 
that if a member gives notice of introducing a Bill and this Bill is printed 
then that member cannot make any changes in the Bill before the second 
reading, and if he makes any changes then the Honourable the Speaker 
gave the ruling that the Bill be withdrawn — the Bill cannot be further 
discussed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The position of law is accepted, there is no 
need to convass that. I do not think the Honourable the Law Minister 
denies the postion of law that he is not entitled to changes . . . 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law): No. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : . . . . any comma or semi colon except as 
accepted by the Select Committee. But it is open to him to place matters 
before the Select Committee. I think that was the ruling of the Chair. 
The honourable member may go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargva : Sir, very respectfully I wish to 
submit that if the other original Bill is placed before the House then 
I will have no objection. Had this Bill been considered in the House 
in this manner then nobody would have any objections. After being 
introduced in this manner the Bill should have been technically 
considered clause by clause and word by word. If this procedure has 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


329 


not been adopted and if the Bill was sent to the Select Committee and 
in the Select Committee it was not considered word by word and clause 
by clause then I would like to ask if the first Bill was before the 
honourable member or was it in his pocket or had he come after reading 
it at his house. I wish to draw your attention Sir, towards Parliamentary 
Practice. No member of the Select Committee has any claims against 
this. I have with me strong reasons and I wish to draw your attention 
Sir, towards them. In the first place perhaps in the majority report it 
is written: 

“We confined our deliberations to this redrafted Bill.” 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : May I interrupt ? This is not correct. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The original Bill has not been 
considered clause by clause and word by word in the actual sense of the 
term. In the popular sense as the Honourable the Speaker said before and 
in the sense in which Shri Balkrishna Sharma submitted before the House, 
the Bill was before us, then I have no objection against the Bill. I am 
prepared to accept that whatever Shri Balkrishna Sharma and the Honourable 
the Speaker have stated .... 

( English translation of Hindi speeches is over) 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : On a point of order. He is questioning the ruling 
of the Speaker.. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I understand the honourable member, though 
I do not understand every word that he says, I am bound to safeguard the 
ruling of the Speaker. I am not interested in seeing that what I may have 
said today, may be upset by a Chairman who follows me. The ruling of the 
Speaker is there. Though the honourable member speaks forcibly on one 
or two points, I understand that he wants to persuade the house to allow 
the country an opportunity to consider the Bill. That is all that he means 
(Honourable Member “NO. no.”. I may say immediately I do not intend to 
go behind the ruling of the Speaker.) Any arguments that may be advanced 
for consideration by the house of the country at large is welcomed but not 
in a spirit to question the ruling of the Speaker. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das : On a point of information. I want to be informed 
whether the next ten minutes will be taken up by the honourable Member 
so that we who do not understand Hindustani could return to our hotels. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Since you have been pleased to say 
that you do not follow me and I want every word to be followed by the 
House and by your goodself I will speak in my broken English. 




330 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar (Madras : General): Hitherto you have 
had no consideration for those who did not know Hindi. There is a large 
number of them here and if you do not care for them and you do not want 
them to listen, it is your own look out. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I had already decided to speak in 
English and my friend’s orders are only supplementary. But after what you 
have been pleased to say, I will continue in English. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whatever has been heared has been heared in 
Hindustani. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not going to repeat all that I 
have said as it will not be possible. In future I shall submit to you what 
I have to say, so that I may not be charged for attempting .... 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : There should be no repetition. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I do not want to be ordered by Mr. 
Tajamul Husain. If he does not want to ... 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I am addressing the Chair. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I do not want Mr. Tajamul Husain 
to make unintelligent interruptions. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am sorry that, Mr. Tajamul Husain goes on 
interrupting repeatedly. I am here to protect the house so that there is no 
repetition. It is unfortunate that we are spending much time in this way. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I do not want to repeat. I submit that 
the manner in which the Honourable the Speaker gave his ruling I respect 
it and I will not say a word against the ruling, though I maintain. Sir, that 
ruling is not the last word. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : It is the last word in this House. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not going to be taunted by these 
things. I think the House can revise its own order. I can quote a ruling 
to this effect from the book ‘Decisions of Chair. At the same time, let the 
house not think that I am asking the Deputy Speaker to review that order 
at this stage. I am not doing so. Let the House not be impatient. But may 
I ask where is the rule that a ruling once given cannot be revised ? There 
is no such rule. Since I am not attempting to get the ruling revised., this 
does not arise. What I was saying was that the ruling of the Speaker was 
to this effect that the Bill was considered along with this redrafted Bill not 
in the actual sense nor in the technical sense in which we understand what 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


331 


“consideration” is. I submitted for your consideration that in the technical 
sense in which we use the word “considered” this Bill was never considered. 

Shri Mohan Lai Gautam : I beg to state that this is a repitition of 
what he spoke in Hindustani. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In so far as to enable me to understand the full 
implications. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Without these preliminary remarks I 
could not make myself understood and those who know would have realized 
that I could not do more than this. 

I was submitting with a view to convince you that as a matter of fact 
the real consideration, technically so called, was only given to the redrafted 
Bill. I said that I wanted to submit certain arguments : firstly, the report 
says that “we confined our deliberations to the redrafted Bill”. Secondly, Sir, 
the dissenting note of Bakshi Tek Chand as well as of Balkrishna Sharma 
says the same thing. I do not want to read further because the members 
have read it and it will be waste of time to read it again. When Mr. 
Balkrishna Sharma spoke the Honourable the Speaker was pleased to accept 
his statement. He again repeated in his speech that “we confined our 
attention to this redrafted Bill” : and when you see the report you will find 
that in the report itself there are some indications for instance in clause 
99 that only the re-drafted Bill was considered in the technical sense. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not able to follow what the honourable 
Member is driving at so far as this is concerned. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am sorry I have not heard what has 
fallen from Mr. K. C. Sharma. 

Honourable Members : Order, order. 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain : Sit down ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If you will permit me I will try to get along. 
There are two questions. If it is a question that we ought not to proceed 
with this Bill, then that point has been decided, The Bill has been taken 
into consideration. The Speaker has said that this Bill was before the Select 
Committee and with the other amendments that have been tabled. Therefore, 
so far as that matter is concerned, I may immediately say I am not in a 
position to go beyond the ruling of the Speaker. Apart from the question 
of a similar case in the Civil Procedure Code, a ruling has been given and 
it is not desirable to go over it in the same case. It may not be a precedent 
for some others. 




332 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


When it comes up in any other connection it will be open to the Chair 
or members of the house or whoever might occupy the Chair for the 
time being to go behind the previous ruling. At this stage in the same 
proceedings I am not prepared to go behind it. In these circumstances 
I would like to ask the honourable member for what purpose these 
arguments are raised. If as I understood sometime ago, it is only for 
the purpose of persuading the House to accept the motion for circulation 
in view of the fact that the Select Committee did not look into the original 
draft but the other one, both of them were before the House. So it is 
not as a point of order but for the purpose of persuading the House, 
which I can understand. For that reason May’s Parliamentary Practice 
and other rulings need not be referred to. So far as the matter of law 
is concerned enough has been said and I would request the honourable 
member, if possible, to conclude this portion of his argument and proceed 
to some other matter; 

Siri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar: General) : Sir, the previous 
speaker, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava said that the Speaker’s ruling is 
not final. May I, Sir,’ draw your attention . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not want any further arguments on the 
matter. I have already given my ruling that so far as this proceeding 
is concerned the Speaker’s ruling is final. I cannot allow any questioning 
of that. It is therefore unnecessary to reinforce the argument or to 
strengthen my hands. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, it is far from my mind to 
invite you to give a ruling contrary to the Speaker’s. I am not going 
to request you to do that. I can quite understand that it is not desirable 
to review a ruling when it is given in the same case, though I know 
according to law you are perfectly competent to give another ruling. The 
law is not so narrow as not to provide for cases in which injustice is 
perpetrated. So I shall desist from speaking any futher on this subject 
that the ruling of the Chair may be looked into. What I am submitting 
is mat mere are several motions before the House and it is not the only 
motion for circulation. This Bill could go before the same Select 
Committee and it could come back to the House in 15 days. As I 
submitted already it is not a matter of dilatory tactics. All that I want 
is that the house should adopt a procedure which is according to law 
and which is fundamentally right. I am a member of this House and 
as such I have a right to see that the Bill sent to Select Committee 
is considered in a manner which the law requires. There is no escape, 




DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 


333 


therefore, from its recommittal to the same Select Committee. This is the 
reason which I want to submit before you. After all the taxpayer has to 
pay for every minute of the time taken in this House and I hate to take 
a dilatory or obstructionists attitude. All the same . . . 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : You are doing it all the same. 

An Honourable Member : He is again on the Speaker’s ruling. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I hope the house will bear with me 
for a little more time . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is the honourable Member likely to take more 
time ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Yes, Sir. 

(The House rose for lunch) 

The Assembly re-assembled’ after Lunch at 
Half Past Two of the Clock 

Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) 
in the Chair. 


Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, when the House rose for Lunch 
I was submitting for your consideration that the functions of a Select 
Committee are to go through the text of the Bill word by word ; the function 
of a Select Committee is to go into the text of the Bill clause by clause, 
and if necessary, word by word. I would refer to May’s parliamentary 
Practice. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I request the honourable Member to proceed 
to another point because I have already given a ruling ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I respect your ruling. You were pleased 
to say that you are not going to reverse the ruling given by the Chair and 
I do not want it to be reversed. As a matter of fact I am unfortunate that 
I have not been able to make myself fully appreciated. The ruling of the 
Chair says that this Bill was with the Select Committee at the time when 
the draft was being considered. I do not dispute that at all. My dispute 
is that the functions of a Select Committee were that they should have gone 
through the original Bill clause by clause and word by word. It is not only 
this. As the House is bound so is the Select Committee bound to consider 
the Bill clause by clause and word by word. 




334 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : We will assume that under the ruling both the 
original Bill and the amended draft were there and they looked into it clause 
by clause. What follows next? Is it the question that we ought not to 
go into this and it is not competent to do so ? If that is so, it has 
already been ruled. When once it has been ruled how is it open to go into 
it again ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : On a question of fact I would still 
request the Members of a Select Committee, to kindly enlighten the House 
whether both the Bills were taken and considered together. Assuming that 
this is correct my contention is that unless and until every clause of the 
original Bill was taken, unless and until it was considered clause by clause 
and word by word the requirement of law and procedure is not complied 
with. 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar: General): Has not the question 
of competence of the Select Committee been disposed of by the Speaker once 
for all ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am trying to meet that point myself. Whenever 
I find it difficult, I will ask the honourable Member Mr. Kamath. to help 
me. 

I have already said I am anxious to know what follows. I will assume 
for the moment that both the Bills were there and that the other draft Bill 
was considered clause by clause. What next ? What is the legal 
objection ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I request you to give me two or three 
minutes to explain my position. There is another aspect of the case also. 
Besides this being a fundamental rule that the original Bill should be taken 
clause by clause and word by word the way in which the entire Bill is to 
be considered is that each clause must be considered of the original Bill, 
then the new clause, then the Schedule, then the new Schedule. Parliamentary 
Practice gives that. The next question is what is the effect. What follows — 
this is the question before you. I beg to call your attention in this connection 
to the general principles of practice and law as well as the particular point 
involved. In regard to the general practice the rule of law is absolutely clear 
that when any law or any practice or the general principle requires that 
a certain procedure is to be observed, unless and until that procedure is 
observed the thing cannot be regarded as having been validly done. For this 
principle I will quote another authority of the Privy Council itself which 
is 1936 Privy Council page 253. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


335 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 335 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am assuming the next step also. I am only 
taking the honourable Member’s argument step by step. Let us assume it 
is so — that the Select Committee did not consider this or considered 
something else. Then the honourable Member evidently wants to say that 
I have no jurisdiction to go into the matter. It is with respect to that I 
want to say that it has already been ruled by the Speaker. I shall hear 
the honourable Member if he is able to satisfy me that that ruling does 
not cover the point he has stated. So far as I am concerned I have considered 
it carefully and I believe the same has been covered. I would therefore 
suggest to the honourable Member to proceed father without taking any more 
time. Already we have taken much time on this. There are other speakers 
also waiting to speak. I would like the honourable Member to dispose of 
this point as early as possible and go to any other point if he wants to. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : My humble submission is that the 
previous ruling of the chair did not consider this point. The only point raised 
by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad was that the motion cannot be allowed to be 
made as only the redraft was considered. That was the simple point. This 
point which I am urging in regard to taking up clause by clause was not 
even argued. The effect will be this that a Bill will be sent to Select 
Committee and if you don’t observe this fundamental rule, any other Minister 
may, after the Bill, put a redraft, get it considered and the real purpose 
of this fundamental rule that it should be considered clause by clause will 
be defeated. This is sufficient ground that no person had a right to make 
any alteration whatever in the Bill — for this I would refer you, Sir, to the 
ruling of the Speaker in the Commons (page 301 of Hansard, Volume 215). 
If you agree with me in this and in the Committee being required to go 
through it clause by clause then the position is absolutely clear that this 
Bill must be recommitted to the same Select Committee. Let the Select 
Committee devote two hours — I do not want that the Report should not come 
in this session — I want them to devote two hours and consider the original 
Bill clause by clause, and we will consider it then. This point, I may submit 
was never considered by the Speaker and I beg of you kindly to consider 
this point. 

Leaving aside this point as you have asked me not to spend any more 
time on it, I would take up the other points. Now the question is what 
is the effect of this. One met as I have already submitted is that we 
must abide by the rules, and the rules in a matter of this 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


336 


336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


kind are fundamental rules which cannot be disobeyed. Then what is the 
real effect of it? That I am submitting to you. Now the differences or 
discrepancies between the provisions of the original Bill and the Bill as it 
has emerged from the Select Committee relate not only to matters of 
procedure but to matters of great substance. In the Dissenting Note given 
by Bakshi Tek Chand and Pandit Balkrishna Sharma it has been pointed 
that as a matter of fact in the redrafted Bill very drastic changes were made 
and they have given examples of the changes. I am not satisfied that they 
have exhausted all the substantial changes in the minutes and I would beg 
of you to consider it from that point. When I began my speech I invited 
your attention to the fact that in this measure, as it has emerged from the 
Select Committee after the redrafted Bill was considered, many changes have 
been made which are certainly destructive of the institutions which we have 
not in the Punjab. I will first of all call your attention to the institution 
of appointment of an heir. In regard to the appointment of an heir we know 
the views of the Honourable Dr. Ambedkar. He himself stated that he 
thought that the adoption of heirs is an artificial affair. I also think so. 
We remember the speech made by Mrs. Hansa Mehta at the time when 
the Bill was sent to the Select Committee. She also made certain remarks. 
Now, according to the present measure, no person could adopt an heir in 
any form except in the Debate form whereas according to the original Bill 
the Kritrim and Goda forms were also allowable. So far as adoption is 
concerned adoption of a son is a mere fiction. How can such a son become 
a real son? But the Hindu law provides for it and I have no quarrel with 
those who believe in it. But in regard to appointing heirs to property, just 
as the Romans did by way of Nominis Hereditio, if the people in the Punjab 
had got practices like that nobody has the right to touch them. According 
to our institutions, in the appointment of an heir, though it is in effect just 
like an adoption; there is no religious efficacy, there are no particular 
ceremonies. There is no question of age. The son is not engrafted in the 
family of the adoption but he continues in his own family. There are various 
rules and the Punjab High Court has given hundreds of rulings over this 
point. That institution is too strongly fixed in the public mind and you will 
be tampering with the custom of at least a crore of people if you are not 
allowing it in this Code. According to the Hindu Code no other form of 
adoption will be allowed, that is the provision in the present: it does not 
go far enough. I understand that so far as custom is concerned, custom has 
been ruled out except to the extent which has been recognised. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


337 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 337 


When I read the speech of Dr. Ambedkar himself which he was pleased 
to deliver at the time when the Motion was referred to Select Committee, 
I found that his attitude was very reasonable and he made certain statements 
in regard to custom which are very much opposite to the provisions of the 
Bill. Sir, I doubt very much whether this Law Department Committee had 
on its personnel our Law Member himself. I do not know who those persons 
were who tampered with the Bill, but at the same time I can certainly say 
that I very strongly suspect — though I do not know it — that Dr. Ambedkar 
must not have been there because he is very anxious to see that the customs 
of the ninety per cent of the people are not affected — as I am anxious to 
see. Either this thing missed him — he may not have appreciated it — or some 
other persons might have been there who were not Members of the Select 
Committee. They entirely changed the face of the Bill, which they had not 
the right to do; then it was the other Bill which was considered — it is a 
fiction that the original Bill was there and considered. Sir, I would refer 
you to page 3652 of the proceedings (9th April 1948) in which Dr. Ambedkar 
said: 

“His second comment was that the Bill had not taken into consideration 
the customary law. He cited some ruling of the Privy Council. I should 
have thought that at this hour of the day it was unnecessary to cite the 
authority of the Privy Council because it has been well established by a 
long course of decisions, that so far as the Hindus are concerned custom 
would override the text of the “ Smriti”. We all know this. But what are 
we doing ? What are we doing is this. We are shutting down the growth 
of new customs. We are not destroying existing customs. The existing 
customs we are recognising because the rules and law which are prevalent 
in Hindu society are the result of customs. They are born out of customs 
and we feel that they have now grown so sturdy that we can indeed give 
them flech and life in the body politic by one legislation. 

Dr. Ambedkar was referring to the speech of Srijut Rohini Kumar 
Chaudhuri: He also said : 

“that we had not taken into consideration the question of the tribal 
people, whose life is undoubtedly governed in a large measure by customary 
law. If my friend had read the definition in this code as to who is a Hindu 
and who is not and to whom this Code applied, he would have seen that 
there is a clause which merely said that persons who are not Muslims, 
Parsis, or Christians, shall be presumed to be Hindus : not that they are 
Hindus. The result is that if a tribal individual chooses to say that he 
is not a Hindu it would be perfectly open to him under this Code to give 
evidence in support of his contention that he is not a Hindu, and if that 
conclusion is accepted by the Court he certainly would not be obliged by 
anything contained in this Bill. 

The position is this : if I accept my institutions as good, if I appoint my 
heirs according to the custom which governs me, then according to 
Dr. Ambedkar I am not a Hindu. That is my difficulty. Either you must 
provide for these one crore of people and accept their customs or. . . . 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law) : I have no 
desire to interrupt my friend, but I must say that I do not accept the 
interpretation that he puts upon that part of my speech. It refers to quite 
a different matter. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very glad that I am wrong. It 
gives me satisfaction that Dr. Ambedkar did not want that the one crore 
of people should go out of the pale of the Hindu law. But all the same, 
the argument I was admitting was this. If this custom was good — and I 
claim it is good because according to the definition given in this very code, 
the custom is ancient, reasonable and not opposed to public policy or 
morality — I claim this custom should have been recognised by the Code. But 
this custom is not recognised. To a certain extent the kritrima form was 
adopted as a good form by the original Bill but the present Bill says that 
no adoption will be recognised except this kind of adoption which according 
to Dr. Ambedkar is governed by certain rules. What are the rules? A man 
must not be more than 15 years of age. He must be given by somebody 
in adoption. He must not have married. Even according to the present law 
of adoption these rules are not there. Supposing a Hindu’s daughter and 
son-in-law have died then the daughter’s son cannot be adopted; the sister’s 
son cannot be adopted, even the nephew cannot be adopted if the parents 
are not there. It is common knowledge that even today this rule that if 
a person is married he cannot be adopted, is not in practice and according 
to law in vogue, it is not necessary that a person should not have married 
before he is adopted. Similarly about age. So, all these measures have been 
changed in such a way that they cannot fit in with the present conditions, 
or they cannot be useful to us or cannot govern us. 

We passed in the Constituent Assembly that we want a Civil Code. Even 
if this were not the Hindu Code and if Dr. Ambedkar was charged with 
the duty of framing a Civil Code, (I think he will be so charged after the 
Constitution is passed.) he will certainly include this civil institution — the 
nomination of an heir — in the Civil Code also. A man may be able to help, 
in their old age, those who appoint him the heir. My submission is that 
this point alone is sufficient to see that as a matter of fact the re-draft 
is much worse than the original Code and full attention was not paid to 
the original Bill. If full attention had been paid, this thing would have been 
considered. Had it been considered clause by clause, you would not have 
arrived at this. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


339 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 339 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This part of the Bill was, if 
I may say so, very much considered. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very glad, Sir, that the original 
Bill was considered. Then the only technical point remains, that it was not 
considered clause by clause, there is intrinsic evidence that it was not so 
considered. What is the effect? Supposing there are provisions omitted. How 
were those provisions considered? When the entire attention was on the draft 
of the other Bill those clauses could not have been considered. This is not 
a technical matter... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member is aware that the House 
is not bound by whatever the Select Committee has done. The Select 
Committee have sent a recommendation ; it is open to the honourable 
Member to accept or not to accept it; if he does not accept it, he can persuade 
the House not to accept it. We need not go into that again. After all, some 
Members were there. It is not right to go into what they considered or what 
they did not consider, the honourable Member would do better in addressing 
the House as to why we ought not to accept a provision or why we should 
accept it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I will accept your advice, Sir, I will 
not refer in future to what happened before the Select Committee. I will 
only say this point, with your permission. Even if the Select committee 
acquiesced in this fraud that the original Bill is not to be considered and 
the substitute Bill is to be considered, we are not bound. An accused, before 
a criminal court, acquiesces in a certain procedure which is illegal; then 
it does not bind him. May I quote some rulings? A Court is required to 
go into a question and find out for itself whether there is good evidence 
or record to bind an accused under section 107 Criminal Penal Code. The 
accused says, “I agree to be bound in that evidence”. The Court says, “You 
are bound”. But the appellate Court still rules that the right procedure was 
not observed and the acquiescence of the accused in a wrong procedure does 
not make the order legal. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is not the honourable Member satisfied with 
tearing the report of the Select Committee in pieces ? Should he also say 
they are “accused” ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Those who are guilty of disregard 
of the fundamental rules of procedure which govern a Select Committee 
are today accused before the House. I am sorry I have to say something 
which may not be wholesome to some of my friends, but I do so 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


340 


340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


in all humility and with a view to safeguarding the rights and prestigious 
of the House. I now leave this point and come to the second point. 

In regard to marriage and divorce which are very important questions, 
what does the Code say and what are the facts at present ? In Punjab no 
specific ceremonies are required for marriages which are called Karewa and 
Chadar, Andazi marriages. The woman puts on the bangles supplied by the 
husband or the husband puts the Chadar on the wife and there the matter 
ends. ( Shri Mahavir Tyagi: “Charming marriage”) It is very easy for Mr. 
Tyagi to avail himself of such a procedure. It is not a sacramental or civil 
marriage. Again, in the original Code there was a loophole. Such persons 
could come to court and get themselves registered. The changed rules is 
that unless the marriage is sacramental, it cannot be registered. There are 
other points on which I shall have occasion to speak before you, but I wish 
to make certain general observations in regard to what is happening in 
regard to many persons and what has not been considered from the point 
of view of the common man. 

In the mofussil areas, the people are illiterate. They are poor. They do 
not know the intricacies of the law. On the question of divorce, when 
Dr. Ambedkar said that he was speaking for ninety per cent, of the 
population, I know that he was saying nothing but the truth. In regard to 
this ninety per cent. How does the divorce take place today ? They go to 
a petition writer and get a letter of release. Another way is they congregate 
together and put a white sheet on the woman. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: And supply a good deal of liquor 
to the fellows assembled ! 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : That may be so, but it is not part 
of the ceremony. What is the present law, Sir ? What have our leaders done 
for you ? I am a representative of those poor people. I include myself in 
them. But when Dr. Ambedkar just by his finger indicates that he is one 
of those he will excuse me if I do not agree. Dr. Ambedkar lives here in 
a paradise. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have lived in Improvement 
Trust chawls for several years who charged me rupees three as rent. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : You can crush them under your 
feet: you can crush them under your thumb, but Sir, do you think 
that any poor villager getting about Re. 1 or Rs. 1/8/- a day could 
go to a district judge without the help of a lawyer ? Dr. Ambedkar 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


341 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 341 

is a lawyer. He wants that this world may be peopled by lawyers alone 
like me and by nobody else. What would happen to these people ? Will they 
go to a district judge for dissolution of marriage or divorce ? (An honourable 
Member, “Impossible”) And this is not sufficient. Even if he obtains a decree, 
it should be confirmed by a High Court, which so far as Punjab is concerned, 
to the High Court at Simla. Now, this procedure is unknown to people. It 
is a great tyranny upon those people. You are legislating for those who live 
in the Marine Drive in Bombay or in the palaces of Calcutta and Delhi and 
not for these poor people for whom you have such a soft comer in your 
heart. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharati : He wants to make it difficult. Do you 
want to make it easy ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Another answer is that they want to 
make it difficult. I do not want to make divorce easy. Absolutely not. I am 
in favour of divorce on one condition only, that you enact laws in which 
it may be very difficult to bring about conditions in which divorce may take 
place. Chastity and continuity of family life are the very pivot of our culture. 
But if I agree to divorce, it is because I see so many deserted women. 
It is on account of that I agree. How can a poor man who is absolutely 
illiterate be able to engage a lawyer and go to a district or high court ? 
It is impossible to accept this. This old Act of 1869 was enacted, not for 
the poor people of the Punjab or any other part of India, it was enacted 
for Christians who were of the same caste as the then rulers. There is a 
world of difference between them and these people. If you go through the 
provisions from article 38 to 50 of the Bill, you will come to the conclusion 
that such a complicated and intricate procedure has been laid down that 
it is very difficult to follow it. If you think deeply, you will find that the 
whole Hindu society will rebel against you if you pass those provisions. 
According to your law, if a man marries his aunt’s (father’s sister) daughter, 
that marriage is good; if he marries the daughter of his maternal uncle — 

it is in vogue in certain parts of Bombay, I understand (An honourable 

Member: “And Madras.”). But so far as we are concerned it is regarded as 
highly incestuous. There is a very great difference. ( Shri Mahavir Tyagi: 
“ The man may be killed.”) Mr Tyagi is not very far being correct. It is 
a fact that in all the villages of East Punjab — and I speak with such feeling 
not because I want to speak with force but I regard it as true if you allow 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


this thing to be done, that man shall be killed and nobody will associate 
with him. (Mr. Tajamal Husain: “Is there any compulsion ?”). If a man 
marries his sister or mother, is there any compulsion ? Is this an enabling 
measure ? This is going into the very vitals of the society. It is intolerable. 
It is impossible for us to be reconciled to this situation simply because in 
regard to some people there is such a custom. I do not say that those people 
should not be protected, but for them provision can be made. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati: Exactly that has been provided if you 
refer to clause 7(5) — the parties should not be sapindas of each other. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: May I humbly enquire if a daughter 
of the aunt can be married to a man ? I have seen the rules. I submit 
for your consideration that in these matters the law has been changed, and 
unless the law is brought to suit our conditions it is difficult for us to support 
this measure. That can be done. In the Select Committee amendments can 
be moved. I do not want that the Bill should be throttled or killed: 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It can also be done by an 
amendment in this House. 

An Honourable Member: I hope you will accept. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I shall be prepared to accept 
any reasonable amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very glad, and to that extent 
I am agreeable to support this Bill. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain: Does the honourable Member intend to finish 
today? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member seems to be interested 
in this than other person, who are affected by this Bill. I have been noticing 
it. I cannot ask the honourable Member when he proposes to finish. It is 
open to him to take a reasonable time without repetition. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It is not my intention to take one more 
minute than is necessary. If I am repeating, I may be called to order. If 
a Bill is there which affects the lives of thirty crores of people, it is not 
too much to consider it for several days. 

Now I come to the provisions made by the Select Committee and to the 
most crucial questions in this matter. They are, whether in regard 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


343 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 343 


to succession and maintenance, what should be our attitude. I fell strongly 

on these. As I submitted in my earlier observation, I am in favour of giving 

to the women of India rights over property, moveable as well as immoveable, 

so that they may be economically independent. But, at the same time, I 

am opposed to giving the daughter a share in the property of the father. 

_ I want that, so far as an unmarried daughter is concerned, she 

3 P. M 

may be given full share like the son as long as she does not 
marry. But as soon as she is married the position becomes different. I see 
that there is a lacunae in our law, but it may be met by enacting that, 
as a woman marries a man, then the man and woman, when they are united 
in love, they may be united in property. Ultimately the man and woman 
may be joint owners and, when the father of the husband dies, both of them 
may succeed equally. Further on, the devolution of the property may take 
place in a particular way. I know that perhaps the demand for equality 
may not be fully net thereby. But in a matter of this kind, I do not think 
our sisters are well advised in weighing every question in golden scales. 
The yard-stick employed by them is not correct. 

May I submit that, in regard to maintenance, they have such laws and 
such provisions the equal of which is not to be found anywhere else. Sir, 
the question of succession and the question of maintenance must be 
considered together. If they are not considered together, the difficulty will 
be that the full implications of the provisions will not be realised. Now, in 
regard to maintenance the duties of a husband or a man are quite different 
from the duties laid upon women. According to the Chapter on Maintenance, 
the wife has a right to be maintained by the husband, but has the husband 
a right to be maintained by the wife ? I am only saying that the rights 
are not equal. I maintain that the rights cannot be equal. They are diverse. 
Ladies and men have to do different work in life and on this basis it should 
be so arranged that the woman gets her full right and not an absolutely 
equal right. 

Then again, Sir, a father has a right to maintain a minor son ; but, so 
far as the daughter is concerned, what are the rights of a daughter. Sir? 
If a daughter is widowed or is married or unmarried, in every ease 
and whatever the age of the daughter, her maintenance is absolute 
obligation. As a matter of fact so far as the provisions for maintenance 
are concerned, I certainly want to congratulate Dr. Ambedkar for 
proposing that the ladies should be protected in every way and that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


344 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


they should be well provided for. But while this useful provision is there, 
there is also the other thing that the ladies should get a share in the father’s 
property. 

The Honourable Dr. Ambedkar told us yesterday that in times of old there 
was simultaneous devolution of property and that the daughter got about 
one-fourth according to Narad. I do not know what was the basis of social 
existance in those days and whether the family was then constituted as it 
is today. I do not know whether this point has been dealt with in some 
texts of Hindu Law. That is not an accepted proposition. Some say that this 
provision of simultaneous heirship refers only to unmarried woman. But, 
leaving that aside, I submit that, if in these times it was considered right, 
the question of questions is whether today, as we are situate after having 
observed the theory of Agnacy for a thousand years or more, are we justified 
in accepting the proposition that the daughter should get a share ? What 
happens in a family ? As long as the father is alive, the sons work with 
him in his business or in the field and they combine together to produce 
wealth. When the father dies of old age, that property which goes in the 
father’s name is thus the result of the joint efforts of the sons and the father. 
Now, to say that the daughter should get a share of such a property which 
she had no share in producing — perhaps she was in some other place 
producing children, is not fair. Let me not be misunderstood. I do not want 
that the daughter should not be given full rights. She may have them. But 
I do not want that this innovation, which is of such a fundamental character 
that it will affect every home in our country, should be made. I know my 
people all right. Choudhari Ranbir Singh who is a Jat knows how his son- 
in-law will be received in the family. I have been a practising lawyer for 
forty years and I know that in the case of self-acquired property, the daughter 
gets a share when there are no sons. If this innovation is introduced in 
the villages, in regard to entire property the result will be endless trouble. 
In every home if you let the son-in-law and the father and the mother of 
the son-in-law to live together with aunt’s son and his family, it will create 
an impossible situation. This is not because we do not love our daughters. 
We do everything for them. In our place, if a daughter comes home to her 
parents, something is always given to her by way of love. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Daughters should not be born in this country. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


345 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 345 


Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : To that I know what Dr. Ambedkar 
will say. He will say, ‘Instead of son, daughters should be born. Do we not 
know that among many Rajputs, the daughters were killed ? I do not want 
that to be done. It is unnecessarily wrong. What I am submitting is that 
for hundreds of years we have lived in such a society. We have regarded 
the son as the very pivot of the family. Without a son the daughter does 
not count in the family. It is the son which protects a man from hell. 
CHcTTcT 3TFTd) If we were like the Muslims, we would certainly accept it, but 
it is very difficult. This interruption by Renuka Ray only brings into relief 
my argument that so far as the conceptions of the people are concerned 
and their mental outlooks are concerned, such an innovation would spell 
nothing but disaster. This is my humble submission and Mrs. Renuka Ray 
only supports me in this. 

Mr. Krishnaswami Bharati : I do not know which part of the country 
he comes from, but it appears that he does not know the custom in the 
Punjab. In no other province I can say the conditions are the same. What 
are these conditions due to ? They are due to the fact that for thousands 
of years, our policy and our theory and our conception about the family has 
been exactly what has been in the Punjab. Sons-in-law are not all bad. Sons 
are not equally bad. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U.P.: General): It is the brother-in-law which 
matters. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There is a proverb which runs as 
follows : 

(Translation of Urdu proverb) 

(The following are the efficient causes of strife: 

(1) Construction of house in the place meant for deposit of village refuse; 
(2) A field in the vicinity of village common ; and (3) The habitament of 
son-in-law in the village.) 

Another proverb. 

(Translation of Urdu proverb) 

(The yama, the son-in-law, the maternal nephew, chowkidar and the 
goldsmith can never be yours. You may try them if you please.) This is the 
truth. Let me say : Ask any person to go to the Punjab and find out among 
the Sikhs and Jats. 

So far as this Bill is concerned, when this Bill was introduced, I remember 
that in the Objects and Reasons, this thing appeared: 

“The Bill aims at providing uniformity in all branches of Hindu law for all 

provinces and for all sections. The old complex, intricate and different provisions 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


346 


346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of Hindu Law have also been simplified. Most of the provisions in the Bill are of 
a permissive or enabling character and impose no sort of compulsion or obligation 
whatever on the orthodox section of the community. Their only effect is to give a 
growing body of Hindus, men and women, the liberty to lead the life which they 
wish to lead without in any way affecting or infringing the similar liberty of those 
who prefer to adhere to the old ways.” 

Now, Sir, in this very spirit, Dr. Ambedkar spoke yesterday. We want 
to see both the sections, the enlightened and the non-enlightened are 
accommodated. My humble submission to him is that so far as that is 
concerned, he is right; but for those humble people, whom you will neither 
regard as enlightened nor non-enlightened on the path of social life, you 
have not given the right provisions in the Bill and my humble request to 
Dr. Ambedkar is : Let him also kindly allow them to live on this earth. 

Now, Sir, the very essence of a codification is that it includes certain 
enabling measures to accommodate the progressive and recognises customs 
which have grown in spite of texts to the contrary. It was never intended 
that established rights and provisions of law should be changed in this 
ruthless manner, which will create bad blood in the whole of the society. 
All our customs and all our cherished institutions are being crushed by this 
Bill. 

When I come to the other provisions, as regards the succession, the 
position will be still more astounding. Now, Sir, so far as the Mitakshara 
is concerned, we know the consanguinity is the basis and so far as the 
Dayabhag law is concerned, religious efficacy is the basis of inheritance. Dr. 
Ambedkar has been kind enough to give us another basis of inheritance. 
I do not want to say that he is far from wrong in what he is doing. He 
is doing the right thing, but I do not know what is the barometer for weighing 
this natural love and affection. Love and affection may also be perhaps 
understood. What is natural love I do not know. According to our conceptions, 
the brother is very dear to us. In our sacred Ramayan, in Lakshman, 
brotherhood is enshrined. Sir, ‘Uncles’ who are just like parents are 
very dear to us. But what is the position of ‘uncles and brothers’ in 
Hindu Code. If I were to tell you how that position has been affected, 
where they have been relegated, where they have been put, in the list 
of heirs you will simply be astounded. If you kindly see the Seventh 
Schedule which has been sought to be made applicable to a Hindu in regard 
to inheritance, you will find that the first clause includes seven kinds 
of people and I want to know, Sir, how this new principle of natural 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


347 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 347 


love and affection is affected by this provision. In the first place Son ; widow; 
daughter: this I can understand very well. Then you find ‘son of a 
predeceased son’: Even there I will allow it. Then comes ‘widow of a 
predeceased son’. Sir, I do not understand how under the law of natural 
love and affection she is preferred to a daughter, son or an uncle. I do not 
think that so far as the question of natural affection is concerned, the widow 
of a predeceased son, or son of a predeceased son of a predeceased son can 
be accepted. My opinion is that the Bill is based on a wrong stand-point 
if it provides for them. I can understand if this is only for providing for 
ladies, if they were not provided elsewhere. If they wanted not a widow, 
but the wife of a predeceased son or the wife of a son, I can understand 
it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This is by statute. If my 
honourable friend will read the Women’s Property Act, 1937, he will 
understand why these people have been put in the category simultaneously. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The friend of Dr. Ambedkar knows it 
quite very well. But in that 1937 Act when that provision was made, the 
‘daughter’ was not included. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have said so. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: You want to add this to enable the 
daughter to succeed a father and succeed the father-in-law too. This is 
absolutely unfair. I do not see why you do not provide for this when you 
are making a new Code. You were making laws in which all claims should 
have been satisfactorily met. How should you have put in these provisions, 
because the Act of 1937 was there. I do not think this committee was justified 
in doing this. They ought to have given a full code in which every claim 
was satisfied. You cannot justify it otherwise. Therefore, you took protection 
under that Act. That is the position, Sir. 

When I come to clause 2 of the original bill the ‘mother’ was 
considered as the better heir, because the ‘mother’ was a class by itself 
and the mother succeeded alone. Here I can understand natural love. 
Now the father has been placed along with the mother and they both 
come together. But if you proceed further what I maintain will be 
better understood. When you come to the second case, you find son’s 
daughter, daughter’s daughter. The son’s daughter has got a special 
place in Mitakshara law and according to Mitakshara, she is one of 
the favourite heirs. What happens now, Sir, is that in the original 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bill in the first class, the daughter’s son preceded mother and father. Now 
the daughter’s son is sent on to the bottom. Then if you proceed further, 
Sir, in class IV, the brother and the sister come. And in class V, brother’s 
son, sister’s son, brother’s daughter all come in. I can only state that a 
brother’s son is made equivalent to a sister’s son and a sister’s daughter. 
Now, this is equality run mad, I should say. In our families, we know what 
is a brother and a brother’s son. This is the result of the system or the 
institution of a family as we have been observing for the last 1000 years. 
We cannot get away from this violent conflict. You are introducing provisions 
in this Bill which will make every person rebel against you, because these 
innovations in practices cannot be made by order. According to the provisions 
of this Bill, every Hindu, male and female has got an absolute right of making 
a will and every male and female in future will be absolute masters of this 
inheritance. You have given in my hand a power to the detriment of the 
ladies and I do not want that it should be used to the detriment of the 
ladies. After all, a father when dying will be within the power of the sons 
and the sons will see that the father disinherits the daughters by will. While 
I am saying this, I may tell you, I have a daughter and I have provided 
for her when I provided for my sons. In the house in which I have been 
living with my sons and in the house in which my sons’ wives have been 
living, I do not want that the daughter and her husband, her father-in-law 
and mother-in-law, her elder-brother-in-law should all come and occupy some 
rooms. That would be an impossible proposition. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Under the Bill there is not much chance of the 
father-in-law and mother-in-law being protected. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : They can come with the son-in-law. 
I will show there is a very good chance of a thing like this taking place. 
The father who does not want to touch even water at the house of the 
daughter, will get the property of the daughter, and her husband. I am 
coming to that subsequently. 

I am only submitting that the ladies will be under a greater jeopardy of losing 
their rights in this way. The father will disinherit the daughter. She is not a heir 
according to class I; she does not succeed to the property of the father-in-law as 
wife of the son; but she succeeds only as a widow. Where is she then ? I do not 
understand. She will be put to a great loss. I want, Sir, that the women should 
get their full rights. The theory which I have propounded. — I have not given 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


349 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 349 


very great thought to it — I have only submitted it for the consideration of 
the entire House and for the consideration of Dr. Ambedkar — I do not know 
how it will affect other interests — there may be flaws and I do not vouch 
for it — but I consider, at the same time, that it will be a better arrangement 
than the present arrangement. The theory is that an unmarried daughter 
succeeds simultaneously equally with the son. The woman on marriage 
becomes joint owner in husband’s property as husband would be joint owner 
in her property, then both succeed in husband’s family. 

Then, again, Sir, what would happen to the brother’s son ? and the sister’s 
son ? They are both on the same level. The brother’s son lives in the same 
house probably or next door and does service everyday ; the sister’s son 
lives at Allahabad or Madras or some other place. How will they be equal. 
In regard to other provisions also. — I want to be brief. — If the House wishes 
me to go into the other provisions also, I am perfectly prepared and I have 
got full notes about the changes and how they affect us — but I would be 
taking up the time or the House in such a manner as to deprive the other 
members of their opportunity. 

Honourable Members : You may go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : There are many other considerations 
which go to show that this provision in clause (2) is not well founded either 
from the point of view of consanguinity or religious efficacy and even from 
the point of view of natural affection and love. 

Next, I come to the succession of the female. After the Hindu Code 
Bill comes into vogue, the lady succeeds to the property of the father 
as well as to the property of the husband. Suppose the lady dies leaving 
husband and children, it is clear that the husband has been given the 
right and the children also succeed. So far so good. Then, when the 
husband and the children are not there, who succeeds ? The father 
and mother of the lady. These people — there are lakhs like them — who 
do not even want to touch water from the house of the daughter, will 
get the property. (Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati: “Why” You cannot 
understand this ; it is my difficulty. You cannot realise this. May I 
submit, Sir, that as soon as the father gives away the daughter to 
the son-in-law, the father never goes to the house of the daughter, 
never takes his food in her house and never even drinks water in her 
house, so that the purity is maintained that no daughter may be 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


350 


350 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


given in marriage for mere consideration or any other material gain. That 
is the basis. There are many people who would not even go to the village 
where the daughter is married. We must recognise facts as they are; it is 
no use saying that they do not know. It is quite possible that they do not 
know. It will happen that the father-in-law would get property bequeathed 
by the lady. That will be an intolerable position. Supposing a lady does not 
leave a husband and children and neither a father nor a mother, what 
happens ? This is a crucial point. The property has been inherited by the 
lady from the father. The property, in the absence of husband, children, 
father or mother will not go to the son of her father. Let me put position 
clearly. The property belongs to A’s family, The property will not go to A’s 
family, the brother of the woman, the real brother made of the same flesh 
and blood, but the property will go to hundreds of people of the husband’s 
family of the list that you have given here. Since the woman is dead, leaving 
no husband and children, father and mother, in that case, the property is 
not inherited by her brother or brother’s son or others, but it goes to the 
family of the husband. Why is it so. Because your Select Committee have 
not been able to shake themselves from the considerations which have been 
influencing the entire community for a very long time. (S hri L. Krishnaswami 
Bharati: “What is the present position ?”) We are not concerned with that. 
You know the present position very well. It is stridhana ; it is not inherited 
by the daughter ; the position is different. I was submitting, the property 
of one family is not inherited by the brother of the lady, but it goes to other 
people. This is a position which I cannot understand. But, you must realise 
that this is the position. You may remedy it; I beg of you to remedy it. 
This is a question on which you will be well advised to review. This is one 
of the points which I submit for your consideration. I will leave this question 
of succession at this ; there are many other considerations which could be 
placed before you. 

Then, I come to the power of disposal. I quite understand the very 
great hardships when there were restricted rights in regard to women’s 
property. So far as the joint family is concerned, it is sought to be crushed 
under this Bill. The joint family is mouldering away ; it is crumbling. 
From a very long time, certain circumstances have so arranged the 
fate of the joint Hindu family that it cannot survive. Sir, I do not 
want to shed tears over its going away. The Income-tax Act is the 
greatest monster in killing this joint Hindu family. I know that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


351 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 351 


the joint Hindu family cannot stay for long. But, so far as this Bill is 
concerned, if it says that in future they will be tenants in common. I have 
no quarrel. This was given in the other Bill and this is also given in this 
Bill. I am too much of a realist to cry that my sacred ancient joint Hindu 
family goes away. There were days when there was great use for the joint 
family. Now we are turning back to co operative forming, co-operative holding 
of properties, etc. At the same time, we are providing social insurance, etc. 
We are doing all these things in such a manner that we are reverting back 
to the principles on which the old joint Hindu family was doing. That is 
beside the mark ; so far as the law goes, so far as the general circumstances 
of the country go, so far as this joint family is concerned., I do not think 
that it must be said 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram (Minister of Labour): It is a lost 
cause. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Whatever you may say, Sir, there is 
no question of cause here. I do not like the idea that legislation should kill 
the joint Hindu family. 

In regard to marriage, Sir, I have to submit a few considerations more. 
It is a very difficult matter. 

An Honourable Member: That has been dealt with before. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have placed some considerations 
before. 

An Honourable Member : This is second marriage. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I find myself in very good company 
when I make 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram : You are with the Law Minister 
himself. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Shrimati Ammu Swamindhan, Mr. 
Shiva Rao and Shrimati Renuka Ray wrote as follows : 

“Regarding claus 6 of Part II of the Code on ‘Forms of Hindu Marriage 
we would point out that there are, in certain parts of the country, long- 
standing customs or usages which recognise as valid marriages which would 
not come under the category if either sacramental or civil marriages in 
accordance with the provisions of this Part. We would therefore suggest a 
proviso at the end of clause 6 to confer validity on such marriages.” 

What is this ? I understand that the trouble is the same in that part 
of India from which Mr. Bharati comes. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati : Luckily I do not come from that part. 
I come from Tamilnad and they come from Malabar. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : So far as the question of adoption is 
concerned I find a similar thing in this dissenting note. So it is not the 
Punjab alone. It is also in other parts in which the rules of marriage and 
divorce and adoption are different from the orthodox rules and all of them 
should be protected, and I am very glad that these dissenting members 
represented their constituencies too well in making the observation. 

I was speaking of sacramental marriages. So far as the non-sacramental 
marriage is concerned I have not said a word about it. I want that to be 
protected. In regard to sacramental marriages, the havoc played by the 
Committee is inexplicable. I do not understand for once how the civil 
marriage should be included in this chapter. If it is a civil marriage, it is 
a subject for the civil code. We have the Act of 1872. It is a very defective 
Act and I have submitted a Bill to put it right, and the Bill which I moved 
a few days back in this House for validating the marriage of all others, 
that would protect us much more than the inclusion of this civil code here. 
I am in favour of a civil code for the whole of India and I want the rules 
to be the same for all. It is our duty to do so but why should we include 
the civil marriage here ? If it is to take away the evil effects of that law, 
then the other course is open. What happens in this civil code and the new 
kind of marriage which is neither sacramental nor civil but a registered 
sacramental marriage in which though the marriage takes place by virtue 
of sacrament, yet if it is originally incestuous, then you go to a registering 
officer and you get it validated ? 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: It is only optional ! 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have replied, it may be optional but 
does it conclude the matter ? The Hindu Code says that there are five 
conditions when the marriage takes place otherwise the marriage will not 
be permitted. The words are “conditions relating to sactramental marriage”. 
That means in fundamental matters, as soon as one of the provisions is 
contravened, you allow the law to secure you to get away from the effects 
of that flaw. As regards the prohibition of the sapinda relationship, I beg 
to submit the difficulty is that the uniformity of law which we aim at is 
very difficult to secure in a country like India. It has been said that bringing 
about such a uniformity will be miraculous. I congratulate Dr. Ambedkar in 
working out that miracle and I am for this miracle being worked out. But 
when there are legal difficulties in local matters in which the conflict from the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


353 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 353 

present position to the position that we want to see enacted is very great 
and very violent. I would ask of the House to so arrange matters that this 
conflict is avoided. 

Now, Sir, I come from a place in the Punjab where there are villages 
upon villages having the same gotra and they believe that they are descended 
from the same common ancestor. You know this sapinda relationship which 
restricts the line of ascent and descent to three or five is not sufficient so 
far as those people are concerned. I do not want to say that you broaden 
it further. At the same time this will be unacceptable and a thing with which 
we could never reconcile ourselves, if you ask us to allow a marriage of 
sapindas. This is an impossible position so far as we are concerned, and 
if you allow this then you are really cutting at the very root of our social 
system as is enjoyed in the Punjab for a very long time. This is my feeling 
also for the whole of India. Of course, I do not speak for the rest of India 
because there are certain gentlemen who question it. My view is that in 
the whole of India the position should be the same. Well, I am not dogmatic 
about it, but this is a very wrong rule that we are enacting and that the 
requirements of section 7, that marrying couple should not be sapindas 
should be waived in so far as registered sacramental marriages are 
concerned. So far as the Sarda Act went, a marriage once celebrated 
according to the Hindu Law and our notions, was always indissoluble. We 
are making a break from this rule in so far as we are providing for disrupting 
marriage by codes or customs. Otherwise when rule 3 has been abrogated, 
you can convict a man and send him to jail. I have submitted to the House 
through a Bill that where a person not of proper age is married, instead 
of a fine he should be imprisoned and the law should not be vested with 
the discretion that he should be allowed to go free. The whole country was 
against the Sarda Act and the present provision shows that if Rule 3 is 
followed, then the marriage will become avoidable. This is going against 
principles which we have not accepted for more than 20 years. 

So far as the main provisions in the Hindu Code are concerned, I have 
dealt with them in brief with a view to bring them to the notice of the 
House and since my feeling is that the Bill is not to going to be throttled 
out, I will deal with those matters when the clause to clause stage is reached. 

To sum up, I want to say that so far as this House is concerned, 
it will be well advised in either sending this Bill out for circulation, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


354 


354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


because in that case nothing will be lost — as a matter of fact much will 
be gained: public opinion will be consulted and the public will feel that they 
are being ignored. As a matter of fact many amendments have been made 
even after it has come from the Select Committee : even before the Select 
Committee the people in general did not know anything about it. In spite 
of all that has been said, I am convinced that people know about it. 
Dr. Ambedkar referred us to the two gentlemen who drafted this report 
and said that they were very good people and not such people as could be 
regarded as very much advanced in their views. I have got with me so many 
opinions of high court judges and more opinions are pouring in every day. 
All these people are against it. I did not want to read them out from the 
evidence that is printed in the report of the Hindu Law Committee. I would 
with your permission refer you to page 13 of this report, where there is 
the evidence of a lady, Miss Subrul, Principal, Fateh Chand College for 
Women. She said: 

“The unmarried daughter, one who is not fit for marriage, or one who 
has made up her mind not to marry should get the same share as the son 
and she should also be subject to the same obligations as the son. A married 
daughter should not have any share in the property. If an unmarried 
daughter marries, her share should go back to her brothers.” 

When the Committee was in Lahore to record the evidence, it is said in 
the report. 

“As a matter of fact in the Punjab where I was presiding over the meeting 
of this committee some 500 women entered the Commercial Museum Hall, 
Lahore, where the meeting was held said with folded hands ‘Do not bring 
son-in-law into the family and ruin our business.” 

In regard to business if you kindly consider what effect this will have 
on the business people you will simply be scandalised, A prosperous business 
conducted by a father and his sons is going on. The father dies and the 
business is run by the joint efforts of all and then the son-in-law gets in. 
What will happen to the business ? It will go to dogs. I would refer the 
House to page 139 of the report. It is wrong to say that all the ladies are 
in favour. Thousands of enlightened ladies did not favour this, not because 
they did not want the daughter to be given any rights. I reiterate that so 
far as I am concerned as also those persons who think in the same way 
as myself, we do not want to see that the daughter is not given the full 
right or that women are not given their full right. We want women to rise 
to the same stature as man and to have the same rights. I am one 
with Dr. Ambedkar. I am like him a progressive conservative. I like 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


355 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 355 


that expression very much. I do not belong to the advanced school of thought. 
This Bill is not either revolutionary or radical, as Dr. Ambedkar said. This 
Bill deals with certain matters but the Bill has to be improved. Today there 
is in the Hindu society some sort of introspection and it is able to see that 
there has been decay. It is our duty to see that the dilapidation is repaired 
in the words of Dr. Ambedkar, I therefore submit that from this point of 
view let no body run away with the thought that we do not want to do 
justice to our sisters and daughters. If our sisters and daughters carry an 
impression like this they are entirely mistaken. I know about your good 
self, Sir. You are also in favour of the view that their rights should be 
secured. I therefore submit that this should not be looked at from this point 
of view. I want this Bill to be circulated and it may be taken up after the 
next elections when we have a more representative House. I do not maintain 
that this House is not fully competent or sovereign. If the House persists 
in proceeding with this measure there is no wrong in it but I would like 
to see that this Bill is considered and that justice is done to every interest 
concerned. At the same time what I do want as a lawyer and as a member 
of this House is that this Bill should be considered again by the Select 
Committee, even if it be for two hours, so as to remove all these defects 
and to legalise the original Bill being considered clause by clause and then 
this very Bill may be substituted if the Select Committee so pleases. I 
maintain that it is absolutely wrong to say that the original Bill was 
considered in the way in which the law required it to be considered or that 
the amendments were moved or accepted in the usual manner as is done 
in every Select Committee. This was not done. We should be quite cautious 
that we do not allow the thing to be done in a way which is fundamentally 
wrong. I would beg of Dr. Ambedkar to consider the question if he is satisfied 
that my objection is right. I would beg of him kindly to consider the point 
of view of the poor Punjab people who had no representation on the Hindu 
Law Committee. 

Honourable Members: What about Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : If you speak of Dr. Tek Chand 
who was on this Select Committee I will be very glad if you will give 
his due. If he had not written this dissenting note where would you 
have been ? If you accept him as a man whose views ought to be 
respected then go by his views. This is my submission. I am only 
a mouthpiece or a loudspeaker of what Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


356 


356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


has written. He has said in his note that you should allow nomination of 
an heir, that you allow divorce to take place in the same manner in which 
it is taking place today and he has also mentioned about non-sacramental 
marriages. In all these points when you take his name I beg of you kindly 
to follow him in what he has said in his dissenting note. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Shrimati Renuka Ray. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, my grievance is not being heard. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member’s grievance will not go 
unheard. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : May I submit that I had certain points and 
I would like to have got the advantage of those points being made and the 
replies given to them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member will have the advantage 
of his observations going unchallenged. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: I do not like it, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I have already ruled that the honourable Member 
will not have his turn now. I have called Shrimati Renuka Ray. 

* Shrimati Renuka Ray : The Bill that is under the consideration of this 
House now, or rather the principles embodied in it, have been on the anvil 
of this legislature since 1943 and the insistent demands for these changes that 
are embodied in this Bill have been before the country for a very much longer 
time. It was more than 100 years ago that Raja Ram Mohan Roy wrote a 
treatise called “The Rights of Females to inherit property and their rights of 
marriage”, and this matter was first brought to public attention. Since 1931 
and 1932 there has been an insistent demand throughout the country, and 
at that time the need for the removal of legal disabilities of women and the 
need for a uniform and comprehensive code of legislation was made manifest 
in this country. Due to the fact that on the anvil of the legislature there were 
a number of Bills dealing with this subject, due to the fact that piecemeal 
legislation was leading to anamolies in law and because of this insistent 
demand, the Government of that day was forced and compelled to appoint 
the Hindu Law Committee better known as the Rau Committee on Hindu Law. 
It was as a result of the report of this Committee that the two Bills on 
intestate succession and marriage were introduced in 1943. At that time the 
opposition that has now again reared its head also came to the forefront. The 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 25th February 1949, pp. 925-29. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


357 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 357 


substance of the opposition was the same as it is now but the approach 
was a very different one. The approach was naturally different because it 
was made to an alien government. The approach was made on the lines 
that they were the loyalists who were the ardent supporters of the 
Government, that it was the Congress, which was agitating, that was behind 
this demand which the women of India had brought forward and that the 
Government should not give any credence to it. I am not making statements 
without foundation. It is true that the nationalist press of this country did 
not give that opposition much chance. Yet the opposition did bring out many 
pamphlets wildely abusing our national leaders, not even sparing our belovd 
leader Mahatma Gandhi. There was a weekly paper produced called ‘Hindu’ 
in which these Bills were attacked and they were attacked on the basis that 
the national leaders of this country were behind it and it was due to their 
advice and under their influence that this was being done. Coupled with 
this factor, when the Government found that the women of this country 
were not willing to agree to those machinations which wanted to further 
divide and bring discord among them, when they realized that women were 
against separate electorates and that they stood behind those who were in 
the vanguard of the freedom movement of this country, then there was not 
much hope that a legislation of this type to improve the lot of women and 
to give them their rights would go through with the alien Government in 
power. It was then that we realized that it was necessary to wait till a 
national Government came in. Later the Government appointed the Hindu 
Law Committee, and the Bills were re-circulated. This Committee as the 
House knows, presented its Report after touring the country, taking the 
opinions of thousands of individuals and organisations in 1946 after the 
Intrim Government came in. I will not recapitulate the subsequent steps 
when this Bill was reintroduced after 1947 in the present Legislature as 
these are well known to the Members of this House. But I merely want 
to point out that the opposition which is in substance the same, in character 
the same, has a new approach. I would like to know who are they who 
were opposed to the Congress in those days to say today to the Congress 
‘You will lose your elections if the Hindu Code Bill goes through.’ I would 
like to ask them when they were deliberately against the movement for 
freedom — when they neither supported it nor symalhised with it — when it 
was in spite of them that the Congress won the elections and the country’s 
freedom, who are they today to tell the Congress that they will not win 
the elections. If anyone of them comes into the legislatures of the country 
today it is by the grace of the Congress and so it shall be tomorrow also. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


358 


358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


This opposition that has reared its head and which is similar in character 
as before, has resorted to many devices. It has resorted to various types 
of tactics. The House is aware of the fact that the Governor-General’s name 
was used and this was found to be a fraud. Only two or three days ago 
in a newspaper in Calcutta I saw the name of Shyama Prasad Mookeijee 
after that of two or three other well-known oppositionists and I was a bit 
surprised until I saw in small brackets the words “(of Uttarapara)”. Sir, it 
was obviously intended to mislead, and if questioned they would have pointed 
out “of Uttarparah” These are the devices, these are the tactices that are 
being used by the opposition. As you know, we do not question those who 
have genuine differences of opinion. But this type of tactics that are employed 
today 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: On a point of information, is it not Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookheijee ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : No. It was not the Minister of the Central 
Cabinet. I do not know which Shyama Prasad Mookherjee he is. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I thought the description was “Dr. Shyama 
Prasad Mookherjee, President of the Hindu Mahasabha”. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : That is not so. It was “of Uttarapara”. Such 
are the tactics adopted by them that even Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is taken 
in by them. The orthodox opposition has found its greatest champion from 
amongst the members of a community which recognizes the daughter’s rights 
of inheritance. It is extremely surprising that the honourable Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad would deny to his Hindu sisters the rights that his own women have. 

I would further say that there are some people who have asked “How 
is it that telegrams, circulars, and posters are being displayed by the 
opposition all over — at least in Delhi — and that M.C.A’s are being flooded 
with wires ; and how is it that those who are in support of the measure 
do not do the same?” Sir, those who support this Code are also representatives 
of social welfare organisations; they are people who work for the good of this 
country. Today when there is a national emergency in regard to any funds 
that they have, they would not consider it right and proper that they should 
use such funds in sending wires and letters when they can be used for the 
rehabilitation of refugees. One wire to M.C.A’s in this House costs Rs. 165. 
With that money for three months a refugee woman can be given vocational 
training for rehabilitation. Do you want that these wires should be sent 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


359 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 359 

to you ? I think it would be wholly wrong for such a procedure to be adopted. 
If we have not issued posters and circulars and wires it does not mean that 
the demand for the changes does not continue to exist. I will not go into great 
detail on the provisions of the bill after the brilliant and masterly analysis 
of the Honourable Law Minister. It is quite unnecessary. Unity is something 
we desire in this country, and a uniform and comprehensive Code of law for 
Hindus who are the majority in the country is surely a necessity in that case. 

Turning to monogamy I would like to ask, is there any one in this House 
or in the country who would contemplate with equanimity the fate for his 
own sister or his own daughter of being the first wife of a man who has 
married again. It is true that polygamy is not very customary : It is on 
the whole rare in the country. But in recent years we have seen that 
polygamy has become more frequent, and to the eternal shame of Indian 
womanhood. There have been women who have knowingly and willingly 
agreed to become the second wives of such men. I do not think that I need 
elaborate the point that law must come forward to redress the grievances 
and the miserable plight of the women who are first wives of such men. 

Turning to inter-caste marriage and sagotra marriage, when in the 
Fundamental Rights of our Constitution we say that all discrimination on 
account of caste and sex and other such things should go, surely inter-caste 
marriage which is a permissible measure will be only the very first step 
towards it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Caste can go; how can sex go ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I said ‘discrimination on account of caste and 
sex’. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The honourable Member may go on. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Turning to the divorce provision in this Code, 
I concede that these are restricted conditions. The home is the nucleus of society 
and I do believe that the primary reason for marriage is that it is for the 
protection of children and as such divorces should not be allowed on flimsy 
grounds, but for genuine cases of hardship we have to provide. Since 1943, 
when the Marriage Bill was first introduced, I have had scores of letters and 
scores of people have come to me with their daughters who have shown to 
me how grave and how terrible is the hardship which the women do suffer. 
Unless there is such a provision, both for men and women, it will not meet 
geneuine requirements. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Sir, let me dilate for a moment when I speak on this point, because the 
opposition about which I spoke have been going round telling many women 
who do not understand law or the provisions of a Code, that their own women 
were trying to bring in laws by which they will be divorced. They do not realise 
that it is only a permissive measure, that it is only the aggrieved person who 
can claim divorce, and for whom alimony is provided. These things are not 
mentioned. At hundreds of public meetings these matters were brought to me 

4 P. M. and I had to explain the point, and I think the women 

Members of this Assembly can also say the same thing. 

Turning to the joint Mitakshara family, I do not think there is any need 
for me to add one word to what the honourable the Law Minister has said 
on the subject. It has been fully amplified by him. 

So far as the daughter’s right of ineritance is concerned, it is the focus 
of the opposition. It is only natural because that alone proves that it is not 
bigotry so much, not blind prejudice so much, but it is the vested interests 
that are up in arms. The honourable the Law Minister has already spoken 
on this point, but I should like to say one or two more things. The economic 
status of a woman can only be established by the recognition of the daughter’s 
right to inheritance. It was a point that was brought up by my honourable 
Friend Sheth Govind Das yesterday. He said — I do not know how far he 
believed in it — he said. “Why should we have inheritance ?” Certainly, I do 

agree that a time will come and must come — if we want and believe in 

equality of opportunity for all, if we believe that disparity of wealth shall 
go — a time must come when inherited property must go out. But until such 

time, if there is a difference between the daughter and the son, then that 

difference means a difference in the status. It is the daughter’s status that 
has to be recognised; she as a daughter, as a woman, is a natural heir. 
It is not merely from the theoretical point of view that I mention this. We 
are dealing with intestate succession and it is far more natural that a father 
will not disinherit his daughter, than a father-in-law would, in spite of what 
my honourable friend Pandit Bhargava said. A woman’s rights in the 
joint family, which in years gone by may have served a very useful 
purpose, have not under the existing conditions been so sure in recent 
years. My honourable Friend Sucheta Kripalani made a point yesterday 
which I would like to endorse. Those women or men who are social workers 
know that an analysis of the inmates of rescue homes in this country 
will go to prove how many of these women are those who have been 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


361 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 361 


turned out of the joint family. Without having the training to earn their 
own living, turned out of their homes, these women have been forced to 
live a life of shame. That is a question which the Hindu society must face. 
I am sure those who propounded the Hindu laws would never have 
contemplated such a state of affairs. 

Women are the mothers of the race. No race can advance till its women 
can be responsible mothers and conscious citizens. There has been a good 
deal of propaganda done about educated women. A handful of educated 
women, it is said, want this Hindu Code or want this very halting and mild 
measure of reform. Sir, so far as women are concerned, it must be a handful 
because after all the educated element of this country is 15 per cent and 
the women who are educated are about 3 or 4 per cent even now. So, so 
far as the women are concerned it must be a handful, but behind them 
are, not today only but from decades past, the large mass of enlightened 
and progressive men who stand behind them. It is not the women of this 
country who alone are responsible for the fact that there is no suffragette 
movement, no feminist movement in this country — it is because their 
champions have been enlightened men, for decades past. Today the same 
state of affairs exists and I am sure that the majority in this House are 
also behind us. It is not a demand from the educated women of this country 
but a demand from all those who want that India shall progress. For, without 
women becoming conscious citizens taking the rightful place in society, it 
is not possible for us to progress. 

Sir, it is well-known that slaves have resisted when the Shackles of their 
slavery were removed. It is a fact serfs have objected to freedom. What is 
more, coming to our own country, it was held by the British that it was 
only the wretched Congress agitators who wanted freedom but that the mass 
of the people were quite willing to remain in the pathetic contentment of 
thraldom. If you speak today of pathetic contentment amongst the women, 
it is true, it is perfectly true that many women are not yet conscious. But 
is that a reason that you will not awaken them, that you will not make 
them conscious, that they should not become equal with men in the joint 
enterprise that is before us today of building a new India in an atmosphere 
of freedom ? I ask, is there anyone who feels that it is possible to go ahead 
without the women of this country ? 

Before I conclude, I will say a word or two about what my 
honourable Friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava has said : I must say 
that I could not quite follow him. This morning he called into question 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the competency of the Legislature, and in the afternoon just before he sat 
down he said that he 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I never questioned the competence of 
this Legislature. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: So, I suppose what he said last is what goes. 
He spoke a good deal about the eleven notes of dissent. But as he knows 
and as the House knows, many of these notes of dissent were on minor 
issues and such notes of dissent are usually attached to all Bills and it does 
not mean therefore that a Bill should be recirculated. This morning Pandit 
Bhargava said that two wrongs do not make a right when he said that this 
Constituent Assembly obviously is not fitted to draw up the Constitution 
of India. I wonder, considering that it is such a wrong thing, how he remains 
in that wrong Assembly. I am not going to contradict him or speak again 
on all that he has said this afternoon, because I think it was very ably 
answered before he ever spoke by the Honourable the Law Minister and 
Pandit Bhargava contradicted some of them himself. 

There is one last point that I would like to make. The cry has been raised 
that Hindu society is in danger because of this mild, halting measure of 
reform. I too think that Hindu society is in danger. It is in very grave 
danger — danger from those who would bind and fetter it; danger from those 
who would not allow out-worn customs to be changed but would allow them 
to choke up the life-blood of our society. If those who today appear to be 
so concerned about Hindu society would give a little thought, they would 
agree with what the Honourable the Law Minister said, namely, that you 
must repair if you want to survive. I do not know who has given a prerogative 
to some people to stand up for Hindu society. I do not consider those who 
wish to bind and fetter Hindu law which has been changing with changing 
times throughout the centuries to be the exponents of Hindu society and 
Hindu law and those who wish to improve it and bring it back once again 
to the culture and heritage of our forefathers as people against it. I think 
it is those who would bind and better it who are not the friends but the enemies 
of Hindu society. If Hindu society is to regain all that it has lost during the 
many years and the many centuries of decadence when Hindus were slaves, 
it has to come in line with the atmosphere of freedom that prevails in this 
country today. Men and women have to come forward equally to work for the 
country and there cannot be equality if there is no equality in the social laws 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


363 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 363 


of this country. Therefore, I plead that those who today are opposing this 
Code should give it a little more thought. If they do not, it may be that 
Hindu society and Hindu law may be left behind, for the march onwards 
must go on and India is not going to go back to slavery or domination by 
others. 

* Shri V. S. Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): I would offer my congratulations 
to Dr. Ambedkar for his learned and lucid exposition of the Bill, becoming 
as it was to a professor and an advocate that he is. 

As regards the several provisions of the Bill, one would necessarily find 
himself in agreement with some and in disagreement with others. This is 
not the occasion to dilate much either on the points of agreement or on 
the points of difference. I would, in the general discussion, confine myself 
to certain broad principles and I would try to show that in these principles 
the Bill goes in a fundamentally opposite direction to the notions which have 
all along, in my humble opinion, been lying behind Hindu law. 

There has been a considerable section of Hindu society against this 
measure. It cannot be denied ; it cannot be concealed. Some may say that 
it is a cry of “Religion in danger” ; it is sentimental; it is reasonless. All 
the same, those who are bent upon making legislation which vitally affects 
a society of more than 20 crores would do well to pause, ponder and consider 
its substance. They should consider what is there in the Bill which makes 
so many people — intelligent, educated people — to be against the Bill. 

[At this stage, Mr. Deputy Speaker vacated the Chair, which was then 
occupied by Shri S. V. Khshnamoorthy Rao (one of the Panel of Chairmen)}. 

I submit that there are two reasons for this. The first point that I would 
refer to is the change in the nature of the joint property. I would submit 
that the co-parcenary aspect of the joint property has certain very noble 
ideas behind it. The co-parcenary means that there is a community of 
interest, as every member of the House knows. It means that every individual 
has the fullest right of enjoyment but he has no individual share nor the 
right to alienate the property. The whole trend of modem society, the progress 
of thought of the society, in my opinion, is in this direction. We may condemn 
Communists, but Communism in its pure form, pruned of certain things, is 
bound to come and would come. What does Communism mean in this aspect? 
As I understand it, it means “From each man according to his ability 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 25th February 1949, pp. 929-34. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


364 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and to each man according to his necessity”. In other words, a man is to 
enjoy the property in his hands to the minimum. He has to divert himself 
of individuality. He is never to consider that he has an exclusive individual 
interest in the property. If this is the basic understanding and if the world 
of progressive thought is moving towards this direction. I believe it would 
be admitted that it would be wrong to go into an opposite direction. Every 
effort should be made to promote such an idea and to promote such 
institutions as foster this idea. Dr. Ambedkar in his speech showed at length 
the attempts which have been made so far by the Smritikars and others 
to fritter away this idea of co-parcenership. Assuming that this is so, the 
effort now should have been in the opposite direction — not to complete the 
process of frittering but to restore the co-parcenary property. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharati : Impossible. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : Impossible ? Yes, everything that is not attempted 
is avoided by saying it is “impossible.” 

Nothing is impossible in this world if you try. Now therefore I submit 
that the idea behind the co-parcenary property system is admitted. Each 
individual member or co-parcener has to enjoy in full the common property, 
though he has no exclusive individual interest in it and he cannot alienate 
his interest in it. So when you attempt to deal with it, this co-parcenary 
you should take the idea as a whole. The idea of the joint property, as 
conceived by Mitakshara, seems to be this : that there is right of survivorship, 
and that each family is a unit and not an individual. It means also that 
the family continues though the individuals in it pass away and whether 
one is a male or a female one has a right of equal enjoyment. There is 
equality of sex in this sense. Therefore it follows that whatever is the 
property of the family has to go to those persons who constitute the family. 
Therefore if a daughter does not constitute the family, if she is the member 
of another family, she would necessarily not enjoy any right in that family. 
It is not neglect or unfairness or want of affection for a daughter. The very 
idea of a joint family is this : that whosoever is the member, whether widow, 
male or female, as long as he or she continues to be member of the family, 
he or she enjoys the property of the family which nobody has a right to 
alienate. I would have welcomed a provision to the effect that there would 
he no partition of joint family property and that no person or individual of 
the joint family has any right to alienate the family property. That would have 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


365 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 365 


been very welcome and in the right direction. That would have been 
according to the idea which is fundamentally behind the joint family system. 
It is the family which is taken as a unit of society and not an individual. 
Conceived from this point of view, no sister of mine need think that she 
has been ill treated, because she and her brother enjoy equal rights in this 
respect. I would therefore submit for the consideration of the Honourable 
Dr. Ambedkar that in such a vast country like India, nothing would be lost 
if there are separate experiments on social units. If it is wanted that a 
individual should be a unit, let that experiment be tried somewhere. If the 
joint family should be the unit of society let that experiment also be continued 
in some places. We are a sufficiently large country to have different 
experiments in society. Let both continue and let the persons choose the 
law or system they want to follow. So, instead of having one codified uniform 
law for the 20 crores of India, nothing would be lost if we have more than 
one system prevailing in this country. 

I may in this connection refer to one of the observations made by 
Dr. Ambedkar. I admire him for his erudition. I heard him with respect, 
because in the cause of his arguments he never descended to have a fling 
at somebody. His attacks were heavy, but they were straight and level. But, 
in the course of his remarks the other day, in the course of his otherwise 
lucid speech, he said that he did not know why the Brahmans of old were 
engaged in comprising so many as 137 Smritis and enquired whether they 
had no better engagement. I believe when the Honourable Minister said this, 
his historical perspective left him for a moment. I may remind him that 
these 137 Smritis were not written simultaneously. They were written in 
a period covering more than 250 years at the least. Thus on the average 
it took them about 20 years to write each Smriti. That means one for every 
generation. But here what happens is that during the space of one year 
the Honourable Doctor prepares more Smritis than one. So he need not have 
indulged in that unedifying observation. It was also very unnecessary for 
the development of his argument. 

Sir, I was dealing with joint family property. I submit that the basic 
principle of joint family property is this : that it allows restricted enjoyment. 

Sir, the question is often asked, what is Hindu culture; what is 
Hindu religion as such ? Where angels fear to trend it is difficult 
for others like me to rush. All the same one has sometimes to make 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


provisional attempts and I shall make that attempt. I think, as far as the 
present topic is concerned, the fundamental points which the Hindus have 
kept before themselves are that there should be restraint on enjoyment all 
along. Not encouragement of enjoyment but restraint on enjoyment was their 
rule and according to them, for the community of interest, the individual 
should lose himself. 

Now, applying this principle of restraint, I submit that the whole Chapter 
on Marriage has to be recast. In this respect it has been stated that because 
ninety per cent, of the people by custom have this right of divorce, what 
are you going to do ? It is asked, are you going to impose this custom of 
ninety per cent, on the remaining ten percent ? I submit an argument of 
this sort is a very good piece of rhetoric, but not of logic. What we have 
to consider and what the Honourable Doctor has to consider is not what 
is the custom, but what is good and what is beneficial. We have to consider 
what ought to be there. That has been the criterion all along and that should 
be the criterion. There will otherwise be anomaly. For instance, among ninety 
per cent, of the people there is the custom of drinking. We are certainly 
not for the matter of that prohibiting prohibition. It cannot be denied that 
there is the custom of drinking. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is not a custom. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : All right, you may think so. I am at liberty to 
express the thinking in that way. An honourable Member “There are not 
ninety per cent, drunkards.”) It is one think to call it a custom in the 
community and another thing to call them drunkards. That is the difference. 
It is no argument to say that a certain custom is there and therefore it 
should be continued by law. The argument should be whether it is beneficial 
and if we consider from this point of view, and if a certain section of the 
Hindu community says that marriage is indissoluble, why force them and 
say that there shall be a dissolution, if the parties so choose ? Argument 
may be advanced, that there is in this Bill no necessity, there is no 
compulsion, but there is an option. The option is always there. The option 
to a drunkard is he may or he may not go to the drinking shop. There 
is always the option, but he does go all the same when there is a drinking 
shop and a drinking shop has therefore to be closed by law. If it is to apply 
to a certain portion of the society, I would have welcomed it. In law of 
marriage, there should be monogamy. I admit it. I would go further 
and say that if you consider that from the point of view of restraint, there 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


367 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 367 


should be no second marriage either of the women or of the men. That would 
have been a welcome provision, but instead of that we are going to the other 
extreme and providing that every marriage should be, if so chosen, liable 
to be dissolved. This is not desirable to my mind. No doubt Divorce was 
allowed by ancient Hindus at a certain point of time. It was prohibited later 
on whatever may have been the historical condition first. The reason appears 
to me is this that the unity of the family was to be kept intact. They wanted 
that the marriage once performed should not be dissolved so that no other 
woman should come in ; and that the woman who was in the family should 
not go away and another should not come in. That contingency should be 
avoided as far as possible. To my mind this was one of the reasons why 
a marriage was not allowed to be dissolve. Therefore, my suggestion is this: 
Let there be two parts in the section of marriage. Those who want that 
their marriages should be dissolved, let them marry according to civil 
marriage and let there be free dissolution of marriage for them according 
to the provisions which you make here. Let the other part be there, which 
may be sacramental, and in that part let there be no dissolution of marriage. 
This would, I think, satisfy both the parties. My humble submission is this: 
Why should dissolution be forced ? 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : In that case they will have to decide for separation 
before they marry. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate: I believe my honourable friend has misunderstood 
me totally. What I say is that those males and females who want that their 
marriages should not be dissolved should marry according to the sacramental 
rights and those who wish that their marriages should in future be dissolved 
let them marry according to civil marriage. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : Does my honourable friend mean that there should 
be divorce before the marriage ? 

Shri V. S. Sarwate: Civil marriage does not mean divorce. It neither 
means separation nor divorce. When I say civil marriage, it means marriage; 
it cannot mean divorce. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : It does not mean even marriage. 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. Let the honourable member proceed with 
his speech. 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : My submission, Sir, is this : Let us get clear 
in our minds whether we are going to force certain things which certain 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


368 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sections of the people do not want ? I go further and say when you once 
admit that sacramental marriages are sacramental, then let religion be the 
test for providing the conditions for such a marriage. If religion allows child- 
marriage and marriages of minors, let it be allowed. It is a contradiction 
in terms first” to say that a marriage should be according to religion and 
then to add that it shall be according to religion and also according to what 
is provided in this Bill. That is contradiction in terms. Either allow 
sacramental marriages or do not allow sacramental marriages, if you do not 
like that. In that case, say that all marriages will be civil. If you say 
sacramental marriage is to be allowed, then the marriage has to be performed 
according to the sacraments. This is my humble contention and in so far 
as the provisions of section 7 of the Bill are concerned, they are not according 
to sacraments. There are certain other things added to sacrament. That 
should be strictly according to the religion, if religion is to be allowed. This 
is the second thing which I bring to your notice and this can be very easily 
done. This would satisfy and may to a great extent remove the causes of 
dis-satisfaction which at present exist. Dealing with principles only, my 
simple suggestion is this, that in this very Act there should be provision 
which should allow society, and the joint family in co-parcenery form to 
continue. Nothing would be lost thereby. In this country there are Muslims, 
there are Christians, there are Parsis — Parsis are a very small community — 
and still if they are allowed to have their own law of succession etc. what 
would be lost if a certain larger section is allowed to have co-parcenery, 
if they so chose. If this principle is once accepted then changes can be made 
in the whole draft according to that principle. 

My further submission is that the Bill may be re-circulated for opinion. 
Here I do not touch on the ruling which has been already given by the 
Chair. The question that then arose was whether for purposes of the rules 
publication was sufficient and the ruling was that it was sufficient. That 
does not however preclude me from raising the point whether it is desirable 
that the Bill should be re-circulated. My submission is that it has been lost 
sight of that the Bill if passed would be automatically applicable to States 
whatever Dr. Ambedkar may say to the contrary. My humble opinion is that 
it would apply to all those territories of states which have merged in the 
provinces and all those areas which have agreed that the Centre would have 
the power to legislate for them. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


369 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 369 


Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo (Madhya Bharat): What is the objection if it 
applies to Indian States as well ? 

Shri V. S. Sarwate : What I am saying is that it should apply. I am 
in favour of it. I do not understand, why honourable members without 
allowing me to speak, go on anticipating me and pass certain remarks. I 
was submitting that the Bill should apply to the Indian States. I was only 
submitting that if it is to so apply and that is very much my wish, then 
there arises a fundamental right, which you ought in justice grant to every 
large area which is to be governed by your bill, to express its opinion. This 
Bill was not published in these large areas and therefore the peoples there 
were not in a position to give to the Bill that serious consideration which 
they would otherwise have given. Now when they know that the Bill would 
apply to them, and the Bill is published they would be in a position to express 
their reaction. It is a fundamental right of every person to be given an 
opportunity to express his opinion regarding any legislation which is going 
to effect him. It is further the duty of every representative of theirs to 
ascertain their views before he gives his vote here. Therefore, both from 
the point of view of the representatives of the States and from the point 
of view of the people of the States, it is only just that some time should 
be allowed to them to give their opinion. Therefore, I suggest a via media, 
that if in any case this Bill is not going to be finished in this session, if 
that be the contingency, which I think it may be, the honourable the mover 
of the Bill may consider whether it would not be desirable to take this up 
in a special session later on ; the time that may intervene, namely two or 
three or four months would be quite sufficient to get the reactions of those 
people. I think this would be just and would also be in accordance with 
the spirit of the publication provisions. I appeal to the House to see whether 
justice does not require this. It should not be presumed that the last word 
has said been on the Code. It may be that the humblest of the humble may 
come forward with suggestions which may be useful to the learned Doctor. 
If opportunity is thus given, it would both satisfy the ends of justice and 
may be useful also. 

With this appeal, I have finished, Sir. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Mr Chairman 

Shri B. Das (Orissa: General): On a point of order, Sir, can a bachelor, 
who has not married and has not begotten a son too offer pind to 
his forefathers, make, a speech on this Bill and contribute to the 
discussion ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


370 


370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Chairman : There is no point of order in this, as long as he is a 
Hindu, he can speak. 

* Shri H. V. Kamath : I shall also answer the point of order. Sir, rising, 
as I do, after two lawyer friends and a woman friend, I fear I am labouring 
under a handicap. I have neither the legal argument of my honourable 
friends Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and Mr. Sarwate, nor the sweet 
reasonableness of my honourable friend Shrimati Renuka Ray. As far as 
the lawyers are concerned. I am sure that my honourable friend the Law 
Minister will take care of them and will reply to the arguments that they 
have raised in the course of their speeches today. As regards Shrimati 
Renuka Ray, I am broadly in agreement with her and so there is no need 
for me to take up any of her arguments with a view to counter them. 

My honourable friend Mr. B. Das raised a point of order when I stood 
up. That very point of order, I think, goes in my favour. I feel that my 
only claim to speak on this measure before the House is that because I have 
neither a wife nor children nor property worth the name, I can bring to 
bear a dispassionate mind to bear on this subject, unswayed by emotions 
of the heart. Most of the provisions of this Bill relate to marriage and 
property, adoption and succession, provisions regarding matters which could 
be summed up in two words of most of our philosophers, namely, kamini 
and kanchan. Not having been so far encumbered with either, I hope I will 
have your indulgence and the indulgence of the House in making a few 
remarks on this Bill in a more or less disinterested manner, not uninterested, 
but disinterested manner. 

This century, the 20th Century after Christ has, as we all know witnessed 
the emergence of women upon the stage of history, in Asia, as well as in 
Europe and America. India and our Hindu society have been no exception 
to this world movement. Fatefully interlocked with all the revolutionary 
upheavals which in our own time have been ripping open and transforming 
old societies inherited from the nineteenth century and its long past are 
the relations between men and women. Our age has been marked by the 
dynamism of women who, with men, have set the world on fire. (An 
honourable Member: “But you are an exception.”) and have also helped to frame 
plans for the world’s reconstruction. Breathes there, I ask, a man with soul 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 25th February .1949, pp. 934-36. 



D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


371 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 371 


so dead, who does not recall with pride, and a certain elation of the heart, 
the remarkable and heroic achievements of women — aye, poor, ignorant 
illiterate women — on the field of non-violent battle called Satyagraha, and 
ever on that more sanguinary Held of battle, of blood and iron, of fire and 
steel. The hand that rocks the cradle has shown itself strong enough to wield 
the sword and gentle enough when necessary to raise itself in benediction 
against the aggressor. Leaving aside other lands and other climes, in our 
own India, we all know how women, along with men, though quite ignorant 
of modern warfare and though quite uninured to the lathi, the bullet and 
the prison, how they have flocked in thousands to the banner of Mahatma 
Gandhi and Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. This story is too well known, for 
me to recount at any length. It is in this context of fast developing social 
and economic change that we have to view the measure that has been 
brought before the House. For, no law can function or can be made in a 
vacuum and no law can be divorced or viewed apart from the social milieu 
in which it has had its birth. In short, this age can be summed up in the 
facetious remark of a wag who said that today, women sit in Parliament 
and stand in buses. This in a nutshell, is the revolutionary change that has 
overtaken the present age, Sir, I feel that I am more or less a political 
Parivrajaka and I set forth a few obsrvation on this Bill. 

I am glad that my honourable friends in this House who are not 
immediately affected by this measure have taken such great interest in this 
Bill. My honourable friend, the redoubtable Pandit Naziruddin — I feel, Sir, 
that the title is not entirely unreserved. If, Sir, Mountbatten could be called 
a “Pandit” on the 15th August 1947, I feel that Mr. Naziruddin has a greater 
claim to be called a “Pandit” than Lord Mountbatten of Burma. Many such 
friends have been taking an interest in this measure and I welcome it as 
a happy sign of the times and a good augury for the future, for thus we 
are going in the right way of being one unified society, and ere long we 
will have one uniform civil code for the whole of our country. 

Those Members, within and without the House who are not wholly 
in favour of the Bill and who do not want to go the whole-hog in 
this regard, take their stand at least some of them — on the Smritis, 
the Shastras and our Dharma. Well, Sir, what is Dharma ? Unless 
we decide that question we cannot appreciate or reject the stand that 
some people in this country are taking with regard to this measure. 
Dharma ! Is it merely a code of ritual and externals and ceremonies, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


or is it something deeper, that pertains to the soul, the heart, the mind 
and the spirit ? Dharma !The etymology of this word in Sanskrit is — Dharma 
is that by which the world is supported, yenedam dharyate jagat. That by 
which the world — ’’Jagat” — is supported is Dharma. 

Now are we not to ask whether the observance of a few ceremonies, 
rituals, and formal conventions constitute Dharma, or whether it is something 
deeper ? 

As regards the Smritis which are interlinked or interlocked with Dharma, 
my honourable friend Dr. Ambedkar said the other day that there are 
perhaps 137 Smritis. If I am wrong he will correct me. I believe he has 
counted them. Of the Upanishads it is stated there are 108 and so many 
other unknown and unearthed Upanishads. There may also be many more 
Smritis unknown and unearthed. Of the Smritis known to Dr. Ambedkar 
there are 137. And now we have got the 138th Smritis. He will pardon me 
if I refer to this, not in a light-hearted fashion, because this is also a measure, 
which although not revolutionary, has introduced changes in our Hindu social 
relations. So I can apply the same term as has been applied to the other 
Hindu social codes and social texts that have been already written for us. 
This we may call the 138th Smriti. I may call it the Bhim Smriti. I hope 
Dr. Ambedkar will pardon me if I refer to this as the Bhim Smriti. If I 
have got to include the name of the other protagonist of the movement, 
which has culminated in the drafting and the presentation of this Bill, I 
would refer to it as the Narasimha. It is the Rau Committee which has 
led to this Bill. Ultimately I will not refer to it as the Bhim Smriti but 
the Bhim Narasimha Smriti. 

Coming to the measure before us : though the Smritis are well-known, 
still they differ among themselves. The same Smritikara at times differs 
in different texts of the Smriti. It is very well known that even a poet is 
not consistent in his poetry. Shakespeare referred to women in one play 
as “Frailty, thy name is woman” : in other play he goes on to describe a 
woman who was strong enough to inflict wounds in her own thigh : I mean 
Portia of Brutus ! Coming to our own country, the great poet and philosopher, 
Tulsidas has said: dhor ganwar Shudra aru nari yah sab tadana ke adhikari. 
For the benefit of my friends who do not know Hindi, it means that a rustic, 
an illiterate man, an animal, a shudra and a woman — these all deserve a 
beating. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (United States of Matsya): I would inform the House 
that the interpretation put by Mr. Kamath upon this well known cuplet 
is absolutely incorrect. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


373 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 373 


Shri H. V. Kamath : I hope my friend will give us his interpretation 
when he has to speak. 

Shri Raja Bahadur: It means that a Shudra who is like a Dhol or is 
uncivil and a “nari” (i.e. woman) who is like a pashu (beast) deserve 
admonition. It means that Dhol, (hollow) Shudra pasu, (beastly woman) 
deserve chastisement. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : But our law-giver Manu says : yatra naryastu 
pujyante ramante tatra devatah. 

It means that where women are respected, there the gods are happy. 

Leaving aside the various Smritis and the Shastras, what does our own — 
the greatest Shastra to the Hindu — says? At the time when the Gita was 
preached by Srikrishna to Arjuna, there were so many customs among the 
Hindus which were derogatory to certain sections of the people that 
Srikrishna categorically told Arjuna in one of the well known texts on the 
highest goal of any human being : 

Mr. Chairman : The honourable member can continue his speech on 
Monday. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Monday the 28th February, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


*HINDU MARRIAGES VALIDITY BILL 

Extension of time for presentation of Report of Select Committee 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): I move: 

“That the time appointed for the presentation of the Report of the Select 
Committee on the Bill to provide that marriages between Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
and their different castes and sub-castes are valid, be extended upto the 25th 
March, 1949.” 

The date given here on the order paper is 11th March, but with your 
permission I would like to amend it to 25th March as the honourable the 
Law Minister will be out of Delhi and he will not be able to devote much 
time to it. Therefore I move the motion with this amendment. 

I want to say that I am very anxious that this Bill may be put before 
this House this session and therefore I request the honourable the Law 
Minister and the authorities in charge of this Bill to kindly see that the 
Select Committee makes its Report by the 25th March. I also beg the House 
to supplement my request to the authorities so that, as the Bill is a very 
important one, it may be passed this session. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar : General): The matter is entirely 
in the hands of the Select Committee. What has the House to do in this 
? My honourable Friend should request the Select Committee to expedite 
the Report and I think they will be pleased to do it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I want an extension of the date. I want 
to urge that it is my anxiety that the Law Minister should see that the 
report is made in time and the House should support me in this. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is : 

“That the time appointed for the presentation of the Report of the Select 

Committee on the Bill to provide that marriages between Hindus, Sikhs, 

Jains and their different castes and sub-castes are valid, be extended upto 

the 25th March, 1949.” 

The motion was adopted. 

* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Chairman : The House will now proceed with the further consideration 
of the Hindu Code. 

fShri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar : General): Mr. Chairman, 
when this House adjourned on Friday afternoon the name of Shri 
Krishna was on my lips. I was saying that even so far as the highest 
goal of human existance is concerned man and woman have been 
placed on an absolute footing of equality by Shri Krishna in the Gita. 
The Gita to the Hindus is the sacred smriti, the supreme shastra, the 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 28th February 1949, pp. 940-56 
t Ibid, pp. 941-50. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


375 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 375 


quintessence of all philosophy and all religion. In that, very well-known 
verse, Shri Krishna says — 

“Streeyo vaishyastatlia sudrastepi yanti paramgatim.” 

Women, Vaishyas and the Shudras who were apparently the down trodden 
and the suppressed classes or castes of that age, even they — Krishna says — 
are on a par, on a footing of equality, with Brahmana and the others. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharati (Madras : General): You are right, Mr. 
Kamath. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : So far as moksha and the paragati are concerned, 
there is absolutely no bar to the attainment of the same by women. I am 
sorry that at the present day there are some men, and even certain swamis — 
so called religious or spiritual heads — who believe that man and woman 
should be placed on an unequal footing. I agree that they are not identical 
in all respects 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani (U. P.: General): How are they equal ? 

Shri H. V. Kamath : But to say that they are unequal and to buttress 
that argument by fantastic reasons is to my mind shocking. The other day 
I had the good-luck — or the ill-luck — of listening to a swami saying that 
man and woman are unequal. And, pray, what were the reasons for that 
statement ? He said fantastic, the House will agree — he said that man grows 
a moustache and woman does not. I am not joking, Sir, many of my friends 
were present at the meeting which the swami addresed, and he said it in 
all earnestness, in all seriousness, that man grows a moustache, woman 
cannot grow a moustache, and the woman at most can bear three, four or 
five children in a year. 

An Honourable Member: In a year? 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Depending upon whether she produces triplets, 
quadruplets or quintuplets. Sir, he went on to say that man, however is 
potentially capable of being the father of a hundred or more children. This, 
Sir, to my mind is a fantastic argument. 

When we talk of equality of man and woman, we regard that on a spiritual 
basis which has been envisaged again by Shri Krishna in the Gita. He says: 
“Sarvabhutasthamatmanam sarvabhutani chatmani” 

That is the basis, that is the yardstick, that is the measuring rod for 
equality of human beings or between man and woman. 

“Yo mam pasliyati s arvatra 
s arvam cha mayi pasliyati.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


This is the test, this is the criterion, this is the standard, this is the 
yardstick for equality of human beings, whether high or low, rich or poor, 
man or woman. 

Well, Sir, I do not subscribe to that notion of inequality propounded by 
the Swami On the other hand, I also do not believe that woman — as some 
of them do today — attain equality with men by taking to smoking and 
drinking. That again. Sir, is something which is to be deprecated if by that 
they seek equality with man. Nor do I subscribe to the progressive conception 
of woman — progressive in the Western sense — who, perhaps in imitation of 
the West and so trying to be progrsssive, take to ball-room dancing and 
other Western habits. This, Sir, is also to my mind no way of securing 
equality with man. 

Shrimati Purnima Banerjee (U. P.: General): It is not included in the 
Hindu Code. Does she dance alone without a partner? 

Shri H. V. Kumuth : I know that but we are talking of the equality 
of man and woman. And here, Sir, our great savant and philosopher, 
Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan who is an authority on Hindu dharma and 
Hindu way of life, says : 

“The modern woman, if I may say so, is losing her self-re sped. She does 
not respect her own individuality and uniqueness, but is paying an 
unconscious tribute to man by trying to imitate him. She is fast becoming 
masculine and mechanical. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Derar: General): What about the modern 
man ? 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I hope, Sir, our women will take this to heart 
and will not undertake such attempts at equality with man. 

Shreemati Annie Masearene (Travancore State): May I ask the question 
whether modern man is in any way better than that ? 

Shri H, V. Kamath : That is for women to answer. 

Well, Sir, when I therefore talk of equality between men and women I 
have before me the historical examples of Sita, Savitri, Damayanti, Gargi, 
Maitreyi and Ubhayabharati. Will you permit me to read from our own 
ancient hisiory about these women and the place these women occupied in 
our ancient Vedic times and even later, on which so many of our opponents 
to the Hindu Code depend today ? It is said that in the Vedic and Upanishadic 
age, women occupied a very high place in society. Among the exceptional women 
of Upanishadic times the name of Maitreyi stands out in bold relief. The lustre 
of her spiritual mind illumines the world even today. For sheer intelectual 
acumen two women stand out in singular brilliance. An All-India religious 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


377 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 377 


conference took place — it has been the tradition in this country to have 
conferences of all sorts and religious conferences were not an exception — 
an all-India religious conference took place in the prehistoric age and another 
in the post-Buddhistic age. They had been summoned not for mere academic 
debate but for the establishment of principles that should govern the spiritual 
life of the nation. The former was championed by the sage Yagnavalkya, 
the same as our law-giver and the latter by the great Shankaraeharya. The 
first conference, Yagnavalkya’s conference, was convened by King Janaka, 
the great Janaka, the karma yogi, when the sages assembled from all 
quarters of India, from Kashmir to Kanya Kumari and I suppose from Kliyber 
to Chcrapunji, are silenced, Gargi boldly rises on behalf of the women, 
championing the cause of the humiliated. That, Sir, is the ideal towards 
which our women ought to be progressing and which they will, I hope, attain. 
Ere long, Gargi is defeated, but only after putting up a tough fight. 

In a second Conference, Sankara Acharya’s conference, the task of 
presiding over this momentous meeting falls upon Mandanamishra’s wife, 
Ubhayabharati. Now, it is very important — and I would like my women 
friends to mark this — that in the history of the world there is not a single 
instance of a woman being chosen as a judge of an important meeting and 
making such an exceptional demand on her intellectual ability as well as 
integrity. She gives — Ubhaya Bharathi — gives the verdict in favour of 
Shankaraeharya. Honourable Members: Hear, hear,.) With the result that 
her husband becomes a monk and a disciplie of his opponent, whose view 
henceforward becomes acknowledged as the paramount creed of the country. 
“In fact”, the author says — I am reading from the” Cultural Heritage of India 
“published by the Ramakrishna Mission — ”It is not the original authors” — 
mark these words ‘it is not the original authors’ — “with the emancipated 
mind of creative thinkers but the mechanically minded commentators” — 
Tikakars, not the smritikars, but those who wrote tikas — ’’who worked for 
the suppression of the rights of women, whom they bluntly assumed to be 
in league with ignorance and illusion.” 

Now, Sir, many of our friends who are opposing this measure, — 
I do not mean in the House but those who are outside-they take their 
stand on Dharma. The other day I posed this question, “What is 
Dharma?”. One of the pamphlets issued by the Anti-Hindu Code 
Committee presumes to give us some advice, and what is that ? They 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


quote the old sloke — I do not remember exactly where it occurs — but the 
Panchatantra quotes it: 

“Nasasabha Yatra na Santi Vriddhah, 
vriddhnateye na vadanti dharmam.” 

‘That is not a Sabha or Assembly where there are no vridhahs.’ 

An Honourable Member : But we have so many of them here ! 

Shri H. V. Kamath : That man is not a vriddhah who does not talk 
of Dharma. I, Sir, am sorry that our friends of this Anti-Hindu Code 
Committee have not exactly understood the meaning of “vriddhah” — who is 
a vridhah and who is not. In the Mahabharata there is a story : Saraswata 
Muni, a young boy of twelve, when there was famine in the country and 
all the old rishis who were fasting and doing penance on the shores of the 
Saraswati river tied for fear of their lives — they wanted to save their lives — 
this young boy at that time stuck to his post and his mother Saraswati, 
that is why Saraswati fed him on fish in the morning, fish at noon and 
fish at night — that is why Saraswat Brahmins even today eat fish. This 
Brahmin boy, inspite of the famine, stuck to his post. The story goes on 
to say that the famine raged for many years in the land — twelve years — 
but our young boy, Saraswat Muni — the progenitor of all Saraswats in the 
world — continued to stay. After the famine was over, the rishis who had 
fled for their lives started coming back in driblets, one after another, to 
the shores of the Saraswati river to resume their tapasya interrupted by 
the famine and they tried to boss over this young boy of 24. He was 12 
when the famine started, and he was 24 when the famine ended. They started 
bossing over him. They said, “You sit at out feet; take instruction from us; 
learn from us; become our disciple.” He said, “Fie on you. Shame on you 
pretend to be munis, rishis, tapasvis, and you fly for your lives ; fly for 
fear of death. You have got to sit at my feet and learn from me.” Thus 
said the young man of 24 to those old men of 70 and 80. The Mahabharata 
goes on to say: 

“Na tena vridho bhavati yenasya palitam sliirali 
yo vai yuvapyadliyanastam devah stliaviram viduh.” 

(A man is not a vridha merely by virtue of his grey hair. Even 
a youth who has studied well is called a wise man by the gods.) 
That man is vriddhah who has attained vriddhi Actually the word 
“ vriddhah ” is wrongly translated as old. It means that man who has 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


379 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 379 


attained vriddhi, you call it, wisdom, growth, development — that is vridhi 

Here our friends say: 

“Na s a sablia yatra na santi vriddhah — 

Vriddha na te ye na vadanti dharmam “ 

I think that even in that sense of “ vriddhi ” or wisdom, there are a number 
of my friends here who will live up to that standard. But my friends have 
stopped short of quoting the whole shloka. They start by saying : 

“Na sa sablia yatra na santi vridhah 
Vriddha na te ye na vadanti dharmam.” 

But what is Dharam ? The sloka goes on to say later on what is Dharma. 
These fellows conveniently omit that portion of the sloka. The sloka goes 
on to say: 

“ Dliarmali sa na yatra na satyamasti “ 

That is not Dharma where there is no satya. Therefore, my quarrel with 
those who take their stand on dharma is that they have not understood 
what is Hindu Dharma. 

I will again crave your indulgence to tell the House what our great savant 
and philosopher, Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan has to say on the subject, 
especially Hindu Dharma. He tells us: 

“There has been no such thing as a uniform stationary, unalterable 
Hinduism whether in point of belief or practice. Hinduism is a movement; 
not a position ; a process, not a result; a growing tradition, not a fixed 
revelation. Its past history encourages us to believe that it will be found 
equal to any emergency that the future may throw up. whether on the 
field of thought or of history ” 

We are happy that today the prediction is coming true. It was Swami 
Vivekananda who said fifty years ago that Vedanta will become the religion 
of humanity — the vedanta which has been given to the world by our seers, 
rishis and munis Radhakrishnan goes on to say: 

“We are beginning to look upon our ancient faith with fresh eyes. We 
feel that our society is in a condition of unstable equilibrium. There is 
much wood that is dead and diseased that has to be cleared away. 

I hope, Sir, that most of our friends here are in their own way leaders 
of Hindu thought and practice, I am sure of that — 

“Leaders of Hindu thought and practice are convinced that the times 
require, not a surrender of the basic principles of Hinduism, but a 
restatement of them with special reference to the needs of a more complex 
and morbil social order. 

“Such an attempt”, he says, “will only be the repetition of a 
process which has occurred a number of times in the history of Hinduism. 
The work of readjustment is in process. Growth is slow when roots 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


380 


380 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


are deep. But those who light a little candle in the darkness will help to 
make the whole sky aflame.” 

I would commend this statement of the Hindu Dharma to those of my 
friends who oppose the Bill, even the consideration of the Bill on grounds 
of Dharma. Who does not know and who does not recollect that this cry 
of ‘Dharma in danger’ or ‘Society in danger’ was raised by those that wanted 
to block every reform of Society attempted in the past ? Is it not a fact 
that twenty-five years ago, when the movement against asprisliyata 
untouchability was started, some of our men, even high-class orthodox 
Hindus said that Hinduism was in danger, social order was in danger and 
that disruption of society was coming ? Yet, did we not persist in that much- 
needed reform ? Did we not help to accelerate the evolution of Hindu society 
on an egalitarian basis ? As a culmination of these attempts, have not we 
adopted an Article in the draft Constitution prohibiting untouchability and 
banning it in any shape or form ? If we could do that in spite of what the 
orthodox pandits claim for Hindu Dharma surely I do not see any reason 
why we should not proceed to legislate or provide for the regulation of social 
relations and personal law. 

Again, Sir, honourable Members will recollect the opposition that was 
started against the Sarda Act, which tabooed child-marriage, on the ground 
that Hindu Dharma was in danger and that Hindu religion and Hindu society 
were in danger. In the last century when the custom of sati, cremation of 
the widow with her husband, was sought to be abolished, these same 
reactionaries who block the road to progress denounced the attempt stating 
that the Hindu-Dharma sanctioned sati and that it granted the highest 
salvation to women and therefore it should be continued. In spite of their 
agitation and obstruction, much-needed reforms like that were put through. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava said the other day that this Bill had not 
reached the rural population and that the rustics, the people in rural areas 
have not seen or read or considered it. He expressed anxiety to know their 
reactions to the Bill, before it was proceeded with in this House. When he 
said so, he forgot the fact that some of the Bills he himself had introduced 
had not been seen by the peasants of his own Hissar. I wonder if on his 
advice we are going to circulate copies of our Bills to every village and hamlet 
and homestead in the country. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P.: General): Peasants do not count these 
days. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


381 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 381 


Shri H. V. Kamath : I am astonished to hear from Mr. Tyagi that 
peasants do not count in these days. If they do not count, who does ? 

Honourable Members: You. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I am indeed grateful for the compliment. I hope, 
Sir, in the near future, not merely I, but all my friends in the House will 
count equally with me. 

Sir, while I have every sympathy with certain observations made by Pandit 
Thakurdas Bhargava, I do not think that his opposition to the Hindu Code 
Bill on the ground that there has been no circulation or proper publication 
among the people affected, can stand scrutiny. That argument is absolutely 
untenable. In that way, every Bill sought to be passed here, which affects 
the lives of millions, would have to be sent to them, in order that they may 
register their approval or disapproval of the same. 

Now, Sir, this vexed question of equality, I hope, I have disposed of in 
a satisfactory manner. Sir, men and women are equal on a spiritual basis. 
The Gita, the Smritis and Shri Krishna himself have preached this doctrine 
of equality. 

Coming, Sir to the question of property, property has been, according to 
most philosophers, political, social or otherwise, the root of almost all evil 
in the world. In this regard I subscribe to the proposition made by Seth 
Govind Das — he is not in the House now — that it would be best if private 
property were abolished. Even litigation will decrease a good deal if this 
is done. One of our greatest law-givers and statesmen of ancient times — 
not Manu or Yagnyavalkya — but a warrior statesman, Bheeshma Pitamaha 
has expounded his doctrine in two parvus of Maha-Bharata, viz., Shanti 
Parva and Anusasanika Parva. There he tells Yudhisthira about property: 
akinchanasya shuddhasya na tulyamihia lakshyaye akinchanyamcha 
rajyamcha tulaya samatolayam atyarichyaia daridryam rajyadapi guradhikam 
nityodvignohi dhanavan mrityorasyagato yatha. He tells Yudhisthira that 
his kingdom and voluntary poverty he has weighed in the balance. He says 
that this akinchanya voluntry poverty has proved more than the other. 
Because, he said, nityo nilyodvignohi dhanavan mrityorasyagato yatha. The 
nearest equivalent to this in English is “Uneasy lies the head that wears 
the crown”. If a man has property he is afraid of death. 

I am in agreement with Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava when he 
says that a wife and husband should become one not merely in love, 
but in property as well. Sometimes it happens that love is their only 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


property. Husband and wife may have no property at all. Their only property 
may be their mutual love. But, Sir, we should face the stark reality of life 
today. It was, however, refreshing to hear Pandit Bhargava’s personal 
experience in this respect. This world would be a happier place to live in, 
if men and women, husbands and wives are in the same happy position 
as Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and his wife are. There are, however, 
hundreds of cases today where the relations between the wife and husband 
are not as happy as they should be, or as we wish them to be. (Interruption) 
I am speaking, Sir, from facts narrated to me by friends like my honourable 
friend. Mr. B. Das and I have come in possession of these facts, as told 
to me by my honourable friends, who have got experience in this direction. 

Our Hindu Code Bill provides in this respect that a woman should be 
entitled to an absolute right in her property. In the Vedic ages and in the 
ancient ages, upon which our opponents of Dharma and the Hindu Code 
Bill take their stand, it was only in medieval times, when Hinduism was 
on the decline that women’s rights to property came to be restricted — in 
the Vedic period the social position of women was generally high. 

Mr. Chairman : There are a number of speakers, who want to speak. 
I appeal to the honourable Member kindly to be as short as possible. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I will try to be short, but I am afraid, the subject 
is so vast that it is difficult to be short. 

The Honourable B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law): There will be 
plenty of occasion for Mr. Kamath to speak. There are at least 130 sections. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : But I do not want to let some things remain 
unsaid today. Now in the Vedic period, I was saying that the social 
position of the women was high. An unmarried daughter was offered a 
share in her father’s property, and the married daughter was given no 
interest therein, but she got ample dowry at the time of her marriage. 
So the argument advanced by my honourable friend, Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava, in this respect, I think, may be considered by the House and 
by the Honourable Minister sympathetically ; because fundamentally 
being opposed to property myself, I do not think that any purpose 
would be gained by making the property position worse than it is 
today. Dr. Ambedkar referred to an instance of the property of a Hindu 
family consisting of 12 sons and one daughter. That is very well for 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


383 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 383 


him to quote that instance, but may I quote the other instance where there 
are 12 daughters and one son. What will happen if the Hindu Code Bill 
as it stands is applied in this case ? The family property will have to be 
divided among all the daughters and one son. The son will be left in a little 
corner of the house, and if the daughters get married, they have got the 
right to bring their husbands and they have the right to dispose of the portion 
of the House to a stranger. Therefore the one little son like a little mouse 
will creep here and there and he would not have even a comfortable cosy 
corner to live in. 

Therefore, Sir, this question of property is a very vexed question and we 
might consider whether a daughter instead of getting the property herself, 
whether she might not be allowed an equivalent share of the property in 
cash or jewellery, or whatever she might choose to have, as it was done 
in ancient times and in Vedic times. There was no property share at the 
time of marriage but she was given ample dowry in leu of the share of 
the property. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the Clock. 

The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of the Clock. 

Mr. Chairman (Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao) in the Chair. 

Mr. Chairman : Before we begin the debate, I would like to make a 
suggestion. There are about 25 names on the list. This is a very important 
measure and as many speakers as possible would like to give their views 
on the Code. Therefore, I would request honourable Members to be as brief 
as possible and refer only to the relevant points for or against the Bill. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar: General): Sir, my name also may be 
included in the list. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa : General): I did not know that I had to send in 
my name; I thought I would catch the eye of the Speaker. 

Mr. Chairman : That is why I am telling honourable members to be 
as brief as possible and refer only to the salient points for or against the 
Bill. Members who want to speak may kindly send chits. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain (Bihar : Muslim): May I know, Sir, whether 
my name is in the list ? I spoke to the Deputy Speaker yesterday on 
Friday last. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-07 MK Chandan 17-10-13>DK>5-12-2013 


384 


384 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Chairman : No harm in sending a fresh slip. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Sir, before I resume the thread of my little speech, 
I may assure you that I shall take much less lime than my honourable friend, 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava did. 

Mr. Chairman : You have already taken an hour. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I said less lime than my honourable friend Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava. 

I was speaking about property: me basis for the allotment of property, 
was the principle which was expressed by Kanwa after he bade farewell 
to Shakuntala. Kanwa said: 

“Artho hi kanya parakiya eva tamadya sampreshya parigrahituh jato 

mamayam visliadah prakamam pratyarpiiaryasa ivantaratmo.” 

The first line, “Artho hi kanya” does not mean, as has been literally 
translated, that a girl is somebody else’s property. It means that a girl 
separates herself from the father’s home when she gets married. It was on 
this basis that she goes into another household that in olden times. Vedic 
and later times, that a daughter was given no interest in the property, but 
ample dowry was given. Again, in the Vedic and later Smriti times, only 
when a father had no son, he appointed his daughter as the Putrika and 
such a daughter was equal to the son. This principle can very well be 
considered by our new law makers. They may try to incorporate the gist 
of this principle in the Code. 

I wish agricultural property were completely excluded as it has been 
already excluded so far as the Governors’ provinces are concerned. I refer 
to Part VII Chapter I. Section 94 says: “This Part shall not apply to 
agricultural land in Governors’ Provinces;” Already, there is a cry against 
the fragmentation of land. We may hasten slowly in this regard so that this 
may not lead to further aggravation of this evil. As a matter of fact, if the 
entire land is nationalised, then no difficulty will arise; so long as this 
question is hanging fire and is not finally settled, we may decide to exclude 
agricultural land not merely in the Governors’ provinces, but also in the 
Centrally administered areas from the operation of this Part. 

Now, I come to the great question which has agitated humanity from the 
dawn of time: I mean that of marriage and divorce. On this question, the 
principle that we should go by, that should be accepted in legislating on 
this subject must be, to my mind, “Marriage should be easy, but divorce 
difficult.” I think if this sound rule were adopted for law making, it would 
solve many of our troubles. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


385 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 385 


Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man (East Punjab : Sikh): In your case, 
marriage is more difficult than divorce. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : There are always exceptions to a rule ; I suppose 
I am one of them. 

If I may be allowed to quote a recent historic instance, der Feuhrer 
Herr Hitler in Germany, when he fought the election in 1932, one of 
his election slogans was, “a job for every German man and a husband 
for every German woman”. This slogan brought him, I understand, 
millions of women’s votes, when he promised a husband for every German 
woman. This proves to the hilt the principle that I have sought to place 
before you that marriage should be easy and divorce difficult. My 
honourable Friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, the other day, while 
speaking on this subject retered to this and said that there are usages 
and customs in various parts of the country according to which divorce 
could be effected. There is even this simplest custom, I am told, according 
to which the man says ‘Talak’ three times and the wife is divorced. It 
may be that or some such custom ; I do not know; that is why I said, 
I am told. I personally think that divorce should not be easy. One of 
the modern States, Soviet Russia, at its inception in the early twenties 
of this century, made marriage as well as divorce equally easy. But, by 
experience they have learnt that family as a social unit has got to be 
preserved and strengthened even in a communist State and therefore 
now, though marriage is easy, divorce is next to impossible. I therefore 
think, however much I am inclined to agree with Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava that certain usages and customs must be given currency and 
must be kept alive, as regards divorce, I think that the procedure adopted 
must be very difficult, so that, the family as a social unit may be 
strengthend and preserved. 

There is one more observation that I would like to make on this 
subject. There are instances, Sir, where due to certain causes, a 
dissolution of marriage may not be quite desirable or may not even be 
agreed to by one of the spouses : by the husband or by the wife. In 
such cases, where the wife agrees that the husband may marry another 
wife, herself also living in the same or another house. I do not see any 
reason why, in spite of the reasons mentioned here, permission should 
not be granted to either of the spouses to marry when the other consents, 
without dissolution of marriage. In Delhi, we are aware of one notability 
who has got several wives living at the same time, though perhaps in 
different houses. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


386 


386 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

An Honourable Member : Who is that ? 

Shri H. V. Kamath : No names here please. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I have not been able to understand ; does 
my honourable friend agree with polyandry ? 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I will only say that 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain : Only an unmarried man can say so. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Sometimes, where a couple has been married 
for a long time, the Hindu mind cannot reconcile itself to the breaking 
of marriage ties with the wife even though the purpose of marriage is 
being frustrated. Therefore from the standpoint of love and humanity 
the new Code should provide, in my mind that on such an occasion a 
husband can get permission from his wife to marry another wife, and 
if she consents then the Court should not stand in the way. But the 
ideal of marriage as has been stated by Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava 
should be one in property and love. I shall go further and say that there 
should be two minds with but a single thought, two hearts that beat 
as one. 

Shrimati Hansa Mehta (Bombay: General): In Polygamy there will 
be more than two hearts. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I am not against polyandry if the husband does 
not mind it. 

Shrimati Purnima Banarjee : Very liberal ! 

Shri H. V. Kamath : I take my stand on the principle of equality 
and I go to the extreme limit for both man and woman. It has been 
a regretable incident or development of our history — our long and ancient 
Hindu history — that whatever rights women enjoyed in the early Aryan 
Age — the Vedic, Upanishad and Smriti age — these rights fell into disuse 
and were not given effect to in the later medieval age. I hope that this 
Code will so work that women, whose paradise was lost in the dark 
medieval age, paradise they will regain in the modern age. 

I have received a little warning from a friend outside, telling me in 
the name of God, in the name of Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the 
Nation, in the name of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose, please do not vote 
for this Bill. That very argument, I think, very well applies to a vote 
in favour of the Bill. I can say 

Shri B. L. Sondhi (East Punjab: General): Is mat friend male or 
female ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


387 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 387 


Shri H. V. Kamath : I can say, I make bold to say that in the name 
of God who has created man and woman equal; in the name of the Mahatma, 
the Father of the Nation, who stood for the complete equality of man and 
woman; in the name of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose, who sought and 
accomplished the complete emancipation of man and woman to the extent 
of calling women to battle if need be ; in the name of God, in the name 
of Gandhi, in the name of Subhas, I think this Bill is a forward measure 
which will lead to the greater glory of Hindu society. 

I have only one more remark to make. My honourable Friend, Dr. 
Ambedkar, said the other day in his peroration that either repair betimes 
or perish. We have to repair. Indeed we are repairing. I think the time has 
well-nigh come when, if we do not repair, then society will be rent in twain. 
A stitch in time will always save nine : otherwise the rent will grow more 
and more till society will be rent in twain. 

I began, Sir, on Friday, the day before Maha Shivaratri and I am closing 
my brief remarks on the day after Maha Shivaratri. This day is sacred to 
the memory of one of the great women of the age — Mahasati Ma Kasturba 
and it is sacred to the memory of another great man — Swami Dayananda 
Saraswati. I hope their sprits — the spirits of Ma Kasturba and Swami 
Dayananda Saraswati — will inspire us in our work and help us in our difficult 
task. It is my hope and prayer to God that man and woman may travel 
together as pilgrims of life, dedicating themselves and consecreating their 
lives to the achievement of artha and kama, the artha and kama which 
are rooted in Dharma and which lead to the goal of moksha, the liberation 
from bondage, the goal of the Living God, in whom we live and move and 
have our being, and in whom all men, all women, all Creation, are equal, 
free and divine. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): May I point out that 
I am getting more and more like an anachronism. T have undertaken the 
task of opposing the original motion but I have not spoken up till now. It 
may be that the proper time I will be squeezed out. There are too many 
speakers to come. To-morrow at four o’clock I understand the closure motion 
will be put. 

Mr. Chairman : It is impossible to squeeze out Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 
The honourable Member will have a chance. Mr. Jhunjhunwala. 

Shri B. P. Jhunjhunwala (Bihar : General): I would like to speak at 
another time. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


388 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati : He either speaks now or he does 
not. According to the rules, if a Member is asked to speak, he must speak; 
otherwise he looses the chance to speak on the subject. 

Mr. Chairman : Babu Ramnarayan Singh. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : I thank you, Mr. Chairman for the 
opportunity you have so kindly given me today to do my part to oppose 
the obnoxious measure which has come on the floor of the House for 
discussion. Sir, at the outset I must tell the house that I am not an 
orthodox man. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You are not orthodox. I 
know you are not 

*Babu Ramnarayan Singh : I am one of those who wants that all 
that is old must be broken without delay. But everything must be done 
with wisdom. When a thing is to be done, wisdom demands that we 
should judge when it is to be done and how it is to be done. I tell my 
honourable Friend Dr. Ambedkar that I am one of his admirers. I feel 
that he is the pride of the country : he is my pride also. But I do not 
understand why such a learned man is engaged in such a useless and 
pernicious job. Sir, this is a government measure. I do not know what 
they understand by law. Law is nothing but the will of the people 
expressed in terms of law. I am sorry that the Government does not 
understand what is law. I say that a majority of the people of this country 
feel that this measure should not have come on the floor of this 
House 

An Honourable Member : No. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Take a plebiscite and you will find it. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati : We are here representing them. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Apparently it appears that there is 
a measure called the Hindu Code Bill and a discussion is going on in 
this House but in fact a conspiracy is being hatched to disrupt the 
Hindu society. I feel that it is something like a preparation to invade 
the Hindu society. Nobody can say how long this Hindu Society has 
lived and flourished in this would. I can say that since the very creation 
of the world, since the creation of the sun and the moon, since the 
very creation of the human race the Hindu society has lived and 
flourished and during all these periods there have been innumerable 
invasions of all descriptions against this Hindu society, Buddha came 


* C.A. (Leg) D., Vol. II, Part II, 28th February 1949, pp. 950-53. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


389 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 389 


first. At one time it looked that Hindu Society would be no more but 
the world Guru Sankaracharya came and exported Buddhism from this 
country and re-established the Hindu society. Then Islam came. That 
was also an invasion like Buddhism but it was also a military one but 
I must say that Islam also failed in this country .... 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal): Islam has become the Saviour 
and you have taken the protection of Islam. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Islam could not become the saviour but 
Islam too failed in this country. According to Islam there is no caste 
system in the Koran but some sort of caste system developed among those 
who followed Islam. In the same way Jainism, Sikhism all came in and 
originally they were all invasions against Hinduism but in course of time 
they became tolerant and tried to develop and flourish side by side with 
the Hindu society and religion. This time this is also a sort of invasion 
but this invasion is a democratic one, though the force behind it, is a 
dictatorial one. 

Some of my friends have already said that there has been a discussion 
in this House as regards the authority of this house to enact this 
measure. It is true and I feel confident that this House is not competent 
to enact a measure of this kind. This is not a Constituent Assembly 
even .... 

An Honourable Member: What is it ? 

Babu Ramanarayan Singh: It is a part of the constituent assembly. 
A large number of members of this House either by order or by 
convention have been asked not to attend this Assembly .... 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: With that the House is not directly 
concerned. The Speaker has already said that that is not a matter for 
the House. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Whatever may be the ruling of the 
Speaker I am not talking against that. I bow to the ruling of the Speaker 
but I am bound to speak for the world about the competency or authority 
of this House to anact this measure. The mandate of the country to 
the Assembly is to frame the constitution of the country. But so long 
as that constitution is not complete or has not come into force the 
Government must go on. It was by a hotchpotch agreement with the 
foreign rulers that this arrangement had been arrived at in order to pass 
the budget and any other important legislation necessary for the 
administration of the country. But such a measure like this against 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


390 


390 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


which there is a lot of hue and cry throughout this country should not have 
come before this House for discussion or enactment. 

When I hear in this house as well as outside the cry about the equality 
of woman with man I fail to understand it ... . 

Mr. Tajamul Husain: May I ask the honourable Member why he accepted 
membership on the Committee when he is opposed to the constitution of 
this very honourable house. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : There are many people who are confounded. 
The measure was sent to the Select Committee. This means that the House 
accepted the principle of the measure but this does not mean that every 
member has accepted the measure or accepted the principle of the measure. 
There are so many principles involved in this measure that so far as the 
house is concerned nobody can say that it has accepted anything and 
everything . . . 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: If it was sent to the Select Committee, 
it means that it accepts the principle. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: I was talking about the equality of man and 
woman. According to our Shastras man is not complete; nor is woman 
complete. According to our Shastras woman is called Ardhangi and even 
so man is not complete . . . 

An Honourable Member: What is man called ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Man is also half. I may tell you .... 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): Sir, it is 
impossible to speak in the house when an honourable member addresses 
it on an important measure like this there are innumerable criticism, and 
running commentaries, and laughter going on simultaneolusly. It is not in 
the interest of the dignity of the House. Members who do not like the speech 
may at least keep quiet so that those who want to listen may at least listen. 

Mr. Chairman : Honourable members will kindly allow the speaker to 
proceed. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Sir, I thank my honourable friend 
Pandit Maitra for the encouragement he has given me. I was talking 
about equality. So far as the purposes of the world are concerned 
and so far as the continuity of the human race is concerned there 

3PM is no question of equality or inequality between man and 
woman. Nobody can compare the hand with the feet, whether 
the hand is more useful or the feet are more useful, whether this eye 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


391 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 391 


is more useful or that eye. Man and woman are one and nothing more 
than one. As regards law I tell my sisters throughout the country 
that law cannot help them. What can help everybody and also the 
womenfolk is love and nothing but love. Love between the pair is 
the only thing which can make the pair happy. Well, they may get 
the right of divorce. One woman may be divorced today ; other women 
may be coming for — marriage the next day. Monogamy may mean 
many-gamy; you won’t allow a man to marry a second wife. The first 
wife will be divorced and he will marry the second day. The third 
day he will divorce that wife also and on the fourth day he will marry 
again. The process will continue. So far as pure love is concerned 
for that I think character of the people is most important. We must 
realize that in this country the people lost their character first and 
then anything afterwards. So, whatever we have to do in this matter 
we have to regain our character. As I say that the importance of hand 
cannot be compared with the importance of feet, so the importance 
of man cannot be compared with the importance of woman. I can 
rather say one thing. According to our shastra they are the goddess 
Lakshmi — Women are called in our society Lokshmi, Saraswati, 
Grihalakshmi. They are anything and everything. If I may compare 
man with woman. I can say woman is much more important in the 
world than man. I can explain this further. If we remove or kill all 
men from the world the world will still go on. (Afi honourable Member: 
‘Except one man.’) Not even one man. I say if all the men in the 
world be killed, the world will still continue and the human race will 
continue. (Honourable Members. ‘Question’). I can explain it. There 
are my friends who question my statement. Well, Sir, if you kill all 
men today there will be millions of men in the womb of the women. 
Women are therefore certainly more important so far as the world 
is concerned. But those who talk of equality between man and woman 
want really to separate woman from man. Instead of helping the pair 
to be happy they are really destructive. As I say their importance 
is there; they are the Lakshmi. But at the same time it is very 
difficult to compare man with woman. Nature has created man and 
woman. Their tasks are different, their duties are different and their 
functions are different. What is the use of comparing the two? No 
comparison can really stand in this case. 

My friends have talked about the provisions of the Bill. I shall 
touch only one or two points as regards the daughter’s share in the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


392 


392 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


father’s property. First of all I was a son, then a brother, then a 
husband and then a father and so on. Not without exception, I cannot 
say, but I say that almost every Hindu father — I am also a Hindu 
father and I also have married my daughters here and there — every 
Hindu father is anxious to marry his daughter in a family which is 
superior in status, in wealth and in many other things to his own 
family. Now there is a talk of share of the daughter in the father’s 
property. There have been jokes also. The daughter is respected in 
every way and is also given a share — you may call it a share — in the 
father’s property by way of dowry and so on and so forth. When the 
question of share comes what will happen is this. Ordinarily if you 
come to my place as a guest I may show you hospitality as my friend 
or this and that but if you come by way of right I do not think you 
will receive any hospitality from me. I tell my friends that law will 
not help anybody, as soon as the right for the daughter will be created 
in the father’s property I think all question of love will go. My friend 
Mr. Kamath — although he suggested many things with which I do not 
agree — said one thing. Here is a family in which a man has got one 
daughter and two or three sons. The daughter will be married several 
miles away. The property may be small and after the marriage when 
the son-in-law, the damad, will be coming to his father-in-law’s place 
for share of the property, or as a share-holder, he will not be 
respected. Everything should develop in a proper manner and in a 
natural way. If this measure is enacted there may be a lot of 
complications and litigations and the principle of pure love will be 
killed in our society. 

I, therefore, appeal to every Member in this House to consider the 
matter in a calm and quiet manner. As it has been suggested from 
several quarter in the House and as I also said before, this House 
is not competent to enact the measure. How is it that they are so 
very anxious that this measure may be passed today? Why have not 
the courage to wait for a year or two? May I say they are afraid 
of the new elections? 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: No; not at all. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : The Hindu society has lived and 
flourished so long according to the same customs and same everything 
else, then, heavens will not fall if we send the measure for circulation 
as my friend Mr. Naziruddin has stated. I appeal to each and every 
Member of the House to consider the measure in a calm manner. People 
may be afraid of the next elections, that we Congress people may 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


393 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 393 


not get votes. That question does not arise. We must be true to ourselves 
and to the constituency and people who have sent us. 

So, I oppose this measure with all the emphasis at my command, and 
support the motion of my friend ‘Pandit’ Naziruddin Ahmad that the Bill 
may be circulated for public opinion. 

*Shri H. Siddaveerappa (Mysore State) : I congratulate the Honourable 
the Law Minister for the very lucid expression of the speech he gave while 
moving this Motion. Sir, a lot has been said that this measure vitally affects 
the Hindu society. I come from a part of this country, namely Mysore, where 
some of the fundamental things, this measure wants to introduce, are 
already in force. We have, for instance, got the law of adoption as also 
the law regarding the daughter’s share, and several other things, though 
they are not on all fours with the present measure. But the principle is 
there. We have enacted a Bill as early as 1934, called the Hindu Women’s 
Rights Regulation and for the last fourteen years that Bill is law in Mysore, 
but we have not found there any general upheaval. There is not much 
litigation nor is there any disruption of the Hindu society as has been feared 
by some of the honourable Members here. As a matter of fact, by our 
experience we have come to understand that the measure which is now 
in force is not of the extent that is needed and another Committee has 
been formed with a view to see that there is further improvement in the 
existing measure. 

It was said that the measure before the House affects the caste system 
or some other fundamental beliefs or principles of the Hindu society. 
Well, Sir, my reading of some of the Hindu literature is that if we 
study the Vidic period, that is from 2000-1400 B.C., and study the 
Hindu society then in existence, we do not see any of these four castes 
in the Hindu society then in existence. Every man born, according 
to his gitna or karma had to go through all the vamas or ashramas 
in his life time. A boy, until he attained the age of twenty, had to 
perform the household duties and obey his guru and do all the other 
acts that were assigned to him, and he was called a shudra. After the 
age of twenty he was allowed to be married and he had to take the 
responsibility of maintaining the family, then, according to the duty 
that was imposed on him he was called a vaishya. After he enjoyed 
life for some time and after he reached the age of 40 or so, when there 
was need for every man to defend the State, he had to do the duty 
of a kshatriya. After he attained a particular age, say 60, when 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 28th February 1949, pp. 953-56. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


394 


394 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


he had seen so much of life, and on account of his experience and 
learning, he undertakes the task of teaching the disciples and doing oilier 
duties of wisdom, and he was called a Brahmana, a man who has got 
the guna of Brahman. 

Therefore, this caste system in this country originated in a different 
way, and developed in a different way. But today we understand that 
there are nearly 13,000 castes and a much larger number of sub-castes 
which have got different traditions, different customs and what not. 

We find today that we are one so far as political unity is concerned. 
If we want to have any uniform standard of rules or any uniform 
standard of our laws, it is absolutely essential that there must be some 
Code which gives a certain standard. May be if necessary at the 
consideration stage we may consider which of the clauses are necessary 
and which are not necessary; but if we say there is no need at all for 
a Code, I do not think any of us, if we apply a little commonsense, can 
accept that position. We see in this country there are people who profess 
different beliefs — Dwaita and Adwaita. There are people who practise 
monogamy and polygamy and in some places there is polyandry also 
prevailing. Under these circumstances, is it not necessary for us to see 
that we have got a uniform code for purposes of inheritance, marriage 
and several other things? During the time of the Britishers we found 
that in the guise of religious neutrality or non-interference, they never 
cared to see that any evils in the Hindu society were wiped out; they 
never attempted any reform in that direction. As a matter of fact, when 
Warren Hastings was impeached by Burke, it is said that one of the 
charges levelled against him was that he used those caste codes for 
purposes of his personal aggrandizement. The Britisher saw that the 
caste system was ideally suited for his own advantage, therefore he never 
interfered to bring about any needed reforms in the society. But that 
is no reason that at a time when we are free, we should not aim at 
bringing about this much desired reform. Somebody said, we are 
proceeding further, why should we take up this measure so early as this 
and why should we not wait for some more time? My point is this : 
this reform was long overdue; it ought to have come much earlier but 
for the fact that we were a dependent nation and that we were not 
masters of our own destiny. My submission is that it has not come a 
day too soon. 

So many other objections were raised regarding the competency 
of this House etc. As a matter of fact, the honourable the learned 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


395 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 395 


Mover has given a clear exposition as to how we are competent to bring 
about this desired result; So I do not wish to take the time of the House 
especially as there are many other speakers. 

With regard to the principle of divorce, it is in my opinion a very 
much debated point. It is a thing which really agitates a large number 
of people in the Hindu society. Whether it be sacramental marriage or 
any other form of marriage, I do not wish to see that there should be 
under any circumstances an indissoluble tie of marriage. Instead of 
giving unfettered discretion to people. I would request the honourable 
the Mover to consider this point, namely, that a time-limit may be 
imposed — say five years or three years, whichever is approved by this 
House — within which the married people may be able to round off their 
angularities, having time to study each other, and if inspite of it they 
are badly off, it may be necessary that the marriage tie will have to 
be snapped. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra Marriage on probation, you 
mean ? 

Shri H. Siddaveerappa : Not marriage on probation, but before 
anybody can have the benefit or advantage or whatever you call it of 
divorce, a particular period should be prescribed within which no married 
couple may be allowed divorce. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi: That is the English law. They have 
three years there. 

Shri H, Siddaveerappa : Let us consider the experience in the 
Western countries; for instance, let us take America. We have the 
experience of a famous divorce court judge, Lindsay. Whenever anyone 
went to him for a divorce, he used to tell: “You people will live 
together for one or two months and then come to me again. Even 
inspite of it, if you feel that you must get yourself divorced then you 
may apply.” He says that invariably his experience as a judge is that 
whenever people try to separate each other, it is because that they have 
not tried to understand each other. If there was occasion to judge each 
other, there may not be recourse to this extreme form of separation. 
Therefore, I suggest that some such period should be prescribed in regard 
to divorce. 

Regarding the theory of fragmentation of property, we find that 
agricultural land is not at all affected by this measure. It is a good thing 
in itself. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


396 


396 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Ch. Ranbir Singh (East Punjab : General): It is affected, in Centrally 
Administered Areas. 

Shri H, Siddaveerappa : No, it is not. Only the Centrally 
Administered Area is affected, which is a very small area. So far as 
this agricultural land is concerned, I think the time has come when we 
should undertake agrarian reform in the interests of our own agriculture 
and our own existence so far as food is concerned. Not only that, with 
regard to inheritance the time has come when we shall have to have 
some such thing as the law of primogeniture. In view of the fact that 
90 per cent, of the people of this country are living in the villages and 
their property is mostly agricultural, and in view of the fact that this 
property of the 90 per cent, of the people is taken away from the 
operation of this Act, I believe the theory of fragmentation does not stand 
to logic or reasoning. 

With regard to custom, some of my friends submitted that custom 
ever rides law, therefore any custom having the sanction of law should 
be accepted. I think many of us, who have experience as lawyers, 
can easily see how custom conveniently comes in handy to take away 
the effect of any benevolent law. I may give one instance. There is 
a provision in the Indian Penal Code under which if any girl is 
dedicated for an immoral purpose it is an offence. The marks of 
dedication are the tying of some heeds round the neck of the girl. 
Now the ingenuity of a lawyer was able to invent the custom of tying 
of heeds and apply that custom even in cases where the dedication 
was done for immoral purposes. Apart from this, we also know how 
on account of custom litigation sets in and how enormous amounts 
are spent in it, at least it was so in the previous regime. People used 
to spend enarmous amounts in getting a decision on any particular 
point and squander money over judges distinguishing between two 
different judgments. Today this Bill is so simple, so lucid, that 
without recourse to any lawyer, any man can for about four annas 
ascertain what his position is with regard to law. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : He can manage everything with 
four annas, you mean ? 

Shri H. Siddaveerappa : It is quite possible. A day will come. 
We will have to try for that also. As a matter of fact, we have been 
seeing how these judicial decisions affect some of the property rights 
and other things. A judge comes to one decision and that will be 
law for some time. Tomorrow they may find out some other law, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


397 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 397 


some text or smriti or some such old document, and we will be told that 
this law is overruled, with the result that nothing is settled in Hindu 
law. As a matter of fact, we have been seeing under the British regime, 
for the last 150 years, there have been so many decisions after decisions, 
any number of them and still they say nothing is settled in Hindu law. 
I want to ask when we will have a settled form of law wherein the 
ordinary man can understand what exactly is his position. As a matter 
of fact, when a creditor wants to give some money, he has to satisfy 
who are his heirs, who have shares and all that, with the result that 
on an agricultural land on which he can give Rs. 1,000 loan, he gives 
only Rs. 500 or so. Therefore, taken from any angle of view, I believe 
this is a very healthy measure, so I give my wholehearted support to 
it. 

Mr. Chairman : The debate will continue tomorrow after Question 
Hour. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-I3\VOL-J4W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 398 

398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*HINDU CODE — contd. 

f Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras: General): It is with great pleasure 
that I rise to support the motion made by the Honourable Minister of 
Law. I also feel that I should express my deep debt of gratitude to Sir, 
B. N. Rau and his colleagues on the Committee who have bestowed great 
labour on the report which forms the basis of this Bill. 

The Bill to codify the Hindu law when it goes on the State Book 
will be a great landmark in the social history of this country. 
Before I go in greater detail into the main provisions of this Bill I would 
like to stress one point. Honourable Members are aware of the fact that 
the provisions of this Bill are of a permissive or enabling nature. They 
impose no sort of obligation or compulsion on the orthodox section of 
the Hindus. Their only effect is to give the growing and clamant body 
of Hindus, men and women, the freedom to live a life which they wish 
to live without in any way affecting or infringing their liberty to adhere 
to the old ways. 

I wish to confine my remarks only to one or two main objections 
that have been raised against the bill. The first objection is against 
the attempt at codification itself. It is urged that many of the principles 
of the Hindu Law are now well-settled, and as it would unsettle the 
settled law, a code is not called for at all. The other objection is that 
far from preserving the principles of Hindu Law which have been 
handed down from generation to generation an attempt at codification 
would tend to introduce principles which are quite alien to Hindu 

„„ society. It has been said that the Legislature has no right 

to alter the law of smritis, shrutis and sages of great 
repute. An other charge against the Hindu Code Bill is that it seeks 
to introduce changes of a revolutionary character and therefore, it will 
destroy the law laid down by smritis and Dharma. My answer to all 
these objections is that it is just because many of the principles of the 
Hindu Law are now well settled, that an attempt to set down all these 
principles into a systematised and easily understood code should be made. 

Hindu Law as it exists today is rigid without being certain. Many 
judicial decisions and precendents have outlived their usefulness. As 
an English writer puts it, the case law on the subject has become a 
luxuriant jungle where it is not possible to see the wood for the 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 1st March 1949, pp. 591-1030. 
t Ibid. pp. 991-95. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


399 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 399 


trees. There are frequently conflicting decisions of various High Courts 
given from time to time. Even the decisions of the Privy Council on some 
of the intricate questions of law are widely felt to be out of accord both 
with ancient authority and also modern spirit. A uniform and unified 
law will prove a boon to Hindu Society, because it would save consid- 
erable time of law students and also practitioners, who have otherwise 
to take a considerable number of years to get to acquire a full grasp 
of the law. Even the ordinary citizen will also be able to read the code 
and say to himself, “Within this cover is the whole basis of my rights, 
privileges and obligations.” A code will also minimise the time and labour 
of Judges and it would also induce the speedy administration of justice. 
To be without a code is, in my opinion, to be without justice. 

The objection that it has introduced changes of a revolutionary 
character is mainly voiced by vested interests. The subordination of some 
of the present interests to secure the future interests of the country is 
always a thing to be welcomed. As a matter of fact, this Code does not 
really go far enough in that direction and that is my opinion. 

The bulk of the agricultural property is excluded from the operation 
of this code. Therefore, it is urged that your object to have a uniform 
law is frustrated. Why attempt a Code at all if this object is defeated? 
My answer to that objection is this. What is aimed by this code is to 
have a uniform law for all Hindus, but not a uniform law necessarily 
for all kinds of property. In the interest of agriculture itself, if not for 
anything else, separate laws and special laws will be enacted by 
appropriate legislatures which may include a special law of succession 
which is quite different from the law of succession applying to other forms 
of property. . 

Now, I come to what I consider as the main objection, that is, the giving 
of a share to the daughter. This was opposed on many grounds that it would 
lead to disintegration and fragmentation of property, besides introducing 
a foreign element in the shape of the son-in-law. And also it is objected 
to on the ground that the simultaneous heirship of a daughter with a son 
would simply shatter the Hindu society. Also it is said that if the daughter 
takes away a share the love of her brothers is lost. It is also said that 
sons in many families would simply be ruined under the double burden 
of marriage expenses and also a share to the daughter. May I ask what 
sort of affection it is of the brothers if only it would involve putting a little 
more strain on their own self-interest? May I also ask if no share is given 
to the daughter the sons’ love will be greater? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


400 


400 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


With regard to fragmentation I fail to understand how this question 
be raised, as it has already been said that agricultural property is 
excluded from the purview of this Bill. This point was raised by one 
of the honurable members of this House and we are all aware that the 
bulk of agricultural property is excluded from the operation of this code. 
It would only apply to urban and movable property. What they mean, 
I feel, by fragmentation is dimunition of the share which they will gel 
if the daughter is also given a share, the daughter being of the same 
flesh and blood should there be so much uproar, I ask, if a share is 
sought to be given to her? 

With regard to the introduction of a stranger into the family my 
answer is that the property which the daughter takes from her father, 
if necessary by legislation may be made to form as part of her separate 
properly. The evil or the good resulting from the legal provision depends 
also on the particular individual i.e., son -in-law concerned. I do not want 
to say much about this. 

It should be noted that the daughter, as do the sons, demands a share, 
if need, be only after the death of the father and there is absolutely 
no question of her demanding a partition when the father is alive. 
Therefore I do not see why some honourable members should object to 
this. As the Law Minister has already dealt with the matter, the smritis 
themselves have recognised the share of the daughter to her father’s 
property and therefore there is nothing revolutionary about this and the 
attempt to exclude the daughter on the ground that she does not 
contribute to the spiritual benefits of the father or her ancestors is, I 
say, unjust and unfair. 

In this connection the argument is put forward, why not the daughter 
take a share in her husband’s property and not come to ask for a share 
in her father’s property? This appears to be a compromising formula. I may 
say straightaway that this compromise formula is not or will not be 
acceptable to women. We say that we should be recognised on a basis of 
equality. This code proposes to abolish the distinction that exists on the 
basis of sex and that should be removed. The daughter should be recognised 
as an heir and should enjoy her property in her full right as a daughter 
and as an heir to the father. As regards the question of disintegration I 
have already dealt with the matter. The evil could be met by different ways. 
Fragmentation can be stopped and consolidation could be secured by special 
laws. If the properly goes down to a certain extent that could be sold and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


401 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 401 


the shares could be adjusted. There are different ways how this problem 
could be tackled and the argument on that score could not be advanced 
that the daughter should not get a share. Hence the Select Committee 
has recommended, based on this principle of equality that she should 
be given an equal share with the son. I appeal to the honourable members 
of the House to support the recommendation made practically unani- 
mously by the Select Committee in this regard 

Shri H, V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar: General): Dr. Ambedkar was 
not in sympathy with that. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: Therefore when it is said that the daughter 
takes a share both from the father and from the husband and the 
husband takes nothing, how about this? The Select Committee has 
recommended that the man also can inherit the wife’s property in the 
same way as the wife inherits the husband’s property and also the son 
will be given a share equal to that of the daughter’s in the mother’s 
property just as the daughter claims a share in her father’s property. 
Therefore, there should be no difficulty even in this regard for those 
who oppose this Bill on these grounds there is one answer given. I do 
not want to quote because the time is limited and other members are 
anxious to speak ( Honourable Members : Go on. Take your time) Mr. 
V. V. Srinivasa Iyengar pointed out in this connection that those who 
oppose this legislation on religious grounds labour under a misunder- 
standing that Hindu law has remained static from the time of Manu. 
That is not the position. 

This takes me on to another subject and that is about the status of 
women with reference to the holding of an estate absolutely and not in 
life, the Bill seeks to remove this disqualification attached to woman’s 
estate and it gives her the right to hold property absolutely and not 
for life only. The main argument in favour of limiting the estate in the 
case of women is that they are incapable of managing it and also that 
they are likely to be duped or exploited. Also it is said that they arc 
illiterate and they do not understand the principles of management and 
hence there will be a strong inducement to designing male relatives to lake 
away her right. My answer to all this is this. The House is aware that the 
daughter has an absolute estate in Bombay today. Therefore, on that ground 
I do not think they are exposed to any risk. The other argument is that 
we have score of instances where women have proved better managers than 
men. Also there is one more argument. No doubt I agree that women are 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


402 


402 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


illiterate but may I ask you how many men are literate? Three out of 
four men continue to be illiterate today (An honourable Member: ‘Nine 
out of ten’.) Therefore, the relative advantage enjoyed by men is confined 
only to one in four of the male population An honourable Members : ‘they 
are the sons of their mothers.’) and is should also be remembered that 
the percentage of literacy among women is rising very much faster today 
than it is among men ( Shri H. V. Kamath : ‘Question.’). With regard 
to the quantum of her share I have already stated the position of the 
Select Committee. We have recommended an equal share to the daughter. 
I appeal to you that you should be generous enough to endorse the 
recommendation made by the Select Committee without any hesitation 
on your part. I will now come to another subject, namely monogamy. 
However much I wish to speak on this subject, I do not do it because 
of the limited time at my disposal. Not only that, but this has been dealt 
with amply by the honourable the Law Minister and also by several other 
speakers. Many arguments have been put forward on economic and social 
and other grounds; even religion and spiritualism have been sought in 
aid to support their arguments. But feelings were expressed in a very 
light hearted manner: if only a man is healthy and wealthy, why not 
he marry and marry again! Also, that if the rule of monogamy is enforced 
many Hindus will become Muslims in order to secure the benefits of 
polygamy! I need not answer this question because I have found one 
lady witness very ably and effectively answering tills point. She said that 
if the rule of monogamy is not enforced, it may be that women will 
become Christians in order to secure the benefits of monogamy, but 
neither of them I think is serious. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa : General): Do you think a Christian woman is 
happier than a Hindu woman? 

Shrimati G, Durgabai: As the honourable the Law Minister has 
already stated, the force of world opinion and the practices prevailing 
in the whole world are there and they are in favour of monogamy. 
Therefore, I need not deal with this matter any more. 

Neither have I time nor is it desirable for me to take the other 
aspects of the Bill because there are other Members who will deal 
with the questions like marriage and divorce; but I only wish to say 
something on co-parcenary. The distinction between Mitakshara 
and Dayabhaga came as a result of the different interpretations put by 
the commentators and other interpreters. Fundamentally, the basis of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


403 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 403 


joint family is there common to both. The right by birth and the principle 
of survivorship is a distinctive feature of Mitakshara. The Dayabhaga 
system has in actual experience proved very satisfactory and the Bill 
therefore, seeks to replace the Mitakshara system of inheritance by 
Dayabhaga It is said the greater prosperity of the people in Bengal and 
their increasing commercial enterprise is due to a large extent to the 
Dayabhaga system. I am told that the commercial enterprise of Nattukottai 
Cheitiyars in Madras is largely due to their ideas of legal relations of 
the members of their families which approximate more to those of 
partnership than is the case in Brahmin joint families. 

Much has been said on this subject, therefore, I do not want to labour 
this point. I feel that the opposition is more due to their love for this 
ancient institution, but those who oppose it I think oppose it because 
they forget the fact that Hindu Law and Dharma on these matters remain 
static and no changes have been made. Various judicial decisions have 
made changes from time to time into this system and the institution 
has been simply shorn of its characteristics. This point has been very 
ably answered by a very great lawyer like S. Srinivasa Ayyangar, who 
said that under the Hindu Law, as authoritatively interpreted by the 
Privy council, the unity is broken by any member at any time by a 
unilateral declaration of his intention to separate from the family. This 
is quite sufficient to answer that charge against the breaking of the co- 
parcenary or the replacement of the Mitakshara by Dayabhaga. 

I do not want to take more time of the House. Many things have happened 
since the achievement of freedom and India has been participating in 
international conferences and pleading for human rights and also for equal 
treatment of Indians in foreign countries. It will be a great misfortune if 
at this juncture we fail to enact a Hindu Code within our own borders, 
in which there will be no discrimination and where there will be equality 
for men and women to move, to develop and to contribute to the re-building 
of our India. Our constitution is in the making, we have already passed 
the Chapter on fundamental rights, and recognised the principle of equality 
of everyone before law. We have also passed the provision enabling ourselves 
to have a uniform civil code. Therefore, I make this appeal to you. Let us 
not be wanting or halting in having a Code of Hindu Law for ourselves 
which will prove a great boon to our own society in the way in which I 
have already stated. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-I3\VOL-J4W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 404 

404 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


* Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): Sir, I am 
thankful to you for giving me this opportunity to put in a few words 
what I feel regarding the motion before the House, namely the consid- 
eration of the Hindu code. I know I am in a position of great disadvantage 
inasmuch as I could not be present when the Motion was debated during 
the first two days, as I had to be away from this place. I had, in the 
few moments I could snatch in the midst of my preoccupations, noticed 
Press reports that my honourable friend the Law Minister, Dr. Ambedkar 
had made a magnificent speech in support of his motion. Also, that an 
equally powerful speech — I am not making any comparison. I rely on 
reports, though there is a divergence of opinion even among the reporters 
that an equally powerful speech was made on the other side by Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava. 

I listened with considerable attention to the four speeches that have 
been made in favour of the motion and the one against it. As the debate 
was going on yesterday, I could see the mood of the House — sometimes 
hilarious, but when a Member sought to differ from the main provisions 
of the bill, all manner of gibes and ironical cheers greeted him all 
through. ( Honourable Members: ‘No, no’) I am glad it is not so. Well, 
I think it will give me some encouragement because most members 
know — I think every single member knows — which way I will speak. I 
do not know how I came to attain this sort of notoriety — I could not 
say, fame — that I do not support the provisions of this Bill. I will make 
no secret of it, (An Honourable Member : Why should you?) because I 
will speak out my convictions. I know what a delicate task it is for me 
to be addressing this House, constituted as it is and in the mood in which 
I find it. I know that I may have to rue the temerity which I have shown 
by taking courage in both hands to say what I feel. It is rather helpful 
that immediately before I address this House. I have had the opportunity 
of listening to my honourable sister, Shrimati Durgabai, who has made 
a closely reasoned speech in support of this Bill. 

I must apologise to my sister for not being able to agree with her 
in the theories which she has so confidently assumed as being almost 
accepted by all. She finished her speech with a peroration, appealing 
to the House to give effect to the principle in the Draft constitution 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II 1st March 1949, pp. 995-1015. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


405 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 405 


providing for equality for all in the eye of the law. Yes, we have done 
that. She also reminded us that we have already passed, as one of the 
Directive Principles of the Constitution that there should be a uniform 
Civil Code for the whole of this country. I am glad she gave me the 
starting point of my speech today. When this subject was debated a couple 
of months ago in another place and when it was thrashed out elsewhere 
informally, I registered a vehement protest against this provision, as I 
felt, that it was nothing but an outcome of shibboleths and slogans — 
a uniform Civil Code for a country inhabited by 32 to 34 crores of people 
professing all manner of faiths : Hinduism, Sikhism, Jainism, Buddhism, 
Christianity ; and last but not the least, Islam! I tabled amendments 
that the personal law should be secure and that this was an encroach- 
ment by the Slate on the personal law of a person which the Slate had 
no right to make. 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani (U. P. : Muslim): Hear, hear. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal: General): That is the reason 
why you should support this Hindu Code. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : The honourable sister in front of 
me says that it is the reason why I should support the Hindu Code. 
May I say that that is the very reason why I am going to oppose the 
Hindu Code — one of the main reasons. You must be logical. I can 
understand the feelings of my sisters. Do not think that I am a hater 
of women, that I am a misogynist, or that I have no feeling for women. 
(An Honourable Member:’ He is a married man ‘) Yes I am a married 
man. I have a humble wife — married according to Hindu shastric rites, — 
a simple, unsophisticated lady, bred up and nurtured in the ideals of 
our Hindu homes. (The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: ‘What a pity’) 
It is a pity ! May be, but I have not much of love or liken for the lavender, 
lipstick and vanity bag — variety of that sex. I am happy, and I am sure 
out of every hundred Hindu homes, 98 have got these types of wives 
and are quite happy. (An Honourable Member: ‘Why 98 ? 99.9 per cent, are 
so’) I am glad, a friend says it is 99.9 per cent, recurring. That enforces 
my argument. So I can tell my honourable friend Dr. Ambedkar that I have 
not felt the necessity for the drastic changes that he has sought to introduce 
in this Bill. (The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: ‘Neither did I feel any 5 .) 
My honourable friend says he also did not feel the necessity. If he did 
not really feel any necessity for these sweeping changes, then do I take it 
that it was due to his megalomania that we have got this Hindu Code 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


406 


406 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bill ? I have very great admiration for my honourable friend 
Dr. Ambedkar, with whom I had the privilege to work for a number of 
years before this Assembly. I respect him. I know the performance he 
has been daily putting in connection with the Constitution Act, (Honourable 
Members: ‘Hear, hear’) I appreciate him. I admire him. But I will never 
appreciate what he has been doing in connection with this Social 
Legislation which is sure to disrupt the Hindu society by the revolu- 
tionary changes which very few of us can now realise. ( Honourable 
Members: ‘No revolution. No, no’) Yes, I am glad it is “No no.’ If this 
Bill is passed into law 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar: General): No. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: What no ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : It would not be passed into law. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: I see. If this Bill is passed into law 
as it is I will then see who is a better prophet — myself or those who 
say “No, no.” 

Shri L, Krishnasvvami Bharathi (Madras : General): You wait and 
see. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Well, wait and see. Posterity will 
judge, and I do not think you will have to wait till posterity. You will 
have to wait only till the next General Election to see what the country 
has to say about you and your work. 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani: Hear, hear. Well done. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Sir, the first point raised by my sister 
Shrimati Durgabai was that having passed that Directive principle, you 
should not now object to the Hindu Code. When that Directive Principle 
was accepted by the House. I thought that the snake had been killed — the 
Hindu Code Bill, — but I now see that the snake was only scotched ; it has 
reared its head again and will in time spread out its fangs of venom. If 
you are true to your Directive Principles, if you mean to act on them, then 
why bring the Hindu Code Bill. Bring a Universal Civil Code applicable to 
Hindus, to Christians, Shri L Krishnaswami Bharati: ‘Will you support it 
?”) to Parsis, to Sikhs, to Jains, to Buddliists, to Muslims. You dare not 
touch the Muslims but you know that Hindu society today is in such a bad 
way that you can venture to do anything with it. Only a few ultra-modern 
persons, who are vocal, but have no real support in the country, are 
interested in this Bill. ( Interruption ). 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


407 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 407 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let him proceed. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Millions of dumb people, ignorant 
but not the less intelligent or sensible simply because they do not have 
the collegiate education, or are not members of the legislatures think 
that such a radical change in their personal law is not called for. They 
are not to be ignored. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Then do not draw up the Constitution. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I therefore feel that there is no 
sincerity in the acceptance of the principles of one uniform Civil Code 
for the whole country; or else, how could you, within two months of it, 
come out with this Hindu Code Bill which seeks to govern only the 
Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Hindu Code came much before. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: You have omitted Christians, 
Muslims, Parsis. 

Maulana Hasarat Mohani: Muslims will never accept any interfer- 
ence in their personal law. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : You need not have reminded me. 
I know that. I perfectly appreciate the proposition of my honourable 
friend Maulana Hasrat Mohani. But all the same. I think this is a 
fundamental departure from the accepted principles in the Constitution. 

When my honourable friend Shrimati Durgabai said that codification 
is justified. She tried to prove that an irresistible case had been made 
out for codification. With all respect to my sister Shrimati Durgabai I 
submit I stand unconvinced. I can understand the necessity for codifi- 
cation when the law is in a state of flux or that there is much diversity 
of opinion, or a good deal of vagueness or uncertainty about it. 
Codification should in such a case be undertaken by the best legal brains 
in the country silting together to give shape to the various principles 
of law which are more or less in a confusing or uncertain state. Is that 
the case with regard to Hindu law in this country ? 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (U. P.: General); It is. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I accept your statement but I feel 
deep regret for the colossal ignorance you have exhibited. Hindu law, 
if my honourable friend is a lawyer and holds that view, he has not 
practised. He will please excuse this friendly retort. I can stand 
interruptions. If you interrupt me you will be only adding ginger to my 
speech. After the advent of the British to this country, the Hindu 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


408 


408 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


law got gradually crystallised. They did not dare to touch the personal 
law of the people of the country. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: They brought in limited estate for women. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am coming to that straightaway. 
If I forget to reply to that point, kindly remind me. Hindu Law is such 
a vast subject that I can talk for hours on it, if the Chair permits me 
to do so. I assure you, Sir, I am not going to do that. 

I protest in the first place against the manner in which this Bill has 
been sought to be smuggled into this House and through this House. 
It is an extraordinary procedure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I object, Mr. Deputy-Speaker, to this insult 
to the House. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : It is not a point of order, 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : This is a point of order, Sir. I object to the 
remarks made against the house. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: ‘Smuggling” I have never understood 
to be an unparliamentary word. If the honourable member thinks that 
there is any stigma attaching to it. I would use another word in 
substitution thereof. I would say that the haste with this Bill sought 
to be passed in the House is extraordinary. Is that also an unparliamentary 
word ? If so, give a parliamentary expression for that. You cannot find 
a substitute for it. (An Honourable Member: ‘Commendable speed'). It 
is a most extraordinary procedure that has been adopted in this House. 
I have some little experience of parliamentary activity in this House. 
I have never known an occasion when a Bill of this importance and 
magnitude has been sought to be passed in the way it is done now. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar : General): It will never be passed. 
(Interruption). 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: I like interruptions but I could not 
catch what he said. If the honourable-members think that by constantly 
interrupting me in this way the effectiveness of my speech will be marred 
they are mistaken. 

The Bill was introduced on the last day of the last Budget session. 

Bahu Ramnarayan Singh : Last hour. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : You know very well how a Bill 
of this importance and magnitude, a Bill which seeks to regulate the 
life and conduct of Hindu society was introduced on the last day of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


409 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 409 


the last session ; how at the end of the day’s work we sat beyond 5 
o’clock for two hours and the honourable the Minister for Law was 
allowed to make a speech committing it to a Select Committee, only three 
or four speakers, under a rigid time limit were allowed to speak and 
at 7 O’clock after a short session the motion was carried. Thereafter what 
happened ? It went to the Select Committee. The Select Committee 
reported on it and on the motion for consideration of that report points 
of order were raised in this House. I am not going to enter into the 
merits of those vital points of order. They were disposed of. So great 
was the impatience that in the last session the honourable the Law 
Minister wanted to simply say that the Bill be taken into consideration 
and there was no speech. It was somehow got into the agenda. Very 
well it was done. Points of order were ruled out and it was found that 
it was within the competence of the House to go on with the measure 
as reported by the Select Committee. Now look at the way in which it 
is being dealt with now. In the short indulge between the Railway Budget 
and the General Budget this is sought to be pushed through. There is 
no seriousness about it. Nobody feels its importance. The country at large 
is bewildered by the way in which we are dealing with a piece of 
legislation of this far reaching importance. If you attach real importance 
to it, if you really mean business, if you want that something should 
be done by way of revising the Hindu law as it is today, this is certainly 
not the way to do it. Keep the Bill for a special session. For small Banking 
Bills and the like you are devoting days and days. That being the case, 
do you mean to say that a Bill which seeks to regulate the life and 
conduct of the Hindu community should be dealt with in the haphazard 
way in which it is sought to be done ? I enter my emphatic protest against 
the way in which this important legislation is being considered. You know 
how at 3 o’clock yesterday there was the Supplementary Demand for 
Railways and later in the day the General Budget came in. I wish to 
submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker that I have not been accustomed to this 
kind of procedure with regard to Bills of this nature. I ask the old 
Members of the Legislature to recall a single precedent for this. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : There is none. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Sir, the question is, is there any 
real necessity for codification. I see absolutely none, because, as my 
learned friend Shrimati Dorgabai said, the Hindu law is well settled and 
it has held the field for about hundred years. The ancient Hindu 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


410 


410 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


law, when the britishers came here, was interpreted with the help of 
Indian Pandits. They used to call them Judge Pandits who ransacked 
all the Smrities and Dharma Shastras and interpreted the law. This 
process continued till they succeeded in evolving from the rest mass of 
Smrities and Nibhandhanas and usages, a system of judicial principles 
constituting the Hindu Law which now hold the field. 

Sir, it is well known that the Hindu Law has the oldest pedigree of 
all the known systems of jurisprudence in the world. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal: General): It is unjust. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Yes, the Hindu law is unjust ! 
Hindu society is unjust! Hindus are unjust! It is not possible for anybody 
to reply to an interruption that the Hindu law is unjust. It took only 
three words to compose that interruption. I do not know if I have the 
capacity to reply to a sweeping charge like that made in three words 
‘It is unjust’, Whether a system is good or bad, it is for the society to 
judge ; it is not for disappointed or disgrauntled persons to judge. But 
I may say that the one surest proof of its soundness is that it has been 
able to stand the test of centuries. No system which is intrinsically bad, 
unsound or unjust can endure for a long time. Hindu law and the Hindu 
social system governed by it have been able to withstand the shocks and 
revolutions which have swept over the country during the ages past. 
Historic cataclysms have swept off the feet of ancient civilisation of 
countries like Greece, Rome, Assyria, Babylonia — which have all crumbled 
down — whereas Hindu culture or community, which cannot date its 
origin, still continues to function with all the vigor and vitality, and I 
am sure, Providence will allow it to function, till we set about to 
undermine its very foundations, by legislating in these reckless and light- 
hearted ways. If there was anything essentially weak in the foundations 
of Hinduism it would not have been able to survive the upheavals that 
overwhelmed it throughout its long and chequered history. This country 
has been subjected to foreign rule for over a thousand years. History 
will tell you how she has shown her wonderful adaptability, reflection 
will reveal to you that the Hindu law has had in it the germs of flexibility 
and adaptability which have enabled it to adjust itself at all times to 
the changing needs and to meet the challenges of the times. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: Hear, hear. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: There is a change now. (Interruption ). 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: I am glad that I get a spate of 
interruption, which gives me breathing time. Please do that singly. Mr. Deputy 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


411 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 411 


Speaker, I am not so big a fool as to hope that many will be convinced 
by what I say, but I do hope that someone of us at least, may give some 
little thought to what 1 say. I earnestly plead that Hinduism, the Hindu 
Law; the Hindu culture have got immemorial traditions, agelong- 
moorings, which it would not perhaps be wise for us to sweep away by 
one stroke of the pen. I make this appeal to my friends to the right 
and to the left. Sir, I am apprehensive tills is just what the present 
Hindu Code Bill is going to do for us. I do not find anything Hindu 
about it. It can be more properly called an ‘un-Hindu’ or ‘Anti-Hindu’ 
Code. 

Mr. Nazruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): Muslim Code. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Whatever else it may be, it is not 
a Hindu Code. It does not breathe the spirit of Hinduism : it reeks of 
un-Hindu ideas : a spirit of supreme contempt for anything Hindu 
permutes the whole Bill from the beginning to end. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : What is the Hindu spirit ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Sir, do you call that Hinduism ? 
You please think over your system of marriage and inheritance which 
form the cornerstones of Hindu system or Hindu society ; are you going 
to undermine it in the way in which you are going to do ? That is the 
question that you will have to answer not only to us here but to our 
countrymen outside and to the posterity. 

Sir, I do feel that if we codify the law in the way it is sought to be 
done, as a simple intellectual pastime, codification for the sake of 
codification, I will plead with my honourable friends that it is unwise 
to do that. It is not necessary. No need for it has been felt by anybody. 
Look at the opinions of the judges of the different High Courts and the 
District Courts. They are the people who have to administer the Hindu 
law. Has the Government got a vast volume of opinion embodying the 
demands from the judiciary that Hindu law require codification and that 
also in the way in which it is sought to be done ? No. Has there been 
such a general demand from the people who have to guide themselves, 
guide their lives and conduct by the provisions of this law ? Have they 
demanded it ? Has there been that kind of demand ? My honourable 
friend to the right says : No. It is perfectly correct. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: He supports you. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: My honourable friend says : he 
supports me. He supports truth. The country will be taken by surprise 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


412 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


at what we are doing. Let us not lay the flattering unction to our 
souls that we are doing a wise thing. I know I cannot deceive myself 
in the way in which you are doing. Even if it were wise, I would not 
have thought it necessary to attempt that codification, because of the 
reasons I have given. You cannot give any uniformity to it whatsoever; 
and if Hinduism is anything, it is because of its fundamental unity in 
the midst of diversity. That constitutes the essence of Hinduism. Hindu 
law and Hindu culture. In a vast country like this you cannot expect 
a uniformity standardized sort of life ignoring the natural variety. If you 
did it, it is no wonder that you would come to grief. You may not realize 
it just now, but realization would come when the time comes. After all 
even after this codification, is it going to serve your end ? I say : no. 
The honourable member from Mysore yesterday made a speech. He said, 
now the work has been made so simple that by buying a publication 
worth four annas or six annas you could know exactly what the Hindu 
law stood for. So many friends shout ‘quite right’ ‘quite right’, but do 
these enthusiasts realize that even the sponsor of the Bill does not 
pretend that he is going to codify the whole law of the Hindus ? In the 
preamble he makes a modest claim, not that kind of preposterous claim ; 
He says : 

“Whereas it is expedient to amend and codify certain branches of the 
Hindu law now in force in the Province of India.” Therefore what is 
proposed to be done is to codify certain branches, such as the law of 
marriage, law of inheritance and law of adoption. Broadly speaking these 
are the main things. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi: What is left. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : My honourable friend asks what 
is left in the Hindu Law. Does my honourable friend think that this 
is all that the Hindu Law stands for ? These three branches cover the 
entire field of Hindu life and activity in this country? I can only 
sympathise with his ignorance. What about joint family property, 
partition, joint family business, religious and charitable trusts, gifts, 
transfer inter vivos, and other things ? They constitute a much vaster 
field which is left uncovered. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Wills is also referred to. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : A mere reference to Wills does not 
mean that it has received a full and comprehensive treatment. In any 
case, I am grateful to Dr. Ambedkar. He is modest; he never claims 
to have brought forward an exhaustive Code. If my honourable friends 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


413 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 413 


on my right think this is all the Hindu Code, they are out Ambedkaring 
Ambedkar. Sir, even if this Hindu Code is adopted in the form in which 
it has been brought before us, it will rail of its purpose for another reason 
also. My honourable sister Durgabai and my honourable friend from 
Mysore said yesterday, well, why do you worry about this : this will not 
lead to fragmentation of agricultural property. I do not know whether 
they realised that they were furnishing one of the strongest arguments 
for rejecting this Bill. Unconsciously, my sister and brother have 
furnished one of the strangest arguments for the rejection of the Bill 
outright. You are going to regulate the disposition of property. It is now 
generally accepted that 90 per cent.of the immoveable property in this 
country is in the villages, in the provinces, leaving aside the Centrally 
administrated areas. Therefore, they would be out of the purview of this 
Code. To house or other immovable property inside the Centrally 
administered areas, directly under the Government of India, this Code 
will apply. Then, how is this claim satisfied that this Code applies to 
all the Hindus in all provinces ? Thus is a very strong argument for 
throwing out the Bill; throwing out on the ground that it fails in its 
objective. Besides the three categories I have mentioned, there are so 
many things which have yet to be covered. The argument would be that 
provincial agricultural land is purely a provincial subject according to 
the Constitution Act; so also are religious and charitable trust properties, 
so also joint family property, and partition, self acquisitions, etc. When 
this vast field would lie uncovered. I ask the House seriously whether 
they are really satisfied with the claim of those who think that this is 
going to be an exhaustive Code or an all embracing Code and that it 
provides the panacea for all the social and economic ills to which Hindu 
flesh is heir to. Do they really believe that the 139 sections will be the 
vitamin tablets which will go to vitalise the whole Hindu society ? You 
may hold that view ; the House may hold that view; I do not hold that 
view. On the other hand, I think this is premature, absolutely premature. 
Even if the Hindu Code be passed into law, it could not come into force 
all until the provincial Governments pass similar legislation in their own 
provinces for devolution of agricultural land. Every single province will 
have to do it before this Act could come into force in all the provinces. 
I am not now talking of the states ; I am talking of the provinces. Besides, 
it is not inconceivable that the provinces may be taking different 
decisions. It is not for the Central Government to force the Provincial 
Governments to legislate on a particular line of succession, a particular 
line of devolution of agricultural property according to its dictates. Then 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


414 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


provincial autonomy will fail to the ground and I am certain that the 
provincial Ministries will not touch such a proposal from the Centre even 
with a pair of tongs if such direction went counter to their own views. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: May I state for the information of the House 
that there are as many as 37 members — I have received chits, letters 
and so on from them — who are all anxious — most of them, if not all — 
to put forward their view points on this Bill. I would therefore suggest, 
however interesting the speech of the honourable member might be, that 
the points that have been raised on one side in support of the Bill may 
kindly be answered by others. Thus, all the points would be threshed 
out and this will contribute to the richness of the debate as well. 
Dr. Ambedkar has given a clear analysis of the Code with arguments. 
Of course, the House would like to know how those points are wrong 
and how they are met on the other side. Therefore, greater attention 
may be paid to that and also regard may be had to the number of 
speakers that are in the waiting list. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : May I request you, Sir, to consider, in view 
of the vital importance of this Bill, that two or three days time is hardly 
adequate and that at least a week or two should be allotted for general 
discussion ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : With great respect to the views 
which were expressed by you, Sir, if I have given the impression that 
I was filibustering, I am sorry. I may tell you, Sir, that this Bill is of 
such great importance that it would be utterly unfair to the House if 
you ask us to conclude this general discussion thus. Because, in the first 
stage, we had not the slightest opportunity to make a speech ; this is 
the stage after gating us committed to the principle of the Bill, in which 
we have to see how best we can serve our country, even within the limited 
sphere. If there are 36 speakers, there is the clearest possible indication 
that the Bill has now attracted serious attention and they want to give 
their viewpoints. Therefore, there is no particular sanctity to the period 
that is laid down for debates of this kind. 

If we do not conclude the discussion today, certainly more days 
must be found for further discussion of this. This honourable the Law 
Minister is very zealous about it; he can give another additional 
session for this ; if not, even in this session four or five additional 
days could be found. The matter must be thoroughly debated. I hope the 
House will not accept closure; nor do I think that a closure will be moved 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


415 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 415 


by the Chief Whip and a motion of this kind cannot be closed by whipping 
without ascertaining that there has been a full and sufficient debate. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Another point. May I request you, Sir, that 
the provincial MLAs who are not present here also be invited to come 
and participate in the discussion ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We will now adjourn 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I have not yet finished, Sir, I take 
it I may resume after Lunch. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes. We will now adjourn for Lunch. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the 
Clock, 

The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of the Clock, 
Shri S.V. Krishnamoorthy Rao (one of the Panel of Chairmen) in the 
Chair. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Before the House adjourned for 
the recess, I was trying to explain to it how this Code was bound to 
fail of its purpose in some of the material particulars. I explained that 
there was no necessity for codification as the Hindu law in all its aspects 
was not only well established but well understood by the people who 
were governed by it. I also explained that those who are to administer 
this Act — I mean the Judges, the judiciary of the land, including the 
highest — have never demanded that the law should be codified, and I 
also explained that the scope of the Bill was very very limited, and that 
besides providing for marriage, adoption and inheritance there was a 
water field which was left uncovered. While referring to the agricultural 
land, I may also point out to the House that according to the series of 
judicial decisions in this country, the question of land involves and 
embraces, a vast variety of interests and subjects, from the landlord of 
the topmost grade down to the tiller of the soil, the man behind the 
plough: and if the Provincial Governments of the different countries were 
to regulate the distribution of their property in different ways other than 
that indicated by the Central Act there was bound to be confusion worse 
confounded. 

Then, Sir, I would like to mention that the Code has not only 
tried digesting the existing Hindu law within its limited sphere, but in 
that process of collating and digesting, a number of things have been 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


416 


416 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


introduced ; a number of subjects, particularly in the matter of marriage 
and inheritance, which go diametrically against the established notions 
of the Hindus. Therefore, it is not merely a case of digesting, collating: 
not also merely a question of amending — because amending is a very 
mild expression: it does a good deal more than that. It introduces 
innovations, far-reaching changes, not only in the law of marriage but 
also in the law of inheritance. Sir, I wish I could explain to the House 
the full implications of the changes involved. But I am physically unequal 
to the task. I will try rapidly to explain how I look at these changes. 

The two categories of changes which in my opinion and also in the 
opinion of the vast majority of my countrymen are very radical and 
sweeping, are those that relate to marriage and inheritance. Sir, my, 
honourable friend has no doubt provided for sacramental marriage 
in his Code. I do not know if in this country, up to the moment the 
Bill was drafted and given the shape it has now had, people really 
demanded of the Government of the land to prescribe a procedure 
by which marriages in this country are to be contracted. I think it 
is nobody’s case that prior to the introduction of this Bill, people had 
not been marrying or there was a good deal of difficulty in getting 
ourselves married. But how the question of marriage would be 
improved I do not know. My fundamental objection to these marriages 
is, that while on the one hand it characterises one form of marriage 
as sacramental marriage, inside this sacramental cover there has been 
introduced a number of things which cannot conceivably be called 
sacramental or sacred ceremonial marriage. Look at the prohibited 
degrees. Look at the character of the parties. It can easily be an inter- 
caste marriage, a marriage outside caste, marriage of sagotras, and 
at the same time it would be sacramental marriage. It is rather 
curious, Sir, that while a sacramental form of marriage is being 
prescribed, along side with it there is a civil marriage. I do not know 
how it finds a place in the Hindu code itself. However, they provided 
an entirely different thing but a most objectionable thing is that while 
in the sacramental form of marriage one particular class of prohibited 
degress is put in, in the civil marriage an entirely different category is put; 
the ambit of the prohibited degree is narrowed down, so much so that the 
marriage in many cases becomes purely incestuous marriage. I do not 
understand, Sir, what necessity was there for this unless we by this measure, 
want to give direct encouragement to all manner of moral looseness and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


417 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 417 


lawlessness, which unfortunately is invading the youth of this country. 
Are we here going to give this the imprimatur of our sanction ? That 
is the question I would ask my honourable friend very seriously to 
consider and answer, not in a spirit of banter or levity but with all the 
seriousness that a difficult social problem demands. 

I feel that the basic conception of Hindu marriage has suffered the 
rudest possible shock by introduction into it of the matter of divorce 
which is so repugnant to Hindu notions of marriage. Hindu marriage 
as ought to be known to every one who professes himself to be a Hindu, 
who honestly takes pride in calling himself a Hindu, as I myself do, is 
a sacrament and not a civil contract and as such it will not be difficult 
for him to admit that divorce is absolutely foreign to its concept. Union 
by marriage, according to the Hindu Shastras is sacred and absolutely 
indissoluble ( Interruption ). If you want me to cut short my speech you 
will kindly interrupt me only on important matters. I am not afraid of 
interruptions — I know how to answer them, I can answer them in my 
own way. But if you keep on interrupting me, my speech will be unduly 
long and you also may not feel happy over the replies I will give. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : It ought to be so. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : The institution of divorce in this 
country, or in any country for the matter of that, has not been found 
to promote the well-being of the community for whose benefit it exists. 
As an humble student of sociology, I have had occasions to read reports 
of matrimonial courts. An honourable Member referred to Judge Lindsay 
and I believe he also had in view the “Revolt of the Youth”. I do not 
know whether my honourable friend realised that he unconsciously 

provided one of the stronger arguments for opposing this form of 

marriage when he referred to that great Judge. I want honourable 

members carefully to consider, if within the family circle we should 

permit matrimonial alliances to spring up between a person and his 
mother’s brother’s daughter or his father’s sister’s daughter, as has, been 
provided in this Hindu Code. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : It is common. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : It may be common in South India, 
but South India is not the whole of India. My whole point is that if 
there is a particular form of practice in a particular part of the country, 
you should not go out of your way to see that it is provided for the 
whole country. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


418 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I come from a province which is not in the South. It is a backward 
province, educationally, culturally — call whatever you like that benighted 
backward province of Bengal. I know of the domestic conditions of the 
families inhabiting there. Go to any Hindu household in Bengal you will 
find that besides the sons, daughters, and other natural heirs, all manner 
of relations, sisters’ sons, nephews, nieces, maternal uncles’ sons, uncles’ 
daughters, all knit together and maintained in the joint family system. 
They are all regulated and restrained by moral and religious influences. 
You will find it in almost every household. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law) : What is 
the difficulty ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: I shall tell you where the difficulty 
is. There is no difficulty for those who have no family of their own. The 
difficulty happens in this way. For dividing trouble here I shall illustrate 
with reference to myself. If in my family my sons, daughters, father’s 
sisters’ daughters and sons, mother’s daughter’s sons and daughters etc. 
sister’s daughters were to live together and if one of my sons contracts 
intimacy with his first cousin even when he is a minor or an adolescent, 
knowing human nature being what it is, do you eliminate the possibility 
of this attachment growing up and culminating in marriage ? If you do, 
you are poor students of history, poor students of sociology and poor 
students of psychology. After all, the call of human flesh is there and 
no legislation, however omnipotent can root out this natural and powerful 
impulse in mankind. If you sanction matrimonial unions between blood 
relations — between closest relations in the household, I shudder to think 
what would happen to society ? The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: 
Nothing. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Nothing of course, if you do not 
care for society ; nothing, of course, if you believe in a kind of society 
only where there are only social butterflies sucking honey here and there 
and making merry ; but I am for a society which has attained or will 
attain for India the position which is her own, the position for which 
she is respected all the world over. If you throw away all these things, 
if you put up a sort of Vademecum, a Hindu Code, where you find all 
sorts of marriages, between first cousins and blood-relations sanctioned, 
if you legalise all these incestuous marriages the society will be a sink 
of moral degradation. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


419 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 419 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: We protest the use of the word 
‘incestuous’. It is very wrong to condemn outright a system which is 
prevailing in large parts of the country. It is a reflection on a whole 
province. 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Therefore, I cannot but raise my 
voice of protest against such a system, because I believe that marriage 
between first cousins is not conducive to the well being of society from 
the biological and engenic points of view and is opposed to the notions 
of Hindu Law. 

L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: No, no. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Thus, not only from the point of 
view of society, but also for the peace and purity of family life, I want 
that this should be condemned. It is immoral and outrageous. . Sir, my 
honourable sister, Durgabai, said quite rightly, that monogamy should 
not be opposed. I do not know of any honourable Member in this House 
who really does not want monogamy. Monogamy everyone of us want, 
not for our mere likes ; circumstances have forced us to accept this 
monogamous marriage. It is a fact. Polygamy has passed away completely 
from the upper classes of this country not by legislation. That is my 
main contention. If you want to eradicate a social evil you should work 
up from within, not from above. If my honourable friends look to the 
history of this country, they will find my position amply proved. We all 
know the miseries and sufferings of Hindu widows. There are so many 
cases of child and young widows which break our hearts or at any rate 
it ought to break our hearts. In fact, in the past generation, the late 
Pandit Vidyasagar of hallowed memory was so much moved by it that 
he got passed the Hindu Widow Remarriage Act. But the country was 
not prepared for it and what was the result ? The Act virtually became 
a dead letter and has remained so till now. That is bound to be the 
fate of all social legislation which have not originated from a demand 
from within the society. 

I was telling the house that polygamy has virtually disappeared from 
the country for a variety of reasons such as a growing sense of 
responsibility in conjugal life, Growing consciousness among woman- 
hood and above all the interplay of all manner of forces, most 
important of which is economic, which makes it impossible to indulge 
in the luxury of having many wives at the same time. Therefore, I 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


420 


420 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


say, there is no necessity for any legislation for it. It has automatically 
died out: the custom has fallen into disuse. It may be argued that there 
are some strata of society where it prevails. There also I want to sound 
a note of warning. You cannot stop it by force or compulsion. You have 
got to create public opinion and when these unfortunate breathren of 
ours come to realise the evils of this system they will discard it. If, on 
the other hand, without bringing up their standard, without creating a 
consciousness in them by education and public opinion you try to thrust 
your legislation down their throats, I would request you to realise the 
effect that it will have on them. Just as my honourable sister was telling 
us they will say : This is our society ; it is such a cast-iron mould and 
they would not allow us to have another wife. We will go to another 
form of society, embrace another religion where this is permissible. Any 
sociologist, any man interested in social reform will have to pay heed 
to that as well. The fear is not altogether an unfounded one. Anyway 
I feel that if you codified the Hindu law, all that should have been done 
was to prescribe the essentials of marriage, the requirements on the part 
of the contracting parties, their ages, their mental and physical capacity, 
prohibited degrees of relationship and things like that. Those who believe 
in social ceremonies and functions, may go through the form of ceremo- 
nial marriage but the essentials of marriage should not be allowed to 
vary between civil marriage and sacramental marriage. If there is a 
demand in the country for inter-caste marriages I will not stand in its 
way. If people want to marry outside their castes, let them by all means 
invoke the provisions of the Civil Marriage Act of 1874. There is nothing 
at present to stand in the way of people who are anxious to marry outside 
their castes. If there are bona fide attachments among intercaste boys 
and girls, it is not that we want to stop or prevent them. They have 
got the facilities open to them even under the existing law, the law to 
which I referred earlier. You can change that law. You can repeal or 
modify certain provisions so that people marrying under that Act will 
have their children governed not by the Indian Succession Act as at 

present but by the Hindu Law. I have no objection to that but I fail 

to understand why in a Hindu Code side by side with the sacramental 
marriage you are allowing civil marriage. This must be completely taken 
out of the Code which should have nothing to do with it. There may 
be a separate civil marriage law for all. 

Sir, I personally feel that if you insist on having the question of 

divorce in it, then you will have to face the music of it everywhere 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


421 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 421 


in the country and unless as public men you have your ears stuffed with 
cotton, as most public men among us have, you will have to pay very 
very dearly for it. In any case, as a Hindu, I emphatically protest against 
the introduction of this heterodox concept of divorce into the scheme of 
Hindu marriage. 

Now let us come to the question of inheritance. There has also been 
an innovation in this regard though I do not want to go into very great 
details. But there also I would like to tell my honourable sister, Shrimati 
Durgabai, that we are firm believers in the judgement of the Hindu law- 
givers of old : we are firm believers in the equality of the sexes, though 
not in the sense in which she talks or her friends talk. Equality must 
be in the sense of equality of opportunity. You cannot make physically 
man and woman the same. Equality must therefore have some other 
meaning. There is no feeling of inferiority attached to women, there is 
no discrimination with regard to the education of daughters or their 
marriage. Our shastras have provided : 

“Kanyapyevam Palaniya, Shikshaniyatigatant Deya Boraya Vidusha, 
Dhana Ratna Samanvita.” 

It means that the daughter also should be educated in the same way 
as boys, and in the fullness of time, given over in marriage to a proper 
groom with dowry including rich jewellery. And in my society, in the 
Hindu society it is enjoined : 

“Yatra naryastu Pujyante, Ramante Tatra Devata.” 

It means that Gods bless the households where women are honoured. 
Women folk has been accorded such a high and exalted place in Hindu 
society. I do not deny that there may be hard cases: there are hard cases, 
where women are not treated in the way they ought to be. But if you 
have fallen off the ideal of your sages, your saints, your lawgivers or 
your leaders, they are not to blame for they have not let you down. The 
blame attaches to us. If you cannot approximate to the ideals of Mahatma 
Gandhi in your conduct but preach them in season and out of season 
or take his name in everything but not follow in his footsteps, the fault 
is not Mahatmaji’s, the fault is ours. Similarly you cannot impugn your 
Hindu Shastras or law-givers. They have set the standards quite high and 
it is for you to act up to them. Notwithstanding our best efforts it is not 
possible to eliminate every case of injustice or hardship. Human institutions 
are imperfect. No human ingenuity can devise any procedure, any machinery 
or any agency by which all possibilities of social injustice can be completely 
eliminated. Let us be frank about that and let us try to realise that. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


422 


422 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


My honourable friend said in connection with the management of 
property that she knows of women who are better managers of 
property , 

The Honourable Shri N. V. Gadgil (Minister of Works, Mines and 
Power): Of men also ! 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Exactly, of men also. I do not think 
there is any single married man in this House who will dispute that 
proposition. In the household she is the ruler: she is all in all. The tallest 
of us. The Law Minister or his honourable colleague will have to crouch 
before her however much he may thunder here. There you are ruled not 
by the rod, but by a strange sort of a whip, a soft, sweet silken cord 
made up of filaments of love which takes off all harshness and roughness, 
and menfolk have cheerfully submitted to her rule. She is the queen 
of the household. Many married people, I think most married people, 
would frankly admit that. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi: That is how we have cheated them. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: We are now going to cheat them 
by this Code. Do you think the greatest justice will be done to them 
if you simply give them right to property. Mr. Chairman, according to 
the Hindu notions, a girl has a distinct position, a role entirely different 
from that of a son. Any honourable member who has read Sanskrit 
literature or has any knowledge of it — I cannot make any presumption 
either way, whether most people know it or no one knows it . . . 

An Honourable Member: The Law Member knows it. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : He may know it, he is a scholar. 
Well, in Sakuntala of our immortal poet, after the marriage of Sakuntala 
and her departure to her husband’s place, there occurs a Sloka which 
is classical and which gives you in a nutshell how the Hindu lawgivers 
and the Hindu society look upon their girlhood. Immediately after 
Sakuntala left the hermitage for her husband’s place, sage Kanwa said, 
“Today I feel relieved” : 

“Artho Hi Kanya Parakiya Eva Tarn Adya Sampreshya Pratigrahita. 

Jati mamayang Bishadah Prakamam Pratyarpit Nyasa lvantaratma." 

“This my heart, my inner self today has been relieved of a heavy 
burden and I get that inner pleasure of relief.” What was that burden ? 
A daughter in the family is like a trust deposit of somebody else’s 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


423 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 423 


money and just as one feels relieved as soon as that trust or deposit 
is made over to his rightful owner. So do I feel today having made over 
Sakuntala to her husband. ( Interruption ) Not in these days of law of 
limitation but I am talking of those days. “Nyasa”, means a deposit, trust. 
If my honourable friend Dr. Kamath wants further interpretation, I am 
perfectly willing to give that outside the Chamber. 

Shri H, V, Kamath : But I am not a doctor ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: More than a doctor: you are doctor, 
philosopher, lawyer, and legislator. I have great respect for you ; you 
are a nice chap and above all a great patriot. 

Sir, that is the conception of girls. So, if the Hindu law-givers did 
not give them a right of ownership equal to that of the son in the family, 
it was not because of any aversion, not because of any dislike but because 
of the simple reason that the girl is made for her husband’s family; she 
is not to become a part and parcel of the family where she is born. That 
is the whole thing. And therefore no question of injustice or inequality 
arises. I do not know of any school of Hindu law prevalent in any part 
of the country where a daughter has been given a distinct share equal 
to that of the son in the property of her father. 

Shri A. Karunakaran Menon (Madras : General): It exists in 
Malabar. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am glad that in the South they 
have got so many things. 

Sreematty Annie Mascarene (Travancore State): In Travancore 
too, sons and daughters share equally. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am grateful for this information 
but all such information emerges from the South ; and if my friends 
from the South . . . 

Shrimati Hansa Mehta (Bombay : General): Are they not Hindus 
in the South ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Yes, but if they are proud of all 
that in the South, let them not deny us our legitimate right to feel 
proud of our manners and customs in the North and North-east. 
That is my humble submission to them. I do not like this type of 
argument. Because some order of succession, some order of inherit- 
ance prevalent in Bombay or some other part has been found suitable 
there, therefore it must be bodily transplanted into Bengal and elsewhere 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


424 


424 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


regardless of all considerations whether it is a plant which can grow 
and thrive in that particular soil. If a particular institution has been 
found to work very satisfactorily in the South, it must be allowed to 
work there ; But if it is not found suitable for the soil of the North 
or the soil of the East or the soil of the West, I do not see any reason 
or justification for forcibly transplanting it there. 

In fact my one very serious objection to the Hindu Code is this: for this 
craze for theoretical uniformity you ignore completely variety; you have got 
these things in this part and those things in that part: that itself shows 
that in this vast country of ours, peculiar social manners and customs have 
developed according to the needs of particular places or areas. They must 
be left undisturbed. In clause 7, however, the Bill provides an overriding 
power by which all usages, immemorial customs which have the sanction 
of law should be scrapped. I think it is clause 7. 

An Honourable Member: It is clause 4. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I will take it on my friend’s 
authority. Sir, this in my opinion, is highly objectionable. Clear Proof 
of usage out-weighs the written text of Law. This is a well established 
dictum. 

There are diversities of customs and manners because of the diverse 
needs of the people that compose this vast continent. And therefore: 

Veda vibhinna Smritayah vibhinna, 

Nasau munir Yasya matam Na Bhinnam. 

Dharmasya Tattwam Nihitam Guhayam. , 

Mahajano yena Gatah Sa Pantha 

An Honourable Member: Let us all be mahajans. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Mahajan does not mean a money- 
lender. 

That is the most unkindest cut of all. That indicates the depth to which 
society has fallen. We cannot think except in terms of rupee or dollar 
or shilling or pence. Mahajan has been variously interpreted : as great 
men; or majority of men. Take it in whatever sense you like. , 

Veda khila Sadachar Swashya cha Priyamatmana, 

Yasmin Deshe Yadachara 

I do not want to weary this House with a lot of other quotations 
but this is such a subject that I cannot altogether avoid it if I 
am to convince honourable Members of the justice of my contention 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


425 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 425 


based on Hindu shastras. I have to make myself clear before the House. 
It may reject what I say ; it does not matter; but I represent a 
constituency — not a purely territorial one — but the constituency of a vast 
body of men and women who believe in Hinduism and Hindu Society 
governed by the injunctions of Hindu sages of old. Sir, I represent for 
the time being the views of that constituency. It is true that I have been 
returned to this Constituent Assembly by indirect election — with four or 
five votes only, but I may assure the House that I have fought some 
of the most contested elections in the country from some of the most 
important constituencies. Immediately before coming to this Constituent 
Assembly I was representing the city of Calcutta in the Central 
Legislature. Before that, I was representing the Presidency Division 
composed of several districts with lakhs and lakhs of people, and the 
Presidency Division is admitted to be one of the most cultured divisions 
in India. I know the people. I know their pulse. My native town is a 
famous seat of ancient classical learning. It is my district Nadia, in 
Bengal, that gave the new schools of Smritis, Tantras, Nyaya, Baishnava 
Philosophy etc. I am not digressing but I shall be failing in my duty 
to the inheritors of this great culture if I did not try to place before 
the House their views and ideas with regard to these matters of the 
Hindu Code. I owe it to myself and to my community to give my views 
so that judgement may not go against us by default. Any way, Let me 
hurry on. 

I have shown you the place, the honour, which our Shastras have given 
to our women. The famous queen Indumali was dead and King Ajah was 
bemoaning her death thus : 

Grihini Sachiva Mittah Sakhi Priya Shishya Lalita Kalavidhan, 

Karmia Bimalkhena Mritywui Harata vade King Na Ma Hritarn 

“Oh ruthless God of Death ! What have you not taken away from me? 
What mischief have you not done to me ? By one blow, you have taken 
away one, who was my Grihini — you know what Grihini means, the 
queen of the house — who was my Sachiva — Sachiva means Minister. She 
was my minister. Not only was she the queen of my family but my 
minister, my bosom friend in privacy and my devoted playmate in love.” 

That, Sir, is the position which our womenfolk used to occupy in our 
society. Therefore, it cannot be said that out of sheer greed, grouse, 
animosity or jealousy or whatever you call it, the womenfolk has been 
relegated to a position of inferiority. If she has not been given a distinct 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


426 


426 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


status in respect of inheritance co-equal with the son, it is because she 
is meant for some other family than her father’s and that the property 
is to be settled with the persons who will keep up the family, who will 
maintain the lineage and preserve the sanctity of the family traditions, 
manners and customs and who will continue the practices and the 
ceremonies of the family. As soon as a girl is married she becomes 
integrated into another family ; and according to the Hindu conception 
the status of a wife in the husband’s family is a most respectable status — 
far more respectable than the status of the girl in her own father’s house. 
I will again quote Kalidas’ Shakuntala. When Queen Shakuntala could 
not be recognised by King Dushyanta, who said: “ I do not remember 
to have married you.” Thereupon Shakuntala was exhorted by the Rishi 
to remain in her husband’s House even as a maid as that was a more 
honourable position than to be in her father’s place. 

The Honourable Shri N. V. Gadgil: That is how men behave ! 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao (Madras : General): He was suffering from 
loss of memory. 

Pandit Lakshini Kanta Maitra : No, he was not suffering from loss 
of memory. It was because King Dushanata was under a curse by which 
he was to forget everything connected with his marriage; not that he 
was guilty of a deliberate moral lapse. Amazing ignorance ! 

Shri B. N. Munavalli (Bombay States): What an excuse ! 

Pandit Lakshini Kanta Maitra : I am not the author of Shakuntala. 
Call it an excuse or whatever you like, I do not mind. But I quoted 
Shakuntala because its author Kalidas is a world Poet commanding 
respect all over the world : and notwithstanding all your disparagement 
of Shakuntala, it will remain the ideal literary master-piece of the world 
for all time. There ought to be some limit to which disparagement of 
our national institutions, culture and traditions can be tolerated. 
Mr. Chairman, I am reminded of a very famous passage in Plato — I 
cannot recall his words exactly now — but he said, in effect: “Anybody 
who is false to his nation’s traditions, to his glorious heritage and culture 
is a traitor and is a person who should be given capital punishment”. 
I do not understand the patriotism of those, the nationalism of those, 
who have nothing but contempt and jeer for anything that is their ancient 
culture and heritage. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : You have misunderstood. Nobody is against our 
ancient cultures. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


427 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 427 


Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : We might differ on many matters 
in connection with this Code, but nobody’s purpose will be served — 
neither mine, nor yours — by trying to belittle our great ancient sages. 
They are not coming here for applause. They do not care for your radio 
propaganda and newspaper Hashes. They did what they considered to 
be in the best interests of the Community. If today you are going to 
make a daughter co-equal with the son in regard to inheritance, I am 
afraid a good deal of complications would arise. When the girl knows 
that she is getting a share in her father’s property, when her brothers 
know that their sister is a co-sharer and as such the property will pass 
off to some other family with her marriage, whose interest would it be 
to marry off the girl’? I want to know. 

Shri H. V, Kamath : Her own. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : My honourable friend says it will 
be the girl’s own interest to marry as quickly as possible. I feel, Sir, 
that such a girl will find many a pitfall lying about her way. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: You distrust her ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Not a question of distrust. The 
Hindu sages have provided that marriages should be negotiated in the 
best interests of the pair by the guardians of the pair. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : What did Shakuntala do ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: I know that Shakuntala did not marry 
that way, but my friend and sister’s interruption reminds me of a story. 
A man had the Mahabharata and the Ramayana recited in his house for 
six months. Thereafter he asked his daughter. “You have heard the story. 
What is the lesson you derive ?” “Well,” replied the daughter, “from the 
Mahabharata I learn that I can have five husbands as Draupadi had five 
husbands.” From the whole of the Mahabharata this is all that she learnt. 
Enquired about the lesson she derived from the Ramayana the daughter 
in law replied, “It is very clear. As soon as my husband dies I can be married 
to my husband’s brother.” “You know what happened after Ravana died, 
his widow Mandodari married his brother Bibhisana.” Sir, according to 
Hindu Law there have been several systems of marriage. There was the 
Gandharva form of marriage for which we have not provided here, though 
we have the provisions in the Code for Civil Marriage to cover all manner 
of such cases. So, I say that in an ordinary Hindu house-hold, under this 
codified Hindu Law, you are going to bring about a change in the 
relationship between the various members. Is this going to make for the 
sweetness of relationship or peace in home life? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


428 


428 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Babu Ramnarayan Singh : By no means. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : There is not going to be that sweet 
relationship between brothers and sisters and sisters’ husbands that now 
exists, because after a girl is married, she will have her husband or her 
son or somebody else in her father-in-law’s house to control the property 
of her father’s family and there is bound to be bitterness, bad blood and 
jealously litigation and all the rest of it. Ultimately the family will break 
up. Are we going to enact a Code which will facilitate the breaking up 
of our households ? Will the summurn bonum of Social life be reached 
when every single family is broken up and domestic peace driven away? 
It is for you to consider whether this should be done. I feel that these 
things are bound to happen. 

Sir, a girl may be educated. But after her marriage when she goes 
to her father-in-law’s house, she is being guided and dictated in all 
matters either by her husband or by some relation of his and it will 
not be in her interest to endow her with a share in her father’s property 
by legislation here. You will say you will pass another legislation to 
prevent her from being dictated in respect of the property she has got 
from her father. If you are going to endlessly legislate in that way, in 
order that you may have the intellectual satisfaction of having a Hindu 
Code, I would leave you alone. I therefore, think that this is a 
revolutionary change and this should not be introduced. This does not 
mean that I am against making provision for girls. By all means make 
provision for them. Make any provision for unmarried girls. Make her 
marriage and her education the first charge on her father’s properly. 
Make it absolute charge on that property so that on her marriage when 
she will be absorbed in the family of her husband, she will be divested 
of her interest in her father’s property. But that is not what you are 
doing. You talk of equality of sex, justice and fairness but are allowing 
the girl the right to inherit not only her father’s property equally with 
the son, but also to share her husband’s property or father-in-law’s 
properly. This is equality with a vengeance. The girl should not get 
property from both sides. This will also lead to further fragmentation 
of property. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: The boy will get a share of his mother’s 
property ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : A daughter whether married, 
unmarried or widowed will get her mother’s property. Let my 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


429 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 429 


honourable friend read the Hindu Law. Even as it is under the Hindu 
Law, all categories of daughters are entitled to Streedhana property. 

Shrimati G, Durgabai: No, no, no, no. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I say, yes, yes, yes, yes. Thus the 
daughter is provided according to the present Hindu Law. I cannot go 
on correcting the misapprehensions of others. The Hindu law is there. 
The members of the legal profession know it. I need not labour the point 
I believe, that there is sure to be more fragmentation. This will 
inevitabily lead to increased testametary disposition and consequent 
litigation and ultimate ruination. 

An Honourable Member: Already there is fragmentation. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Yes, but two wrongs do not make 
one right. Because there is fragmentation already, is no argument for 
making provision for further fragmentation in the shape of more shares 
to property. 

Sir, in this field of inheritance, another innovation has been introduced 
and I think that is the most devastating of all changes. 

Shri B. Das : That is not the principle of the Bill. You can drop it. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : What is the principle of the Bill? 
Shri B. Das ; I am referring to partition and that is not the main 
principle. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : The system of inheritance is the 
backbone of the Bill. Under this Bill you are going to scrap the 
Mitakshara law. Make no mistake about it. The right to property by 
birth and survivorship, which is the basic foundation of Mitakshara 
law, is going to be swept away. This Mitakshara system of law has 
been governing the country for hundreds of years till there was 
evolved in Bengal the Dayabhaga law founded on the principle of 
natural justice and affection. Many of my friends who are supporters 
of the Bill have told me that I should be the last person to oppose 
it inasmuch as it introduces the principle of inheritance enunciated 
in the Dayabhaga law of my province. My reply to them was that 
that was no satisfaction to me. I do not want even if the well-meaning 
Social Reformers in India wants that that system should be adopted. 
Even if a superman or dictator comes and tells me: ‘Look here, the 
law of inheritance in Bengal should be made applicable to all India’, 
I would be the first man to raise my voice of protest against it. The 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


430 


430 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


old system has stood the test of time. The change might suit my province, 
but not all India. I do not want that this Mitakshara law of inheritance 
should be scrapped in favour of one which is neither the Mitakshara 
law of inheritance nor the Dayabhaga law. It is a hybrid mixture of both 
which is conducive to the welfare of none, tending to bring about the 
disintergation and downfall of Hindu society as it will completely unsettle 
a well settled order of things. 

I think I have exhausted the patience of the House and must bring 
my speech to a close. (Honourable Members : ‘No, no’) I have dealt with 
inheritance, I have dealt with marriage. I feel that those two branches 
of Hindu law which are sought to be drastically amended should get fuller 
consideration. But it will be a tragedy for India, for the Hindu society, 
if in the name of reform, you uproot the Hindus from their safe and 
ancient moorings which have protected them from the stress and storm 
of centuries. Let me again repeat that our Shastras, besides making 
elaborate provisions for all matters of social life, left a wide field to well- 
established local customs and usages. They have been very salutary in 
their effect, as stabilizing forces in society. If we ignore them and make 
a fetish of codification we will cast Hindu Law into a mould absolutely 
inflexible, rigid and cast iron; we will be importing into it unncessarily 
a character which never belong to it. We will be transforming it into 
something, which will never be able to adjust itself to the needs of times, 
as it has been in the past. 

Sir, before I conclude, I will touch on the argument which has been 
advanced here also, but which has been very lightly brushed aside by 
those who do not like it. It has been argued — and I believe perfectly 
rightly — that this Legislature is not competent to deal with it. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Legally incompetent ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Yes. I feel that it is not 
competent. In any case, if you take shelter behind legal formation, 
I will tell you, morally you have absolutely no justification for passing 
this Code. I know this objection was raised not only from people like 
us, but by people very highly placed in the political life of this 
country, by people with high political stature ; for instance, by a man 
of the eminence and standing of the Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad, 
the President of the Indian Constituent Assembly, the sovereign body 
by which in season and out of season, we are all swearing. I want 
to know whether or not his views deserve our best consideration. 
Personally, I have very great respect for him. He is not only the uncrowned 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


431 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 431 


monarch of Bihar, but he is one of the undisputed leaders of India. Dr. 
Rajendra Prasad has given the clearest possible indication. He knows 
not only the people of Bihar but Bengal as well and also other provinces. 
He sat up his practice in Calcutta and upto the middle of his life he 
lived in Calcutta. It is not for nothing that he gave the warning that 
the Constituent Assembly constituted as it is to-day, ought not to discuss 
a legislative measure of this nature. I can speak for myself. I cannot 
speak for others. I honestly feel that I have absolutely no right, legal 
or moral to be a party to any measure, any legislation, which is not 
absolutely necessary for the day to day administration. I was returned 
to the Constituent Assembly with four votes only. I can honestly declare 
here and now that when I sought all those four votes from the Members 
of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly, I never promised them that 
I would give them the right of divorce. Neither did they ask for it. I 
declare that I never promised them that I was going to scrap up the 
law of inheritance. I never told them that I was going to the Constituent 
Assembly to create a fresh Portfolio and a Ministry of Marriage, because 
I feel that such an institution will be necessary here in the Central 
Government, if this Bill goes through. Look at the formalities that have 
been provided here. So, personally speaking, I feel that I have no right 
to give my assent or dissent to this. I can only tell the House that I 
am not competent, because I had no specific mandate from my Constitu- 
ency to do it. When I came in through the General Elections there were 
clear issues before the Country such as the attainment of the freedom 
of the country and all the rest of it; and the last time we came here, 
we were enjoined only to draw the Constitution of India. Therefore, 
it might gratify our vanity that we as members of the sovereign 
legislature of the land are competent to enact such a legislation but 
the claim is shorn of all moral content whatever. Nothing would have 
been lost if we had deferred the consideration of this Bill to some 
future dale after the next General Elections. I emphatically maintain, 
Mr. Chairman, that the time chosen for its passage through this 
House has been most importune. After the attainment of indepen- 
dence, problems after problems have been confronting the National 
Government. Have we been able to solve them ? We have not. Are 
we in the country very popular ? By ‘we’ I mean ‘all’ including that 
side. No. Frankly, because we raised expectations which we have not 
been able to fulfil. That may be due to a variety of causes over which we 
have had no control; that may be due to an interplay of forces, which took 
us unawares, absolutely unprepared. But throughout the country you find 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


432 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


simmering discontent. As a matter of fact, I do not feel inclined to disclose 
my identity as a member of the Legislature, of the Constituent Assembly, 
when I travel in a railway compartment, because the moment they come 
to know that, they start vigorously criticising us. 

Shri B. L, Sondhi (East Punjab: General): Then go by air. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I have started going by air. Quite 
true. There also I fare no better. I am not joking. I really feel that the 
country has become sick of us, disappointed of us because of our failure 
to do anything real for the common man. Hitherto there had been the 
Kashmir question. There is the question of commodity prices. Yesterday 
we had a brilliant performance with the unfortunate — enhancement of 
post-card rate and the price of cloth. 

Mr. Chairman : The honourable Member may confine himself to the 
Bill. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am only saying that the rise in 
prices of commodities, labour strikes, the Communist menace, refugee 
problem etc. have been too much for the government. Is this the time 
for us to go on with this luxury of Social reform legislation, and a very 
highly controversial legislation at that ? It is sure to give rise to the 
bitterest acrimony; and as a matter of fact, it has already brought about 
a lot of acrimonious controversy. I believe honourable members have been 
already Hooded with literature (Interruption). Of course, from the Anti- 
Hindu Committee, and similar societies and associations from Calcutta 
and elsewhere. I have got protests from the Women’s Association in 
Poona, I have got protests from Women’s Association in Bengal, the 
members of which come from the highest aristocracy in the land. I have 
not known of any Bar Association in Bengal which has not protested 
against this. I have not known any Bar Associations which have 
supported this Bill. I have in my possession perhaps the whole literature 
that has been circulated so far in connection with this Bill. I have 
classified it and the dead weight of opinion is against it, qualitativley 
and quantitatively. I again say that the time is not opportune. At a time 
when, according to our Prime Minister’s appeal we should close our ranks, 
put our heads together, devote all our time and energy and work in amity 
and concord so that we may solve the problems of the land, we should not 
give another cause for disruption, another cause for discord or grouse or 
discontent in the country. I do feel nothing is to be lost if we shelve this 
Bill for the time being. If that is not done, then, of course, I promise that 
I will have to oppose this Bill at every stage. I oppose this Bill, because 
I feel that it is a wholly unwarranted measure and that there has been 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


433 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 433 


no demand in the country for a legislation of this kind. I oppose it because 
I feel that in all social legislations we must go slow and that we cannot 
bring about large scale social reform by legislation alone. The reforms 
will have to come from within by force of public opinion which has to 
be created inside the society. Thirdly, I oppose because of the most 
irregular manner in which this Bill is sought to be passed in this House. 
I oppose because I feel that I am not morally competent to discuss this 
Bill and pass it in the Legislature as it is constituted at present. I oppose 
this Bill because I feel that it has brought in radical changes in the 
concept of marriage, in the scheme of Hindu Law including the law of 
inheritance and succession. I oppose it because I feel that it will create 
endless and needless complications including such things as Civil 
Marriage Register, Sacramental Marriage Register, Marriage Notice 
Book, Director General of Marriages, Registrar Generals of Marriages, 
Ministry of Marriages, and so on and so forth. I oppose it on the further 
ground that it would give rise to bitterness, disunion and discord in our 
families leading to the disintegration of society. I oppose it on the further 
ground that it is undemocratic inasmuch as a vast body of opinion in 
the country is against it. In view of all these, I feel I am morally called 
upon to oppose this Bill with all the force at my command. 

With these few words, yes, these are few words in view of the enormity 
of the legislation, In view of the gravity of the issues involved ; these 
are few words in view of the opposition it has roused and the repercussion 
it will have on the society. Anybody who really wants society to be 
protected against this menace coming from the legislature cannot but 
be articulate and discursive; he has to devote time to the full and 
dispassionate consideration of things ; he must give his humble bit of 
advice of caution to the legislators so that they may not drive us along 
the wrong path and that the society may not slip down the declivity 
into ruin. 

* The Honourable Shri N. V, Gadgil: I have been somewhat provoked 
to participate in the discussion on a Bill which undoubtedly is revolutionary. 
I have heard with the greatest respect the speech of my honourable friend 
with whom I had the honour to work in this House for more than ten years. 
If there is anything which distinguishes him most, it is his earnestness which 
is only equalled by his great eloquence. I entirely agree with him that in matters 
of social reform one must go slow. On that point, I have not the slightest 
doubt. But this Bill has proceeded so slow that some of us have rightly 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, Part II, 1st March 1949, pp. 1015-20. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-08 MK AMIT 16-10-2013 S.K.-05- 12-2013 


434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


complained that it has not been passed much earlier. As far as I know, 
this Bill or at least the main provisions of this Bill have been before 
the house or its predecessor and before the country including the 
members of the Bar for nearly eight years. It cannot be said by any 
stretch of imagination that this Bill has taken either this House or the 
country by surprise. 

I well remember in 1945, at the time of the general elections, I was 
opposed by certain groups precisely because I stood for social reform, 
because I stood for the codification of the Hindu Law. The very fact that 
I was elected and I am still here is an indication that I carry the views 
of my constituency. 

A point has been made by my honourable friend Pandit Maitra that 
this House is not competent to pass a legislation of this character. I think 
this objection I have heard so often in the course of the last fifteen years 
that every time when a social reform Bill was before the House, the 
same objection was raised. With what result, everybody knows. If this 
House is competent to pass the Constitution for free India, I fail to see 
how it is not competent to pass this legislation. As if to reinforce the 
agreement with a personal appeal, my honourable friend Pandit Maitra 
referred to the views expressed by Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad. I 
have, and, in fact, every person in this House has, every respect for 
Honourable Dr. Rajendra Prasad. Yet, there is a duty which every 
member of this House owes to his conscience and to his constituency 
and to this great country in which he lives above everything, not merely 
as a legislator, but as a person who visualises the reconstruction of Hindu 
society and he would be failing in his duty if he were to take into 
consideration only the personal views of one eminent person or another 
eminent person. When I say this, I say it in no spirit of disrespect, but 
because I feel duty is higher than any respect for any individual. 

The main point is, has the time not come for the codification of 
the Hindu law ; has the time not come for the introduction of certain 
reforms in the system of marriage, adoption, inheritance and all other 
things which go to constitute what is generally known as the Hindu 
Law. The sources of Hindu Law are so many. I do not want to dilate 
on this and I do not want to take much time of the House. But there 
is a clear case established that there must be some uniformity, some 
definitions about the interpretation of the law. If the law is not clear, 
if the law is not uniform, the stability of society suffers. If we have 
different interpretations of a particular text by half a dozen High Courts, 
I think the time has come when all this must be put an end to. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


435 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 435 


Further, my honourable friend suggested that we are attempting to 
destroy Hindu Society. My own feeling is that, here are about 290 persons 
who are in close contact with Hindu Society ; here we can come together, 
ventilate our views and come to some agreement and adjustment and 
pass a legislation calculated to secure the further progress of Hindu 
Society. When Manu, Parashara and Yagnyavalkya wrote their smritis, 
they had not the benefit, I should say, of any legislature. They were 
undoubtedly great men ; but I do not think that the race of great men 
died with them. On my left, I find a person so great in scholarship and 
character that it would not be wrong on my part to compare him with 
some of the old Rishis and law givers. If today, in addition to his own 
wisdom and learning, he requisitions the help and co-operation of all 
the 290 persons, I think his hands are strengthened and his views ought 
to appeal to us. 

The main point, as I said was, has the time come for certain reforms 
and has the time come for the codification of Hindu Law ? If the time 
has come, it makes no difference whether one man promulgates a Code 
and the country accepts it, or whether it is accepted by the process of 
discussion in a democratic manner and the country accepts it. The main 
point is to judge it without passion, without prejudice and without 
entering into any extremist considerations. We have in this House to 
judge it purely on merits and not on sentimental grounds. 

After all, what is it that is in this Code ? Except for the question 
of inheritance, there is nothing to which we have not listened so often 
and to which we have not agreed substantially. My own view is that 
there are two important things on which the controversy is centered, 
One is marriage; the other is ending of the co-parcenary in Hindu Law. 
So far as marriage is concerned, there is nothing revolutionary in this. 
In these days, when everything is pointing towards State control more 
and more, and when we are talking of nationalization, I think the only 
sphere for private enterprise is marriage. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Let that also be nationalised ! 

The Honourable Shri N. V. Gadgil : Now in this Bill a golden 
mean is struck. The entry and exit in this sphere is so regulated that 
a modern man coming from the West would certainly laugh at our 
backwardness. He would say if marriage is a matter which is calculated 
to secure the highest happiness for both, then one of the grounds for 
divorce must be incompatibility of temperament. Have you gone up to 
that ? The grounds in the Bill are very narrow. In fact, I say that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


436 


436 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


this is a very moderate measure. You do not expect a wife to carry on 
with a lunatic, a leper etc. and there is nothing in this Bill which runs 
contrary to the provisions of Smritis or which is inconsistent with the 
genius of Hindu society and culture. Most of us know the Smriti. 

^ ^ -RsffacT, cftftsN ■qrf^ ^ I ■qfcl: ^ Hlil'hlH fHfacl I 

These are the grounds given in the ancient text and if something 
approximating to that is not available today in Hindu society, it is 
because we have become stagnant and all these dynamic urges for 
progress have ceased to operate. After all who, and to what extent of 
Hindu society will this effect? Speaking for my own province, 95 per cent, 
have already some sort of divorce, not as a matter of law, but as a matter 
of custom. It is only the two or three per cent, of people of the upper 
classes who are opposed to it. But taking a fair view, the educated section 
is completely for it. 

On the one hand I agree that divorce must not be made very cheap 
and that incompatability of temperament should not be one of the 
grounds. But at the same time, marriage should not be considered a life 
sentence, if it virtually comes to that. After all, just as marriage has 
an individual aspect, it has also a social aspect. If the two spouses do 
not agree, then the bickering and the bitterness and the lack of harmony 
is not confined merely to the precincts of the family but it has wider 
application and effect, and society and the general atmosphere round- 
about also suffer. If it is the desire of any law giver that whatever piece 
of legislation he wants to get through it must have the capacity of 
securing the results contemplated then we have to judge whether what 
has been all along with us has really given us the result we have asked 
for. It is a matter for introspection. If today we are providing some way 
out from wedlock in order to make people, who are readily not happy 
to get out of it, we are only doing what I think is our social duty. 

So far as marriage is concerned, I fail to see how we can object 
to marriages between persons belonging to different castes. In the year 
1949, it would be a sad commentary on our progressive outlook if 
a single person should stand up here and say — well, marriages between 
persons belonging to different castes should not be legalised. In free 
India, I think there is only one caste, the caste of free men : and one 
religion and that religion of humanity. (Shri H. V. Kamath, ‘And free 
women !’)■ This reform has been before this country so long that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


437 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 437 


those who feel that this means dissolution of Hindu society, are enemies 
of progress ; such a Hindu society in my opinion ought to be dissolved. 
What is this that a man should be called untouchable because he is born 
in a particular caste. I have never seen a boy born with a broom : I 
have never seen a boy born in a Brahmin family with a Yagnopavita, 
nor a boy born in a Marwari family with a Taraju. 

I fib* Rid feETl ^TTfd f^I SJlddMdl WT I 

All are born Shudras and after Sanskara a man attains higher status 
and when he has gone through the different stages of learning and 
accomplishment he becomes a Shrotriya, Here is the real spirit of 
Hinduism, not the spirit which is evinced by some of our old Sanantanic 
friends here and outside. If the object of this great country, as has been 
often given out to be is to make a classless society, then we must see 
to it that proper institution, both social and political are evolved and 
enlarged. I therefore consider that whatever recommendations are made 
in this Code as regards marriage are not only absolutely necessary, but 
they do not go far enough. But as I agree with my honourable friend, 
Pandit Maitra, that in social mailers we ought to be slow, I am willing 
to accept this position for the time being. 

The most controversial part of the whole thing is the elimination of 
the coparcenary from Hindu society. Something was said of public 
opinion. Something was said of the press and the bar. In my own province 
there is an association called the ‘Dharma Nirnaya Mandal’, In this 
Mandal are to be found Mahmahopadyaya Tarkatirth Vidyavachaspati 
men of high learning and scholarship. Very recently they have passed 
a resolution and expressed views on the proposed Hindu Code : — 

“The Dharma Nirnaya Mandal takes this opportunity, when the Hindu 
Code is on the anvil for consideration in the present session of the 
Assembly, to express its appreciation of the general liberalizing influence 
which is brought to bear in the framework of the present code. The Mandal 
sees this influence clearly in the removal of — 

(a) distinction regarding joint ancestral and self-acquired properly: 

(b) different treatment of sons and daughters : 

(c) technical difficulties in the interpretation of Women’s Estate; and 

(d) distinctions between Mitaksliara and Dayabhaya rules of inheritance. 

The Mandal believes that the above reforms will go a great deal to 
minimise court litigations and foster national spirit and engender a 
feeling of oneness by this one Hindu Code being made to apply to all 
Hindus in the whole of India. The Mandal notes this as the first attempt 
ever made in this direction within historical memory. 

This is the reason, why in spite of several differences in minor details, 
the Mandal heartily supports the present measure as it is.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


438 


438 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Babu Ramnarayan Singh : What people do they represent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They are most learned and 
orthodox men. 

The Honourable Shri N. V. Gadgil: But enlightened orthodox. 

Now, I come to the question of joint Hindu family. The house will 
no doubt agree with me that a progressive society ought to change 

4PM with the change in times and that it should evolve appropriate 
institutions both of property and of laws. The time has now 

come to assess dispassionately the merits of the joint family system, both 
as an institution to secure family happiness and as an institution of property. 
Even today, if somebody gives me convincing arguments about the benefits 
of the joint Hindu family, I am prepared to hear him, for I am not dogmatic — 
I feel that truth is the real thing, not prestige for ones own views. 

Now, taking the first point, has the joint family system secured happiness 
for the individual members of the family ? I am not speaking what the 
daughters-in-law feel when they have to live in a big family. What I have 
seen and heard definitely goes to show that so far as happiness and harmony 
are concerned, this institution has ceased to be of any use or value. After 
all there is nothing new in this. If out of 32 crores of Hindus nearly 5 crores 
are already governed by Dayabhaga and if that system has worked well, 
at least one cannot say that it is absolutely bad and that we must even 
think of it. Hu honourable Member: It is absolutely new.) That it is new 
there is no doubt. But what is the society that we are visualising for the 
future ? It is of a patriarchal type ? What is exactly the nature of the society 
you want to reconstruct ? As I understand, that society is going to be one 
in which there will be equality of status and equality of opportunity because 
those are the two phrases we have incorporated in the Preamble of the Draft 
Constitution. I think with that Preamble the joint family property system 
is not consistent. 

The real trouble seems to me to be — after having listened to the 
speeches of various members — what is being given to daughters. But 
as an institution of property the joint family system must go, because 
it concentrates wealth. People will ask me, “Well, has it or has it 
not done something good?” I at once agree that it has done some 
good, but so far as property aspect is concerned, so far as social credit 
aspect is concerned, other alternatives have already come into 
existence, such as co-operative societies and the joint stock companies. 
Therefore, there is no need of this institution so far as the creation 
of social credit is concerned. As a mechanism for business other 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


439 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 439 


alternatives have come into existence and by experience we have found 
that they give better results. Therefore, we are not destroying anything 
without putting something in its place; we are not leaving the whole 
society in a sort of vacuum as it were. What has outlived its usefulness 
is being liquidated so that new India will go ahead with greater speed 
and may attain greater progress. 

Now, the real trouble as I said is about some share being given to 
the daughter: whether it should be half or whether it should be something 
less are details which can be discussed later on. But one point is certain 
and that is that the daughter must get some share. In free India if you 
are only going to say that — 

and then say that she should either go to a court of law or ask for 
maintenance, I say it is not fair. 

My own feeling is that some difficulties may arise at the beginning; 
when new institutions come, when new thoughts generate; society does 
take some time to adjust itself. The question is not whether these 
difficulties are great or small: the relevant question is whether the new 
arrangement proposed is good or bad. If you are convinced that it is 
good, naturally there will be some difficulty in adjustment. We must not 
mind the difficulty at all. 

It has been suggested that as soon as the marriage is over the 
bridegroom will start trouble, by suing or otherwise, for the share which 
his wife has got from her parents. It would be welcome to lawyers. Well, 
when we are trying to nationalise as much as possible, what little will 
be left will not be of great consequence, that people would go to the 
court for a small share of it. In times to come there will be little left 
both for the boy and the girl. Even if it leads to litigation, does it mean 
that we should not do justice? Because a good tiling may be abused by 
a few, does it mean that it should be denied to all? It is for the House 
to decide. It is high time that the general talk of equality of sex must 
be followed by equality of ownership of property. If we do not do that 
we will have to face the charge of hypocrisy. 

My honourable friend Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra has prophesied 
all sorts of trouble for the great Hindu society. Such prophets have 
always been there in the past and they have always proved false. I have 
not the slightest doubt that Hindu society has got such a flexible 
nature that it has absorbed various cultures and if it has lived through 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


440 


440 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the ages successfully it is because those who guide the affairs of the 
society had in time suggested changes suitable to the times. That is the 
reason why it has survived till now. Here is an attempt to bring the 
law in line with public opinion. What the law does is that it consolidates 
the public opinion but public opinion being dynamic by its very nature 
it goes ahead every now and then. It is like a horizon which recedes 
the nearer one goes to it. Modern society by its very nature progresses 
very quickly. Therefore, we have to adjust public opinion and the law 
of the land. There are other means by which it can be done, like legal 
fiction or equity but the best and the honest way is to do it by a piece 
of legislation. I think here is an attempt in that direction. Although I 
agree that it is revolutionary, it is a planned revolution and therefore 
it is going to be a success. 

*Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have but a short time at my disposal. 
(Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Why? You have your own time.) I mean compara- 
tively short time for the enormous subject which I have to deal with 
and I hope the House will give the subject that amount of thought and 
attention which I have given to it (An honourable Member: What have 
you to do with it ?) At the very outset I am asked what I have to do 
with it. I say I have every thing to do with it. Two very enormous changes 
have taken place in the country. One is that we have decided to shed 
our communal character and the other is that we have decided to impose 
upon ourselves the benefits of joint electorates. Can any honourable 
gentleman in this House deny the right of a Muslim to’ think in the 
same way as a large part of the Hindus think? After all we have to 
live with Hindus. In West Bengal they form 80 per cent and we have 
to live with them and think with them. Come with me to West Bengal. 
Pandit Maitra put the case of the opposition in Bengal very mildly when 
he said that there is serious opposition to this Bill .... 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : There is equally and more serious support. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Come with me to West Bengal. I am 
not speaking on behalf of the orthodox section. With regard to that 
aspect of this legislation I have nothing to do. I have certain serious 
questions to raise before the House which have not been raised up 
till now. The objection in Bengal is so serious that if anybody 
undertakes a journey to ascertain public opinion — ( Interruption ) I mean 
intelligent and advanced public opinion — if anyone will go there, if 
anyone will make a journey from town to town in West Bengal, he 


* C.A. (Leg.) IX. Vol. II. Part II, 1st March 1949, pp. 1020-30. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


441 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 441 


will be faced with opposition to the Bill from the most intelligent section, 
the most enlightned section (An honourable Member: Which the Honourable 
Member has not done). I believe the interruption is not based upon a 
thorough consideration of the subject. I submit that it will be agreed 
that the members of the bar are not very conservative people 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Most of them are orthodox and 
conservative. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : They are not perhaps the orthodox 
section. . . . 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : What about the opinion of Mr. Atul Gupta 
recognised as one of the most eminent lawyers and chosen by Congress 
for the Partition Committee? 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : Does the lawyer line on 

precedents ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In spite of these interruptions I submit 
they are not the orthodox sections. You go to any bar library and you 
will find that this Bill is opposed tooth and naiL . . . 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Because their occupation will be 
gone. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not agree that you eliminate the 
profession of the bar by this Bill. You are introducing complications which 
you can not think of. On the other hand, I submit that the lawyers in 
a different capacity, in a professional capacity, will thank this House 
for introducing this controversial measure. Four judges of the Calcutta 
High Court, four advanced Hindu judges of the Calcutta High Court — 
one of whom now adorns the Federal Court Mr. B. K. Mookerji have 
said — that the law is already well settled, the law is well known. The 
law may be different here and there but that is due to various reasons 
into which I need not now go. The law is well known. 

Shri A. Karunakara Menon : If the law is so settled why Law reports 
every week? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is because I feel that my honourable 
friend does not realise the subtleties which underlie the law. In fact 
precedents are necessary. You cannot cover any possible case in 
anticipation by legislation. So precedents are necessary. They illumi- 
nate difficulties and they are helpful in deciding cases in future. The 
moment mankind gives up precedents, specially in the domain of law, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


442 


442 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


they will cease to be intelligent animals. That is why I submit that 
lawyers who are not orthodox people are opposed to this piece of 
legislation, not because it will deprive them of their food 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : What happens when limited estate for 
women goes out in regard to litigation in Bengal? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I only hope that my honourable sister 
Shrimati Renuka Ray did represent the ladies of Bengal. An Honourable 
Members: She does.’) She is only one star in the whole of West Bengal. 
I will cite at least a dozen stars in opposition who are equally well known 
as Shrimati Renuka Ray. She is only one guiding star leading the case 
of the Hindus. . . . 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar: General): The only star. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : There are hundreds of women who have gone 
to Noakhali and other places. There are many guiding stars in Bengal: 
these women social workers are all leading stars, but they all support 
the Hindu Code. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that my honourable sister has 
not the experience of litigation. He has not lived in the law. If he had 
lived it he would have seen the enormous possibilities. . . . 

Honourable Members : Say ‘she’. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : for a good thriving business. There 

is no difference between he and she. According to the latest standards 
‘he’ includes ‘she’. 

I submit ladies should no longer be called “she”, but they should be 
called “he”. 

The lawyers are against this measure. Their family system will be 
seriously disturbed. They are very much averse to the Bill. (An 
honourable Member. ‘Are they afraid about their profession?’) No, they 
will get more cases. I assure the house on behalf of the lawyers to which 
profession I have the honour to belong that for their personal interests 
they should all welcome it. ( Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: You are 
mistaken). I am not mistaken, I have lived in the law much longer than 
my honourable friend has done. I have taken part in litigation. The 
divorce provisions will introduce endless litigation and will lead to 
endless complications and endless difficulties for many families and more 
misery for women than men. 

Coming straight to a very important point, I have to submit before 
the House a very serious state of, affairs in connection with this Bill. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


443 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 443 


The bill was lastly rushed through the Legislature on the 9th of April 
last. We were asked by our fair sisters not to oppose the Bill at that 
stage; it was considered to be so important that no detailed attention 
need be paid to it — it should be passed. So, at the last hour of the last 
day we agreed to allow it to be considered. I raised my feeble objection 
from the Hindu point of view. Am I raising any objection from the Muslim 
point of view? Certainly not. So, my declaration that the objection was 
from the Hindu point of view should not have elicited any surprise or 
any laughter. It is from the Hindu point of view that I am speaking. 
My learned sister the other day asked me, “Why is it that you are denying 
to your Hindu sisters rights which you are giving to your own sisters”? 
That is a very cardinal question. May I reply? My reply is this, that 
you cannot give the same kind of food to different kinds of persons. You 
have got to judge the position of a Hindu woman as the Hindu law 
conceives of it. You have got to consider the position of a Muslim woman 
as the Muslim law conceives it. We are not here to question the wisdom 
of one system or the other. I find there are two kinds of Members here: 
some vegetarians and some non-vegetarians. Would you give meat food 
to a vegetarian and if anybody gives vegetable food to a vegetarian would 
you accuse him of partiality? (An honourable Member: ‘Is it logic? Very 
strange logic.’)- The argument is as logical as the question put to me 
by my sister Shrimati Renuka Ray — it was not logical. You cannot give 
the same kind of food to two different kinds of persons ; they were indeed 
born and bred differently. 

The Bill was rushed through the House on the 9th of April. The 
Honourable the Law Minister has given us a revealing passage in the 
Report of the Select Committee. He has made a plain admission that 
the Bill had not received any consideration on its merits before it 
was taken to the Select Committee. That was very wonderful statement 
to make. Originally the Bill was supposed to be well-drafted — a good 
Bill — it passed through the Legislature on the 9th of April and was 
taken to the Select committee and then comes the realisation that it 
had not received technical or departmental consideration. Why is it, 
may I ask, that although it had not received technical or serious 
departmental consideration at the hands of the Law Ministry, it was 
rushed through at that stage? {An honourable Member: ‘We were 
very near 1st April’). That may be; it was very near the 1st of April 
and that probably has something to do with the rush. Probably no 
serious business was meant, some sentimental piece of literature had 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


444 


444 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to be passed through in order to satisfy our fair sisters. The Bill is driven 
more by “lady sentiment” than by a consideration of the necessities of 
the case. The Department then undertook a most unprecedented task. 
They came to the conclusion that the Bill was not properly drafted, that 
it had some defects, that it had to be recast. The Bill was composed 
of several individual chapters with separate numbering and separate 
definitions, entirely separate from each other. The Legislative Depart- 
ment thought that this was a blemish and that the Bill should be recast 
with continuous numbering and the whole blended into one complete 
whole. 

I submit that the moment the Legislative Department came to that 
conclusion, then was the time to withdraw the Bill and to frame a new 
Bill which the Ministry was able to accept; and present that as a new 
Bill. Instead of that the department went through a process of legislative 
drafting with which I was never familiar. The whole constitutional 
history of India and abroad will never offer an example of a Departmental 
Bill being prepared after a Bill is presented and after sending it to the 
Select Committee. Shri Ramnarayan Singh yesterday asked as to what 
authority the Drafting Committee had to make a new Bill altogether. 
(An honourable Member: ‘It is not a new Bill.’) I shall be in the 
unfortunate position of being able to show that very substantial changes 
have been made. Although the Honourable the Law Minister yesterday 
tried to avoid answering the question, still he had to admit in the end 
that he did not make any changes, that it was the Select Committee 
that made the changes. I am in a position to demonstrate before the 
House that the changes were very serious, very radical, and not 
unsubstantial changes. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Sir, on a point of order. If the 
honourable member wants to base his argument for re-committing the 
bill to the Select committee on the fact that it was some other Bill that 
was considered and not the Bill sent to it, that point has been covered 
by Mr. Speaker’s ruling ; he need not emphasise on that point. If he 
has other reasons, he is welcome to do so; he is speaking on his 
amendment for re-committing the Bill to the Select Committee. But if 
he stresses his argument, namely, that the Bill considered by the Select 
Committee was not the bill sent to it by this House, then that has been 
covered by the ruling of the Chair which declared that it is the same 
Bill. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras: General) : That might be an 
argument for rejecting consideration. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


445 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 445 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : If that is so, then that point has 
been thrashed out so much that if he were to argue it again it will merely 
be taking the time of the House. That aspect has been so thrashed out 
and arguments have been advanced. He is merely repeating them. I 
would submit to you, Sir, that we can hear any new arguments but we 
are not prepared to hear the same arguments being repeated by him. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : May I put in a few words in 
connection with the point of order raised by my friend Mr. Bharathi? 
He said that the honourable member Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad in his 
amendment for re-committal to the Select Committee had been raising 
the grounds which had been covered by Mr. Speaker’s ruling. I do 
emphatically maintain and the House would also agree that every 
honourable member is entitled, without disrespecting the ruling of the 
Chair to give the reasons which lead him to recommend the Bill 
for recommittal to the Select Committee. There is no point of order as 
such involved in it. It is a member’s legitimate right to place all 
arguments which he can for making a motion for recommittal to Select 
Committee. 

Mr. Chairman : I think there is no point of order in this, because 
he is speaking for his amendment that the Bill be re-circulated for 
purposes of obtaining further opinion thereon and he is just advancing 
arguments how the Bill has changed ; how the original Bill has been 
altered in the Select Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit, the real difficulty of my 
honourable friend is not there. I believe that an intelligent man as he 
is, Mr. Bharathi of all persons, is well aware of the real difficulties of 
the situation. That is why, I submit, he most intelligently wants to 
intercept me by Mr. Speaker’s ruling. I must make a declaration at once 
here that of all persons in the House I have the greatest respect for 
the decision of the Chair. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Why do you go into that ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am merely saying that I accept the 
decision of the chair. I am not going into that. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): You must 
go into that. Why not ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : But what was the ruling ? The ruling 
was that the consideration of the Bill was not out of order; in fact, 
the ruling was that the members of the Select Committee had the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


446 


446 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


old Bill and the Departmental Bill and they must have taken the whole 
thing into consideration and on that basis the technical objection which 
I had raised that the Departmental Bill above was taken into consid- 
eration and not the original Bill was well founded. That is the effect 
of the ruling, and that is the ruling. My present purpose would be now 
to show that although the members of the Select Committee had 
the original Bill before them, although they had the Departmental 
Bill before them, although they had both, although they had 
the opportunity of comparing the two and seeing what glaring interpo- 
lations were made in the Departmental Bill, they did not do so. They 
discharged their duties, I should say with respect in consideration of the 
importance of the subject, in a somewhat hasty manner and imperfectly 
and rather perfunctorily. This was the point of view that I was 
emphasizing. 

An Honourable Member : You are inciting the Law Minister to 
violence ! 

The Honourable Dr, B. R. Ambedkar : I would not do any such 
thing, because I have plenty of arguments to meet Mr. Ahmad. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit the Honourable the Law Member 
is fully conscious of the situation, I have a little suspicion, that he knows 
by this time without any doubt what serious changes have been made 
in the Departmental Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know. I am waiting 
to hear, though. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Honourable the Law Member said, 
“There have been certain serious changes, but I did nothing. It is the 
Select Committee that did so. The Departmental Committee did not make 
any changes.” In fact yesterday I put a pointed question which he kindly 
answered, namely, whether the Departmental Committee that was set 
up was instructed not to make any substantial changes. That was due 
to the fact that I find in the report of the Select Committee a definite 
declaralion by the majority of the Select Committee : “This revised draft 
does not make any substantial changes in the body of the original Bill.” 
It was this declaration which I understand was also given to the Select 
Committee by him that no substantial changes have been made; it was 
on this basis that, although they had the original Bill with them, they 
did not look very carefully and compare them with a view to finding 
out whether any substantial changes have been made. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


447 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 447 


Shrimati Renuka Ray : On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. Are 
matters which happened in the Select Committee, are those details 
allowed to be brought up in this manner? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : With regard to this point of order, I have 
already to submit that. . . . 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : It is a point of order which I would like 
you, Sir, to decide. 

Mr. Chairman : I think there is no point of order. It is only Mr. 
Naziruddin Ahmad’s inference that the Select Committee did or did not 
do such and such a thing. I think the honurable member will not cast 
any aspersious on either the Select Committee or the members of the 
Select Committee. He may advance his arguments. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The manner in which the Select 
Committee behaved is certainly open to the criticism of the House. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : You are right, Mr. Chairman. 
Without casting aspersions he may advance agruments. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : But he is casting aspersions. 

Mr. Chairman : They are at best inferences. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, my inference is that members of the 
Select Committee were definitely assured by the Honourable Minister 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I object to this Sir. This is casting - 
aspersions. These inferences are casting aspersions. 

Mr. Chairman : Every honourable member is at liberty to draw his 
own inference. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit, Sir, it can be contradicted at 
once by any member of the Select Committee. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: No; certainly we cannot con 
tradict. But since you are inviting a contradiction, I as a member of the 
Select Committee, do contradict. I say that we went through the whole 
thing and we were satisfied that 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : You are making a statement 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : You wanted a contradiction. And 
I contradict. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that 
because inferences are made and aspersions are cast, the members 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


448 


448 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of the Select Committee are put in a very awkward position, because 
then we have lo bring forward all that happened in the Select Committee, 
which we are not supposed to do here ? 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. I would request the honourable member 
not to make any aspersions against the members of the Select Committee; 
he may address arguments as to how the Bill has been changed. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I would not willingly make or cast any 
aspersions on any honouruable member unless it is involved in the very 
exposition of the point. If anything was badly done which affects the 
fate of 30 crores of people and if any mistake or slip has been done 
by members of the Select Committee then I should respectfully but 
frankly criticise that. This amount of privilege should be given to a 
member of the House. I should stand corrected if I am wrong. I should 
not cast any aspersions merely for casting aspersions, but I will confine 
myself to pointing out certain serious changes and errors of procedure 
affecting the merits of the Bill and the discussion of the same may 
necessarily involve me in a criticism of the members of the Select 
Committee. Why should the members of the select Committee be afraid 
of a discussion ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : We are not afraid of discussion. Then we 
must be given the right of speaking on what happened in the Select 
Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The so-called sanctity of the Select 
Committee has been broken in this connection so many times. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P. : General) : There is no sanctity about 
it. We can discuss it. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : We are prepared to discuss it. 

Shri Mihir Lai Chattopadhyay : (West Bengal: General): Should 
members be allowed to carry on conversation like this, Sir? 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. I have been seeing it happening. I hope 
honourable members will kindly allow the speaker to proceed with his 
argument. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Honourable Deputy Speaker the other 
day asked Dr. Ambedkar to explain why certain things took place. 
Dr. Ambedkar said that it was due to the influence of his enemies getting 
the better of his friends, they combined together and did it. Is it not 
giving out the so-called secrets of the Select Committee ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


449 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 449 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not want to interrupt 
the honourable member at all. But now I think it is my duty to draw 
your attention and also the attention of the speaker that his motion is 
that because certain changes have been made in the Bill, it ought to 
be recirculated. I think what is most germane to that motion is that 
he should strightaway without any kind of preliminary discussion proceed 
to point out what changes have been made. I was waiting to know that 
from him. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is what I was going to do when side- 
issues were raised. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : On a point of order; I beg to submit 
that this question affects the previleges of the Members of the House. 
The question at issue is: are the members of the House not entitled to 
criticise the wrong behaviour or the wrong conduct of the members of 
the Select Committee in regard to procedure? Supposing a Bill is placed 
before a Select Committee and that the Bill considered by the Select 
Committee was not the one referred to, another Bill is substituted in 
its place. Are not the Members entitled’ to say them by the House ? 
You may give a ruling on the point whether the members of the House 
cannot criticise this conduct of the Select Committee ? Whatever has 
happened in the Select Committee may not be allowed to be divulged. 
But the manner in which the proceedings were conducted is open to 
criticism, otherwise it will mean that the members of the House have 
no sort of control on a Bill. If a bill is introduced in the House it becomes 
the property of the House and every Member has a right to point out 
the irregularities in the Select Committee. 

Mr. Chairman : This is not a point of order. The speaker will go 
on. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : (Minister of State for 
Railways and Transport). May I submit that while the House is entitled 
to criticise the Select Committee and even censure it, it is not entitled 
to say that the Bill before it is not the Bill that was referred to it. It 
is not open to the House to say that this is not the Bill referred to the 
Select Committee. The House may condemn the Select Committee if it 
thinks that the Select Committee has not done its duty. Whenever a 
Bill is presented to us and is under consideration it is not open to us 
to say that this is not the Bill that was presented to it. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that I was only going to condemn 
the Select Committee and nothing more. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


450 


450 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Chairman : The honourable member will be perfectly right if 
he criticises the Bill as it has emerged from the Select Committee and 
points out the changes made. He will confine his remarks to the changes 
that have been made in the Bill. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am going to submit to the House that 
some changes have been made, some serious changes have been made. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Point them out. I am 
awaiting to know the changes made. The honourable member may take 
his own time, but let him tell us what the changes are. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I will proceed in my own way. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : He cannot go on in this manner. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the original Bill was 
introduced by Mr. Jogendra Nath Mandal. It bears the printing date 1st, 
August 1946. This was the Bill which was sent to the Select Committee. 
A Bill printed on 16th August 1948 is the Bill that came out of the Select 
Committee with the report. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What is the point on that ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am coming to that. There are serious 
discrepancies between these two Bills. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is what we are waiting 
to know. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If this is accepted I will proceed to the 
vital points. There are serious discrepancies between the original Bill 
and the Bill that has been appended to the report of the Select 
Committee. ( Interruptions ) This is not the best way of quickening my 
pace. I submit that in between these two Bills, a very interesting 
document came in. It is a departmental draft which was printed on 17th 
July, 1948. It is this draft which came in between the two. All the points 
of order raised and argued were about this departmental draft Even in 
the present discussion, if I understood the Honourable the Minister of 
Law rightly, he mentioned nothing about this departmental Bill, but said 
that all the changes were made by the Select Committee and not by 
him. I am referring to the Bill dated 17th July, 1948. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : That was before the date of the Select 
Committee meeting. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am grateful to my friend Mr. Tyagi 
for pointing out that the date of printing, viz., 17th July, 1948, was 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


451 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 451 


before the Select Committee was first called to meet. I submit that this 
Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would like to curtail this 
argument of my honourable friend by saying that it is bound to be so. 
The re-draft was sent one month before the meeting of the Select 
Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is the point I was mentioning. I am 
grateful for the admission. This draft was complete before the Select 
Committee met. I should like to state at this stage that the House was 
not informed about it. The authority of the House was not taken to 
completely change the original Bill. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Is the middle one exactly the same as is 
appended to the report? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : There have been some changes. The 
changes made by the select Committee were slight, but serious changes 
were made by the Department which the Select Committee never knew. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : It is the Select Committee that has 
introduced the changes and not the Department. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the most important thing 
is that they never made a detailed examination of the Departmental 
draft. In fact my contention is that — I would sit down if my honourable 
friend Shri Santhanam can quote a single example in the whole 
legislative history of India or in other countries for this — a Bill that has 
been sent to a Select Committee has been substituted by another 
completely re-casting the whole thing and put along with it. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I have been on many Select 
Committees and in many cases the orginal Bill has been completely re- 
drafted by the Select Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is another matter. 

Mr. Chairman : May I point out to the honourable member that 
Mr. Speaker has given a decision that it is the original Bill that was 
considered by the Select Committee along with the draft given to it by 
the Honourable the Law Minister? In view of that decision, the 
honourable member may confine his remarks to the point as to how the 
original Bill has undergone a change in the Select Committee. All the 
other remarks about what happened in the Select Committee are beyond 
the purview of the honourable member. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My point is that, although the Select 
Committee must be deemed to have considered the original Bill and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


452 


452 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the departmental draft and to have come to this conclusion, that was 
done most perfunctorily and imperfectly. My point is this, that although 
the Select Committee considered or must be deemed to have considered 
the original Bill and the departmental draft and came to this conclusion 
and although that is so, my point is that it was necessarily done most 
perfunctorily and most imperfectly. They must have been, I submit, 
dominated by the serious changes introduced into the departmental 
Bill and they must have been completely under the hypnotic influence 
of a revised draft, a convenient readymade thing, which was placed 
in their hands. It must have made a tremendous psychological 
impression on the Members of the Select Committee, so that the Select 
Committee, although they had the right, largely depended upon the 
departmental draft and this affects the merits though not the legality 
of the final Bill. 

My point is that any Select Committee has the right to make 
enormous changes, but it has never happened that a new Bill, completely 
changed, was placed at the hands of the Select Committee and then they 
would begin consideration of the new Bill. Although, technically, they 
had also the original Bill, still they proceeded clause by clause with the 
new Bill. That was a matter of merit. I submit, that the introduction 
of this departmental Bill has created considerable amount of prejudice 
to a fair and impartial consideration of the Bill. I submit that the clauses 
of the original Bill should have been begun one by one and changes 
should have been made gradually on the body of the original Bill. Instead 
of that it seems to have necessarily followed that the departmental Bill 
was taken up, although there was in them marginal references to the 
clauses of the original Bill. Still, I beg to submit without any disrespect 
to the members of the Select Committee, it was impossible for any 
member to really see readily what enormous changes had been effected 
in the departmental Bill and it is this, I submit, which has affected the 
merits of the final Bill. I never suggest that the Members of the Select 
Committee had no right to make any changes or to adopt the depart- 
mental Bill or to proceed with the original Bill. I submit that the work 
was, speaking again with respect, necessarily done perfunctorily 
and considerable responsibility in the work of the Select Committee 
must rest upon the departmental draft. On a consideration of the 
departmental draft, therefore, the merits of the present Bill should be 
considered. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Let us see all the points of 
difference. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


453 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 453 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the entire legislation began 
with a blunder and it proceeds from blunder to blunder until we come 
to a capital blunder, namely the present Bill. I submit that the mistake 
first arose in the year 1937. The mistake arose there and I shall show 
at once that one mistake led to another mistake and that mistake led 
to other mistakes and all these mistakes led the Select Committee and 
then ultimately ( Interruption ) I ask Shri Krishnaswami Bharathi in all 
seriousness, should I be disturbed like this ? 

Mr. Chairman : If the honourable member addresses the Chair, I 
think the disturbance will be much less. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I submit, you will be pleased to 
consider that in the year 1937, a Bill was passed into law and that is 
the Hindu Married Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937. That, I submit, 
was a hasty legislation. It contained within itself ill-digested, little 
understood law that has led to all this trouble. In fact the author of 
the Bill was Dr. Deshmukh. So, Dr. Deshmukh — I am happy to find it 
is not our present Dr. Deshmukh — unconcentously with the bona-fide 
belief of doing good to Hindu society, introduced that Bill. The effect 
of the Bill was to introduce some change in the law of Succession in 
the compact series. According to Hindu Law, as I have understood it, 
when a man dies, his heirs are son, grandson and great, grandson, In 
the presence of the son the grandson by a pre-deceased son inherits — 
the grandson represents his deceased father and takes his father’s share. 
So in this way the son. grandson and the great-grandson in three 
generations inherit the property. Dr. Deshmukh was enthused with the 
idea that the widow must be given a definite status and a definite right. 
So he made the widow of the propositus a share-holder, and not only 
the widow of the propositus, but the widow of a deceased son, the widow 
of the deceased grandson and the widow of a deceased great-grandson. 
They were also included within the ambit of the shareholders. That, I 
submit was most ill-considered, although the author was imbued with 
the highest sense of patriotism and welfare of the community I submit, 
that this was then 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Would my honourable friend 
like me to inform him that this Bill was actually accepted by the late 
Sir N. N. Sircar, who was the greatest authority on Hindu Law ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am in a position to show, although not 
only he, but mere was a time when I also accepted it. ( Interruption ). 
I beg to submit that I am in possession of the House. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


454 


454 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Chairman : The honourable member is going into the history 
of the amendments to Hindu Law. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the Hindu Married Women’s 
Right to Property Act was the first mistake and I shall show that this 
contained within it seeds of other blunders culminating in the present 
Bill. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : That was a serious reflection of the 
legislature then existing. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the mistake was admitted 
by that legislature itself and I can quote passages that that legislature 
admitted that mat was a mistake. ( Interruptions ). 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit, I should show how the mistake 
came about. In fact in providing for the widow of the propositus of the 
deceased son, grandson and of the great-grandson, the position of the 
daughter became absolutely uncertain. Nobody knew what the position 
of the daughter was at that time under this Act. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : An undertaking was taken 
from my friend Dr. Deshmukh by Sir N. N. Sircar that the Government 
will support the measure only if he agreed to drop the word daughter 
and he promised that he would drop the word ‘daughter’ 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am as much familiar with the history 
of that law as the Honourable Dr. Ambedkar. 

Mr. Chairman : Is the honourable member going to take more time? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Chairman : In that case, he may resume his speech later and 
we may now adjourn. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Thursday, the 3rd March, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


455 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 455 


* HINDU CODE — contci. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have to inform honourable Members that 
the following dates have been fixed for receiving nominations and holding 
elections, if necessary, in connection with the following Committees, 
namely : — 

Date for Date for 

nomination election 

1. All India Council for Technical Education 

2. Committee to review the working of the 2-4-49 5-4-49 

Railway Convention. 

The nomination for these Committees will be received in the Notice 
Office upto 12 Noon on the date mentioned for the purpose. The elections, 
which will be conducted by means of the single transferable vote, will 
be held in the Assistant Secretary’s room (No. 21) in the Council House 
between the hours 10-30 a.m. and 1-00 p.m. 


HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the following motion moved by the Honourable Dr. B. 
R. Ambedkar on the 31st August, 1948, namely: — 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 
as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): Sir, 

before you call upon my honourable friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
to continue his speech, I feel constrained to bring to your notice 
once again the irregular manner in which this motion is being brought 
to this House from time to time. I think very few of us knew up till 
yesterday that this Bill was coming up again for consideration. As a 
matter of fact the House was under the impression that so heavy was 
the pressure of urgent government business that no day could be found 
for it; in fact several Members of this Parliament who came over 
here to participate in the deliberations on this subject went back under 
the impression that this matter was not going to be taken up again in 
this session. I can particularly mention an honourable Member, Pandit 
Govind Malaviya, who came over here and who wanted to speak for a 
very long period of time, and when he was assured that the matter was 
not coming up 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. Ill, Part II, 1st April 1949, pp. 2211-43. 


D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


456 


456 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Several Honourable Members : Assured by whom ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Most people knew. It was not 
a case of ordinary business of this House. No single Member of 
Government stands, up and says. “I give you an assurance that this 
will be discussed”. Nothing like that. Everybody got the impression 
from Party talks and elsewhere that the matter was not going to come 
up at any rate in this session, interruption). That being so, if it is taken 
up now it will be showing very scant courtesy to the House. 
I feel this Bill is of such a controversial nature that I do not think 
that you should allow this Bill to be proceeded with in the way in 
which it is being done repeatedly in its different stages. Sir, it is for 
you to consider the point of view which I am placing before the House. 
The House is attenuated, and because the whole Budget discussion was 
over most Members were under that impression — and quite reasonably. 
When they had no idea of the change suddenly to spring a surprise by 
bringing in a motion like this at this late stage, of the session, is, I 
think, hardly fair. 

An Honourable Member : We want your decision, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But there is no point of order here. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U.P. : General): But then I want information 
as to how long the discussions are proposed to be held. There are friends 
in my Province who had requested me to inform them when the Hindu 
Code Bill comes for consideration. I could not inform them because, I 
did not know whether the Bill will be considered only for today or for 
tomorrow or any other day or till the end of the session. So, Sir, will 
you now be in a position to tell the House how long we are going to 
discuss this Bill so that it there is time for them to come, I might inform 
them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am in full sympathy with what Pandit 
Maitra has said, but I do not find any way out of it. As far as I 
am aware — I have been here for a number of years in this Assembly — 
when any matter of such importance where a number of people are 
interested, comes up, the agenda for the next week would be at least 
read out on the previous Friday. I have been accustomed to some 
procedure. Evidently it was not expected that there would be time 
for this Bill, but it was put in when one day was extended and time 
found for today and tomorrow. That is why previous notice could 
not have been given. I believe the honourable Members would try 
to take as good advantage of it as possible by sending telegrams, etc. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


457 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 457 


and get other Members. Therefore, so far as Mr. Tyagi is concerned, if 
he thinks that other Members outside are interested in the proceedings, 
I may say that the proceedings will be broadcast, this evening or 
tomorrow morning and then they will come to know of it. 

An Honourable Member : How can they come tomorrow? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They can come by aeroplane! It is not for 
the Chair to decide how they can come. All that I can say is that on 
an important matter of this nature, certainly Government must have 
given proper notice; it is not as if Government could lose sight of this 
important matter. The general public is interested, a large number of 
the Members from the Provinces and States are not here. Even it they 
were here, it cannot be expected that everybody should be expected to 
read all the books and carry all the information for use at a moment’s 
notice. These are the disadvantages but I am sure the honourable 
Members will try to do as best as they can of the opportunity. Nobody 
can guarantee how long the discussion will go — it may conclude this 
evening or go on till tomorrow. 

Shri T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar (Madras : General): What is the 
programme for this Bill ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is entirely in the hands of the House. I 
do not think we can have a cut-and-dried programme. It is for the House 
to see whether it is necessary to continue discussion, and if there is 
sufficient debate to close it as early as possible. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Sir, I will put the question the other way round. 
May I know if there is any other Government Bill for the rest of the 
Session or this Bill is the only work before us, so that I can make out 
how long this Bill will go ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : As the honourable Member will see from the 
Order Paper, there is so much other work. This no doubt happens to 
be the first Bill for the day but tomorrow other Bills will come which 
are on the list. We need not spend any more time on this question. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa: General) : Will you please fix a time-limit for 
speeches ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I cannot fix any time-limit on a controversial 
matter of this kind. I shall try, so long as I am in the Chair — certainly 
the Speaker will do it better — to see that repetition is avoided. That 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


458 


458 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


is all that I can do, and I shall to the best of my ability, avoid all 
irrelevant matters being brought in Subject to this. I would like to give 
as much freedom as possible. 

*Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim) : Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it is a strange irony of fate that apart from the interrupted nature of the 
debates on this Bill, it has been decided by Government that the chequered 
career, of this Bill and the intermittent debate should, after an interval be 
seriously resumed on the All-Fools’ Day. On the last occasion, when I pointed 
out that the Bill was sent to the Select Committee in a great hurry on the 
9th of April last, some honourable member reminded us that 9th April was 
very near the 1st of April. Somehow or other this Bill is associated with 
the 1st of April. On this day, we are accustomed from time immemorial 
to deal with each other in a playful spirit. We issue bogus invitations, bogus 
marriages are announced and various other bogus things are done. 

Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan (Madras : General) : Sir, has this got 
anything to do with the Hindu Code ? Just now you said that no irrelevant 
matter will be allowed. Has all-fools’ day anything to do with the Hindu 
Code 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have not heard the honourable Member 
sufficiently to come to a conclusion as to whether it is irrelevant or not. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I was merely emphasizing the unsatis- 
factory manner in which the Bill is being brought up from time to time. 
A Bill of this importance and magnitude requires that it should be sat over 
continuously by honourable Members. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Spat over ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sat over. Pandit Maitra thought “spat 
over”. I did not mean that. I submit, Sir, a Bill of this magnitude requires 
that Members should sit over it continuously for a long time. The 
disadvantage of considering this matter at long intervals is that Members 
lose the thread of argument and it is very difficult for them to appreciate 
what has already been said so as to connect with what is said on each 
occasion. I submit, therefore, that this is not dealing seriously with the 
Bill or with the House. 

On the last occasion when I was dealing with the history of this 
important legislation, I pointed out that the first mistake was committed 
in 1937 with the passage of the Hindu Married Women ‘s Rights to 
Property Act, 1937. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. IE, Part II, 1st April 1949. pp. 2213-43. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


459 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 459 


The mistake was to have rushed to the legislature and without 
sufficient consideration to have passed a Bill of that complicated 
nature. In fact, an honourable Member of that House at that time, 
Mr. Deshmukh, had a happy idea and without giving sufficient 
consideration to the subject, he came to the House and the House 
in a generous mood passed the Bill. By that Act, certain women were 
given the right of direct inheritance along with the sons, grandsons 
and great-grand sons. They were given independent right. They were 
not merely Hindu women’s rights, but absolute, transferable and 
inheritable rights. Soon after that, a distinguished lawyer from 
Bengal — Mr. Rishindranath Sircar — drew attention to certain difficul- 
ties which would arise in connection with the Act. Mr. Rishindranath 
Sircar is a distinguished lawyer and author of a text book on the 
Hindu Married Women’s Right to Property Act, and connected Acts. 
He pointed out certain inherent difficulties which would arise in 
connection with the Bill, and in 1938, the Act had to be amended 
by Act, XVI of 1938. The trouble, however, did not cease there and 
difficulties arose afresh. A further difficulty arose by the Act as it- 
was amended in 1938. By the Act even as amended, right was given 
to the widow of the deceased, the son’s widow, grand-son’s widow and 
the great-grandson’s widow and considerable difficulties arose as to 
the position of the daughter. In fact, there was a great deal of 
controversy and Mr. Sircar again pointed out the difficulties of the 
situation created so far as the daughter was concerned. This question 
was agitated throughout the country, and we find about half a dozen 
Bills were submitted to the Legislative Assembly to clarify the 
position of the daughter, to give her also that right, along with the 
son, grandson, and the widows of the various persons. Those Bills 
were presented to the House and they were on the agenda. I 
believe experienced Members of this House, like Pandit 
Lakshmi Kanta Maitra will be able, to recall the situation with 
which the Government was faced, when it had a large number of 
Bills before it — about six Bills. Sir Reginald Maxwell, the Home 
Member, at that time pointed out in the House that it was always 
a bad thing to rush legislation on social matters, without adequate 
consideration. And the difficulty was more and more increased 
as there were more and more legislations. He was, therefore, in 
full sympathy with the position taken by those members, and he 
agreed to have the matter examined properly, from every point of 
view, before legislation was undertaken. This led to the birth of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


460 


460 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the Rau Committee. That Committee prepared a Draft Bill and sent 
questionnaires to various people, and considered and analysed the 
answers and they prepared another Bill. But before proceeding any 
further with their work, they were met with an initial difficulty. They 
found that there was another blunder in connection with the Acts of 1937 
and 1938. They were of opinion that the Act of 1937, as it was amended 
by the Act of 1938 did not apply to agricultural land, the difficulty arose 
in this way that the first Act of 1937 was passed by the Legislative 
Assembly when agricultural land was a subject no longer cognizable by 
the Centre. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House stands adjourned to 2-30 p.m. The 
Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half-Past Two of the Clock. 


The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at Half-Past Two of the 
Clock, Mr. Speaker ( The Honourable Mr. G. V. Mavalankar) in the 
Chair. 


Sreematty Annie Mascarene (Travancore State): I wish to raise a 
point of order. May I know whether it is the duty of a Member of this 
House to attend the session of the legislature throughout ? 

Mr. Speaker : It is hardly a point of order. A member need not attend 
any discussion if he does not like to do so. But I will make one 
observation. If a member makes a speech in support of or in opposition 
to a Bill, it is his duty to remain present in the House to hear the reply. 

Sreematty Annie Mascarene : If he is absent for a few days and 
then comes back and complains that he is not aware of the agenda of 
the House, can that be excused, Sir ? 

Mr. Speaker : He will be judged by his statement before the House. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Before we parted for Lunch today I was 
dealing with the first part of the history of this legislation. The Act 
of 1937 and the amending Act of 1938 led to difficulties with regard 
to the daughter and a large number of Bills were brought forward 
to clarify her position. At that stage the government agreed to have 
the matter examined and appointed the Rau Committee. The Rau 
Committee soon found that the legislature had no jurisdiction to pass 
the Acts so far as agricultural land was concerned. The point arose 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


461 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 461 


in this way : Agricultural land was in the Legislative List of the Centre 
under the previous constitution. The Bill was passed by the Lower House 
in March 1937 when it was functioning under the old Constitution. The 
Upper House passed it sometime in April when the new constitution of 
1935 had come into force. So, when the Bill was passed by the Upper 
House, it had no jurisdiction to legislate for agricultural land. The 
amending Act of 1938 was passed when none of the Houses had this 
jurisdiction. These were capital blunders committed by the Legislature 
of the time. The Rau Committee referred the matter for opinion to the 
Federal court. The Federal court gave a ruling that the House had 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law): The history 
is wholly wrong. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras : General): How could the 
Rau Committee refer to the Federal Court ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is wholly wrong ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, wholly wrong. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In what respect ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will deal with it in my 
reply. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : He is substantially correct 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Rau Committee reported to Govern- 
ment and the Governor General referred the matter to the Federal Court. 
I was wrong only in a minute technical detail. I repeat: The Rau 
Committee referred the matter to the Federal Court through the 
appropriate channel — the Governor General. Is that wrong ? I was 
absolutely right and never wholly wrong. (Interruption). 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member may proceed. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The point was thus referred by the Rau 
Committee to the Federal Court and they gave the ruling that the 
Legislature acted ultra vires so far as agricultural land was concerned. 
That was a capital blunder which was revealed at the time. As soon 
as the ruling of the Federal Court was known I come upon the scene 
My connection with the Hindu Code is not casual or recent. I am in 
a position to show to the House that I took legal steps in connection 
with this legislation as far back as 1941. I was then a Member of 
the Bengal Legislature and I submitted a Bill even before the first 
report of the Rau Committee was out. As soon as the judgment of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


462 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the Federal Court was known I introduced a Bill in the Bengal 
Legislature to apply the Act to Bengal so far as agricultural land was 
concerned. That was the first attempted legislation of the time in this 
connection in India. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain (Bihar: Muslim): May I know from my honourable 
friend if at that time he was in favour of the Hindu Code Bill from what 
time did he change his mind? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Hindu Code Bill was not even born 
at the time. At that time, like many others — many more famous men 
as far even as the topic was concerned, it turned out later that I had 
taken a wrong step. In fact I wanted to extend the Act to agricultural 
land in Bengal. That was the object of the Bill which I submitted to 
the Bengal Legislature. It was circulated for opinion throughout Bengal 
and a large body of public opinion was in favour of the Bill. Everybody 
at the time like me thought that that Bill was right. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : Sir, the honourable Member has not given 
his reasons why he changed his mind. 

Mr. Speaker : That is not relevant at all. He may change his .mind 
any number of times. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The honourable Member should try to wait. 
The House will be pleased to note that the Bill was submitted by me 
in 1941, 14th July, and that a very large section of Hindu public opinion 
in Bengal was then in favour of it. Then the Bill was placed on the 
agenda for a Select Committee. I have got a copy of the agenda paper 
with me, dated 25th September 1942. I was then in a position to get 
it passed by the Bengal Legislature where the Hindu Muslim Coalition 
party had a large majority. The Party by a majority had decided in favour 
of the Bill and it was going to be sent to a Select Committee. By that 
time, however, Hindu opinion had been sufficiently crystallised against 
the Bill. I was told that serious difficulties would arise if the Bill was 
passed. Many people, including myself, then realised that if the Bill was 
passed, the position of daughters and others would lead to chaos. In the 
meantime the Rau Committee report had been published and the Bill 
drafted by them was before the country. A large number of meetings 
were held in connection with it in 1941 and 1942. There was a meeting 
held in my native place of Burdwan and many similar meetings were 
held throughout Bengal condemning the main Bill. Though I had the 
requisite majority in favour of my Bill, I did not proceed with it as 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


463 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 463 


it was a Matter affecting the Hindu community alone and it was opposed 
by them. I felt that it was no good passing a measure by sheer majority 
of persons who were not affected by it. I was never in favour of the 
Hindu Code Bill, though I was for a time in favour of my own Bill. This 
will I hope satisfy my honourable friend Mr. Tajamul Husain. I asked 
the Hindu members to let me know what to do and they were against 
my Bill and so the Bill was dropped. I am not afraid in the least to 
make this admission that everybody thought and even the Rau Com- 
mittee thought that a Bill foreshadowed by my Bill should be introduced 
to extend the Act of 1937 in every local legislature to Agricultural land. 
I also fell in line, but then I found this volume of Hindu opinion against 
my Bill. No province has ever applied the Act of 1937 to agricultural 
land. Thence forward, Sir, a large number of meetings have been held 
in Bengal and the Rau Committee Bill has been uniformly condemned. 

Now with regard to this Rau Committee’s report, they prepared a Bill, 
that is the “Hindu Code Bill — Part I intestate Succession” and that was 
introduced in the Central Legislative Assembly and that was sent to a 
very strong joint Select Committee of both. Chambers of the Central 
Legislature. I have got a report of the Select Committee with me. It 
was very strongly supported on one side, but equally strongly opposed 
on the other, and this Bill as reported by the Select Committee came 
to the Legislature once again, the Rau Committee had in 1941 reported 
that the Hindu Code Bill should be taken up by compartments. It is 
a very important joint and I wish to draw special attention to the fact 
that the Rau Committee actually reported that the Hindu law should 
be taken up by compartments, succession marriage, guardianship and 
others. They said at page 23 of their report of 1941. 

“The recommendation which we should like to stress most strongly is 
that relating to the preparation, in gradual stages of a complete code of 
Hindu beginning, as we have said, with the law of succession, to be followed 
by the law of marriage and in due course by the other topics of Hindu 
law. It is true that even these large groups are to some extent inter- 
connected; but it will be easier for the draftsman to see what he is doing 
if he deals, for example, with the whole law of succession than with isolated 
rules relating to the property rights of widows. This plan would also offer 
a better chance of agreed solutions on disputed points, for the larger the 
field, the more room there is for compromise. The aim should be, as far 
as possible, to arrive at agreed solutions and to avoid anything likely to 
arouse acrimonious controversy. This need not mean any real slowing down 
of the pace of reform; for true reform proceeds by persuasion rather than 
coercion.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


464 


464 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


At page 11, they say : 

“We do not suggest that all parts of the law should be taken in hand 

at once. The law of succession may be taken up first, then 

the law of marriage; and so on. After the law relating to each part has 
thus been reduced to statutory form the various Acts may be consolidated 
into a single Code.” 

That was the report and in pursuance of their report they submitted 
their Bill relating to the Hindu Code Part I, intestate succession. Before 
the Bill relating to succession as settled by the Joint Select Committee 
came up before the Assembly, the Joint Select Committee had itself 
recommended that it is no good passing this part alone, but that they 
should have a true picture of the entire Hindu Code as it will stand, 
as the different parts are inter-dependent and in this way, they 
recommended that this Bill should not be passed and a truer and a more 
comprehensive view of the Hindu law should be taken. In their report 
the Select Committee say: 

“We think that steps should be taken to resuscitate the Hindu Law 
Committee and to encourage the formulation and enactment of the 
remaining parts of the proposed Code in the interval which is to lapse 
between the present Bill when passed comes into force. It may well be 
found that the present Bill will require before it is allowed to come into 
operation, readjustment and amendment in the light of the decisions taken 
in connection with the other branches of the Hindu Law.” 

So they recommended that the House and the country should have 
a fuller picture. The Hindu Law Committee which had been dissolved 
was thus revived and they were asked to give us a picture of the other 
branches of the Hindu Law. The first thing which they did was to produce 
another Bill, the “Hindu Code Part II — Marriage.” The second Bill was 
produced by them and later on they produced the other parts. The point 
which I am trying to emphasise is that these were separate self-contained 
Bills. The law of Inheritence was absolutely self-contained and separate 
and was capable of being enacted separately. The law of Marriage also 
could be enacted separately. There are three other parts which were in 
separate parts though printed in one volume was circulated. Then after 
obtaining opinion, they introduced some changes also by way of supple- 
ment. The House will, therefore, be pleased to note the real meaning 
and purpose of completely separate Bills printed in the same book as 
separate self-contained subjects with separate numbering. The Law 
Ministry, however, it seems mistook the purpose of the separate parts 
with separate numbering. In fact in the report of the Select Committee 
on the present Bill, the members of the majority say that separate 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


465 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 465 


numbering and separate parts was a thing unknown and purposeless, 
and therefore, they wanted to blend the different parts into one complete 
whole with consecutive numbering. That is clearly mentioned in the 
report. That is the reason why they produced a Hindu Code which they 
thought was self-contained and more logically arranged. The purpose of 
the Rau Committee of separate enactments and their subsequent con- 
solidation was entirely missed. 

The first point, which I should like to take in this connection is that 
the changes made by the Departmental Committee set up by the Ministry 
of Law went beyond the purpose of the original Bill, or rather the 
different Bills. In fact the blending of the different parts of the original 
Bill into one is the thing which has created a lot of difficulties and has 
made confusion worse confounded. As was suggested by the Rau 
Committee, the better thing would have been to pass separate parts 
separately, so that there will be the least objection and the attention 
of the House as well as of the country could be focussed upon individual 
subjects, though they may have a comprehensive view of the entire Hindu 
Law. Now the blending of the different parts or Bills into one whole 
with running numbers has placed us in this difficulty that we find in 
the House that there is hardly any Member who has spoken; who is 
completely in favour of the consoclidated Bill as it has emerged from 
the Select Committee. Some are in favour of the marriage provisions; 
others are in favour of the inheritance; with regard to guardianship and 
other things, there is the least objection. Separate Bills as in the original 
scheme would have simplified matters and reduced our troubles. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Maintenance portion is the best; 
all the rest is rubbish. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Maintenance portion, as Pandit Maitra 
reminds us, is the least objected to. So if the parts were kept separate, 
then the House would have been in a position to deal more easily with 
individual subjects. The subject of maintenance is not controversial. It 
does not affect the religious structure of the society. It does not wound 
the religious feelings and age-long beliefs of the Hindus and it could 
have been passed at once. That was the reason for the separate 
treatment. But the Departmental Committee rather, missed the purpose 
of the separate treatment and blended the whole thing into one. 

Sir, I would point out that in the second Rau Committee report 
also, the Bill was prepared in different compartments, they repeated 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


466 


466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


their advice that it should be taken up separately. The Bill was intended 
to be taken up in parts separately and should be dealt with individually. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : Why don’t you bring amendments to this 
effect ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My honourable friend by the interrup- 
tion means to say “I shall mix up things in any way I like, and it 
is for you to bring suitable amendments to separate them.”. It is 
impossible. If you cook meat, fish and vegetables together and ask a 
vegetarian to separate them by means of an amendment and then take 
the vegetables alone, that would be to putting the cart before the horse. 
The Bill has mixed up distinct and separate categories of law into one 
complete whole. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : No, no. There are separate 
chapters. 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member is expressing his own view 
and other honourable Members will have an opportunity of expressing 
their own views. What is the good of interrupting ? It will only prolong 
his speech. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The sections of one part have been lifted 
. from that and placed in another part. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : On a point of order, Sir. Am I 
not entitled to correct, when his statement that it has mixed up different 
chapters is open to correction? 

Mr. Speaker : That way he will be entiteld to correct again. There 
- should be no interruptions. I think, we are unnecessarily impatient. 
Whatever our views in respect of the Bill for or against, we must give 
a patient hearing to the opponent and try to meet his points I am going 
to give the fullest opportunity to every one. So let there be no 
interruptions. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am very grateful for this direction. The 
point is that the definitions and other clauses in each part were 
absolutely separate. It is easy for any one who has the patience to 
compare the original Bill presented by Mr. Jogendranath Mandal to - 
the House with the revised Bill to see the difference. 

An Honourable Member : Who was Jogendarnath Mandal ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : He was the previous Law Member. If 
any one compares the old Bill presented by him and the present Bill, 
it would be easy to see that portions from different parts have been 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


467 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 467 


transplanted to other parts. The act seems to be absolutely bona fide, 
but it was not based upon a full appreciation of the purpose of the 
separate treatment of the subjects. In fact, the Select Committee was 
presented with a re-drafted Bill by the Ministry of Law. That I submit 
would be likely absolutely to mislead the Select Committee. It is this 
document which was printed on the 17th July 1948. It was prepared 
ready-made for the handy use of the Select Committee before it ever 
met and the Select Committee was presented with this Departmental 
Bill. I have already dealt with one point, that in this intermediate 
Departmental Bill is a serious departure has been made, namely, 
different parts have been mixed up into one whole so to make it 
impossible to put separate parts back to their original shape. It can be 
done by a research student, not by Members of the House without any 
such tendencies or inclinations. I submit therefore, that the first mistake 
was committed by the Departmental Committee in mixing up entirely 
separate subjects. This introduces a serious and unprecedented consti- 
tutional innovation. 

Then, Sir, the Departmental Committee has introduced very serious 
changes in their Departmental Bill. It will be extremely important when 
we consider the bearing and the effect of this Departmental Bill on 
the proceedings of the Select Committee. The Departmental Bill, as I 
shall attempt to show introduced many very important changes, though 
I must point out that neither the Honourable Minister for Law nor 
the Members of the Select Committee nor the Members of the House 
seem to be aware of the seriousness of the changes effected. In fact, 
the Minister for Law on the last occasion when he spoke in the 
present session in support of the motion for consideration pointed out 
the substantial changes made in the Bill. But he was careful to 
insist that all the changes had been made by the Select Committee. 
I took careful notes of his speech and this can be verified from the 
official reports. He pointed out with commendable thoroughness the 
departures made in the final Bill from the original Jogendranath 
Mandals’s Bill. That show that the Honourable Minister was 
totally unaware of the serious changes made by his Department in 
the so called Bill submitted to the Select Committee. In fact, I asked 
a Short Notice Question of the Honourable Minister as to whether the 
Departmental Committee had been authorised to make any substantial 
changes in the original Bill. The answer was that they had no such 
authority. On the other hand, the Minister for Law took the entire 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


468 


468 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


responsibility for the changes, if any on himself. To a supplementary 
question of Mr. Ramnarain Singh the Minister for Law stated “I 
introduced no changes”. In fact, the point was whether the Departmental 
Bill had made any substantial changes, and he made it absolutely clear 
that he had made no such changes and that the Select Committee alone 
had made the changes. The entire House seems to be of the opinion that 
the Select Committee made the changes and that no substantial changes 
were made by the Departmental Committee. On the last occasion when 
I was on my legs, I was repeatedly asked to point wherein the 
Departmental Committee had made substantial changes. It is important 
that I should refer to this, because it shows that the Members of the 
Select Committee or the House or even the Minister for Law was not 
aware of any substantial changes really made, and I submit therefore, 
that, if I can show that substantial changes were really made by the 
Departmental Committee and very rarely by the Select Committee, it 
would open up before the House important considerations. The Select 
Committee were given a readymade new Bill and the assurance in the 
report of the Select Committee is that it contained no substantial changes 
and that the changes were rearranging the clauses, their re-numbering 
and such formal changes as are purely of a drafting nature. This is the 
assurance we get in the report of the Select Committe. I would therefore, 
like to point that those substantial changes were made by the Depart- 
mental committee. It is not easy to trace the changes and I cannot blame 
any honourable Member for failing to notice them. I had to prepare a 
comparative chart, not of the numbers alone, but of the clauses and sub- 
clauses of the three bills side by side. I asked for a copy of the 
Departmental Bill, but it was not supplied. I submit, Sir, that the 
Departmental Bill is a very important document and should be supplied 
to the Members. We have been supplied with a report of the evidence 
of witnesses before the Select Committee, but the most important 
document which played such a large part in the framing 
3-00 p m. fj na i has not been supplied. It was with the 

greatest difficulty that I have procured a copy, not from the Department, 
but through the courtesy of an honourable Members. Then, Sir, I 
prepared a comparative statement in parallel columns of the appropriate 
provisions of the original Bill and the corresponding provisions of the 
Departmental Bill and the final Bill, and I find it extremely difficult 
to explain the real significance of the changes except by reference to 
the comparative chart. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


469 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 469 


I am trying to get the Bills in parallel columns printed. I am sorry 
it could not be completed and it could not be placed in the hands of 
the Members for their convenience. But, I shall refer to the substantial 
changes made one by one. In doing so, I shall refer to the very important 
changes made by the Departmental Committe. It is on a consideration 
of the changes by the Departmental Committee that this point will be 
decided. I shall refer to the changes made by the Departmental 
Committee which has been officially denied by the Department and also 
unknown to the Members in the House. The House will be pleased to 
consider certain clauses of the original Bill. 

It is in part I, clause 2, sub-clause (3)(a). The clause corresponding 
to this is clause 2 of the departmental Bill, sub-clause (2). The original 
Bill says: 

“It shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that the whole of 
this Code applies to every person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi 
or Jew by religion.” 

The original Bill was thus a mere rule of presumption. But in the 
departmental Bill, it is no longer a rule of presumption but a positive 
rule of law. In the original Bill, it was to be presumed that, if a man 
was not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew, he would be “presumed” to 
be a Hindu. That would not be a rule of law but a rule of presumption. 
In the Departmental Bill this is changed to stand like this: 

“This Code also applies to any other person who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion.” 

The difference between the two is that under the original Bill any 
man who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew, would merely be 
presumed to be a Hindu and would be presumed to be governed by this 
Act. In the Departmental Bill, it is said that. — 

“the Code applies also to any one who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi 
or Jew.” 

I submit, Sir, this is introducing a substantial change. While it was 
a rule of presumption in the original Bill, it is now a positive rule and 
not one of presumption, that the Hindu law applies to any one not being 
Muslims, Christians, Parsis and Jews. 

In the proviso it is said: 

If it is proved that the Hindu law does not apply to anyone, the Hindu 
law will not apply.” 

I think it is most unsatisfactory way of stating things. The final Bill 
applies it to them and this with the proviso, has changed the law. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


470 


470 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Sir, I submit that this has introduced a serious change. I am not 
concerned with the policy of the law. But, I am concerned with the 
changes in the Departmental Bill of which the Select Committee seem 
to be unaware. 

Then, Sir, coming to another part of the Bill. In the Departmental 
Bill 

Mr. Tajamul Hussain :May I have your permission to raise a point 
of order ? 

Mr. Speaker: Yes. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : My learned friend, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
has been trying to show before the House that the Departmental Bill 
was considered by the Select Committee and not the original Bill and 
he does this after your finding of fact and ruling that the original Bill 
was considered by the Select Committee. I want to know your ruling 
now. 

Mr. Speaker : I have been hearing his argument and I feel he is 
speaking in support of his amendment that the Bill be circulated for 
purposes of opinion and the other amendment is for recommitment to 
the same Select Committee. Therefore, though my ruling stands, I think, 
he is trying to make out a case that, there has been such a substantial 
departure from the original Bill as introduced by Sjt. Jogendra Nath 
Mandal, both in the scheme as well as in the content, that it is necessary 
now to recirculate or recommit it to the same Select Committee. His 
point, as I have understood till now, is that the original scheme of the 
Rau Committee in the first Bill was that the various parts of law should 
be taken in different compartments. It was possible to separate one from 
the other, but in the present scheme, the whole having been made as 
an organic whole, it is difficult now to take certain parts that the people 
agree to and drop out other parts, with which the people do not agree. 
How far he is right is another matter, therefore, he says that, it is 
necessary to recirculate the Bill for opinion. That is how I have 
understood the point till now. I do not think he is contradicting my 
ruling. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Not in the least. Sir, it will be too 
late in the day even to suspect that I have questioned your ruling. The 
ruling was on a point of law. It was very technical in nature. My point 
of order was based upon some assumptions which could not clearly be 
proved. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


471 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 471 


Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member may proceed with his 
argument. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I substantially agree that my point of view 
is that. But it is something more too. In fact, it is my purpose to show 
that if the honourable the Minister of Law, who is responsible for the 
Departmental Bill, and the Members of the Select Committee were not 
precisely aware of the substantial changes made in the Departmental 
Bill, can it be said that legally and also in fact they have substantially 
considered both ? They technically considered both, but did they as a 
matter of fact adequately consider them ? The question no longer arises 
as a matter of law on account of your ruling, the justice of which I 
respectfully accept. But the point I am stressing is that though they 
considered both, they were faced with the obvious difficulty that there 
was a Bill presented to them which was said to be a mere redraft of 
the original Bill and a re-arrangement of things of the clauses, with the 
express guarantee that no substantial changes had been made and yet 
in fact substantial changes had been made. My point is that though 
technically the Select Committee considered both the original Bill and 
the Departmental Bill, they did not and could not, as a matter of fact, 
give sufficient or adequate consideration to these undisclosed changes. 
My purpose is to make out a case for recommitment of the Bill to Select 
Committee or for circulation. 

The next change made by the Departmental committee of a substantial 
nature is in clause 2, sub-clause (4). the change introduced here was 
made by the Departmental Committee. The change is absolutely new and 
it was not in the original Bill and is a substantial change. This was 
introduced by the Departmental committee in the Bill and not by the 
Select Committee. That is the most important point. The Departmental 
Bill provides: 

“2(4). Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special Marriage Act 
of 1872 (HI of 1872) this Code shall apply to all Hindus whose marriages 
have been solemnised, under the provisions of that Act prior to the 
commencement of this Code.” 

The original Bill did not contain anything like this and the original 
Bill left those who were married under Special Marriage Act of 1872 
to be governed by that Act. That is divorce, maintenance and other 
provisions applying to those who were married under that Act 
would be governed by the provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 1872, 
which are entirely different. How different from the present Code is 
not very material. The present sub-clause however wants to make out 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


472 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that those marriages under the Special Marriage Act of 1872, which took 
place before the Code comes into force, would be governed not by the 
Special Marriage Act but by this Code. I submit that this is a substantial 
departure or change introduced in the Departmental Bill and it was 
introduced by the Departmental Committee and was merely accepted by 
the Select Committee as a matter of course. This is a substantial change, 
whether it is good or bad, whether it is bona fide or not is not the point 
but a substantial change has been effected by the Departmental Com- 
mittee and the Select Committee was not specifically informed of the 
change made. Though there are references to clauses of the original Bill, 
etc. given in the margin, still this subclause is absolutely new without 
any indication whatsoever that this was a change. Changes in sub-clauses 
have not been indicated. In fact in ordinary Bills coming out from a Select 
Committee all changes made by the Select Committee are either 
underlined or sidelined. The Select Committee has stated that this 
practice is unnecessary, because marginal references have been given. 
I submit that marginal reference is only to the clauses but this sub- 
clause (4) is absolutely new. The reference to this sub-clause is Part I, 
Section 6, page 2 and Schedule I, page 30. The change effected is neither 
indicated here either by reference or by suitable marking arrangement. 
At least it is a change of a substantial nature and the attention of the 
Select Committee was not in any manner specifically drawn to it, nor 
the nature of the change is indicated. That is change No. 2. I am dealing 
only with the more substantial and important changes. There are many. 
I hope at a future time to make available to Members as well as the 
public a publication which will clearly show the real changes introduced 
by the Department and the changes really introduced by the Select 
Committee. I again insist that the Select Committee made very few 
changes and most of the substantial changes introduced were made by 
the Drafting Committee. 

I come to another part of the Bill. In the original Bill, Part I, 
clause 3, which deals with the operation of the code in relation to 
previous customs and usage, it is provided: 

“In regard to any matters dealt with in this Code its provisions shall 

supersede any custom or usage not hereby expressly saved” 

The original Bill would supersede only “customs or usages” not 
thereby expressly saved — all customs not specifically recognised by 
the original Bill would be superseded. Let us look at the corresponding 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


473 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 473 


provisions in the Departmental Bill which also was accepted without 
question by the Select Committee. I may point out that the change was 
effected by the Departmental Committee and not by the Select Commit- 
tee. In the Departmental Bill, it is clause 4 which corresponds to 
clause 4 in the final Bill. The marginal note is “over-riding effect of the 
code” which is much different but I lay no emphasis on this note as 
it is not part of the Bill. The Departmental Bill says: 

“Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Code any text or rule or 
interpretation of the Hindu Law or custom or usage or any other law in 
force immediately prior to the commencement of this Act shall cease to 
have effect as respects any of the matters dealt with by this Code.” 

The verbal changes are not important but you will please consider 
that several important new matters have been introduced by the 
Departmental Committee. “Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law” 
and later on “any other law in force immediately prior to the commence- 
ment of this Code are absolutely new. Let the House pause for a minute 
and consider the seriousness of the change. All custom and usage not 
specifically recognised by the original Bill would be absolutely gone. But 
the Departmental Bill would include also within its mischief any text, 
rule or interpretation of Hindu law. This is something which is entirely 
different from usage and custom. In fact any text of the sacred books, 
the Vedas and Smritis any rule or interpretation of the Hindu law, that 
is to say, all ruling of the High Court, the Federal Court and the Privy 
Council, all authoritative expositions of the original Sanskrit texts or 
the interpretations by the highest judicial authorities must perish as also 
any other law in force immediately prior to the commencement of this 
Code. The sacred texts and the rich case law for over a century and 
a half would be abolished altogether by a stroke of the pen. “Any text, 
rule or intepretation of Hindu law” probably includes all things. “Any 
other law in force immediately prior to the commencement of this code” 
would probably be included within the passage, but I submit that the 
Departmental Bill would try to illegalize, if I may be permitted to use 
the expression, all texts, interpretation of Hindu law or rule not 
specifically recognised by the Bill, and they will all be gone. I submit 
this is a substantial change. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras : General): On a point of order, 
is the honourable Member within his rights to question the competency 
of your ruling ? When he calls this Bill as the ‘Departmental Bill’ 
he is making very great insinuation against the members of the Select 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


474 


474 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Committee. The Members of the Select Committee have gone fully into 
the Bill and they have noted all the changes. He can no longer argue 
on the point by referring to it as the Departmental Bill. We want your 
ruling as to whether he is in order. 

Mr. Speaker : I am afraid it is hardly a point for ruling. These are 
observations which, I appreciate, irritate some Members; but I do not 
think the honourable Member, when he uses the expression ‘Departmen- 
tal Bill’ suggests thereby that the Members of the Select Committee did 
not consider the points. He is, as I have been noticing, using the 
expression ‘Departmental Bill’ for the sake of brevity instead of saying 
each time “the Bill which was drafted by the Department for the benefit 
of the Select Committee Members.” I do not think it goes anything further 
than that and we should not read any meaning into it. Departmental 
Bill is only a short phrase for that. As I once pointed out — I do not know 
whether the honourable Member was present when another honourable 
member of the House raised this point, the point that the is making 
out is that the changes made by the Select Committee are substantial. 
And if the changes are substantial then he is certainly within his right 
to say that the Bill should be re-committed or recirculated. That seems 
to be the point though he is going his own way, doing so in a very 
elaborate way which he could do in a shorter time. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : My point is he is imputing ignorance to the 
Select Committee members. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Not in the least. I am imputing, not 
ignorance, but carelessness naturally following from the Departmental 
Bill which gave them no clues to the changes. ( Interruptions ). 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I withdraw the expression “ignorance”. But 
they were effected by a mistaken faith in the Departmental Bill, 
t Interruption ), Even if this is not yet apparent to him I am sorry for 
the honourable Member that he is still suffering from the obsession. 

Mr. Speaker : Let the honourable Member proceed on a different line; 
let him say that they should have given more attention to this subject. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is what I mean. In fact for my 
argument I do not require any hard expression — I rely more upon reason 
than upon an expression. If I have used any expression which is hard, 
even if not unparliamentary, I withdraw it. The point is we shall again 
begin with . . . 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


475 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 475 


Mr. Speaker : He need not repeat it; he may proceed further. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The other point is that not merely have 
substantial changes been made without sufficient or any clear notice to 
the Select Committee . . . 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : That is what we want to object 
to. He cannot say so. We knew it fully well. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If the Honourable Minister for Law is 
unaware of the change and if honourable Members are repeatedly asking 
me to point out the substantial changes it shows that they are unaware 
of them and accepted the changes bona fide without knowing them. I 
think the changes were introduced by some over-zealous draftsman who 
thought of improving the Bill and he introduced some bona fide changes 
without realising that he was thereby making a new Bill altogether, and 
nobody saw through it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I must really protest against 
this. It is a grave reflection on the Draftsman. My friend is almost 
suggesting that after the Select Committee had considered everything 
the Draftsman took it into his head to make changes in the Bill. I very 
strongly protest against it. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : And we protest against the way 
in which he is insinuating against the Select Committee Members. 

Mr. Speaker : Changes made after the Select Committee report ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is what he is 
suggesting. 

Mr. Speaker : He means “before”. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, Sir, I am absolutely certain that I 
said that the changes had been made before the Select Committee met. 

Mr. Speaker : There appears to be some misapprehension. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have no idea. If I 
understand my friend’s speech it simply means that the Select Committee 
blind-foldedly signed the report without going into anything or it means 
that after the Select Committee had done its work the Draftsman took 
it into his head to introduce some changes. It cannot have any other 
meaning. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : As to whether the changes were made bona 
fide or in a careless or mala fide manner it is not material for us to 
go into. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


476 


476 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member’s point is that changes which 
he believes to be substantial are made. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am quite prepared to hear 
any friend setting out seriatim the changes which he thinks the Select 
Committee has made. Assuming that certain changes were made by the 
Select Committee, I would like to know whether that in itself would be 
a sufficient ground for re-circulation. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Not at all : I never said they were made 
by the Select Committee. 

Mr. Speaker : What I was suggesting to the honourable Member 
was that assuming that certain changes are of a substantial nature 
in his opinion have been made, his case is strong enough for 
pleading and he need not say whether the changes were made out of 
ignorance or mala fides. The Select committee with an open mind and 
considering the whole thing could have made the changes. Still he thinks 
that they are of a substantial nature and, therefore, the Bill should be 
re circulated. All people need not agree that these changes which he 
believes to be substantial are necessarily substantial. Opinions may 
differ. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Honourable Minister for Law said that 
it is for me to show what changes were made by the Select Committee. 
I have been at pains to show that I am not drawing the attention of 
the House to changes made by the Select, Committee at all. That is I 
believe the mistake which is haunting the mind of the Honourable the 
Law Minister. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Nothing of the kind. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In fact he has been insisting that the ... 
changes were made by the Select Committee. The changes I have been 
mentioning so far are changes made not by the Select Committee but 
made by the Departmental Committee. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order, there the rub comes in. Whosoever 
made the changes so long as the Select Committee has accepted 
them they are changes by the Select Committee and not changes 
made by somebody else without the knowledge of the Select Committee. 
He need not make that kind of insinuation or assertion. By whomsoever 
they were made — even at the instance of a single Member or the 
Law Minister or the Drafting Committee or anybody else — he should 
proceed on the assumption that these changes are changes made by 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


477 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 477 


the Select Committee and he should proceed to show that they are 
substantial. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My difficulty is I cannot stop at that. The 
Honourable the Law Minister insists that the changes were introduced 
by the Select Committee and not by the Drafting Committee, that would 
make it absolutely clear that the Select Committee faithfully and bona 
fide accepted the changes introduced by the Drafting Committee. If that 
is so the Select Committee did not apply its mind to it when accepting 
it, knowing it to be a change. If the Select Committee did not know, 
as the Honourable the Law Minister does not know, that these changes 
were introduced by the Departmental Committee, they accepted techni- 
cally, but not with full appreciation, all the changes made. That is the 
point which makes my case stronger. It is not merely the changes made 
by the Select Committee willingly but the changes made by them of a 
substantial nature without realizing that they were accepting any 
changes which makes the case stronger. In fact, they obviously assumed 
that the Departmental Bill was a mere re-draft without any substantial 
change. This is corroborated by the fact that even the Law Minister 
supposes that I am pointing out changes made by the Select Committee. 
That is why I am constrained to argue that the Select Committee’s 
attention was not specifically drawn to the changes. On the other hand 
they took the Departmental Bill as a substantial reproduction of the 
original Bill without any substantial change. I can say that without 
casting any reflection ; we can always argue mistakes or oversights or 
bona fide errors. I need not put the point better than that. 

Sir, I submit that the Members of the Select Committee or the Minister 
for Law need not be very sensitive about this. It is a matter of record. 
In fact, even the honourable the Law Minister admitted that he 
introduced no change and he assumes that I am pointing out changes 
made by the Select Committee. They have been adopted: as your ruling 
must be accepted, they must have accepted these changes. But the 
question I am pointing out is that the consciousness or the legal mind 
was not directed towards these because they were not aware of it. The 
Honourable Minister insisted the other day on a question that the 
Departmental Committee introduced no substantial changes. The sub- 
stantial changes are there and they were not indicated in the Depart- 
mental Bill. Therefore, there is no question of insinuation. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us not go into that question again. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


478 


478 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : This is one substantial change. Sir, I 
thought I was treading on very solid ground. If any offence is meant 
to the Members of the Select Committee by pointing out obvious matters, 
I am very sorry. 

Shri L. Krishnaswamy Bharathi : You cannot insinuate against 
Members. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : What insinuation ? That they made 
mistakes ? To err is human. I was only suggesting that the Members 
of the Select Committee were human beings. 

Shri B. Das : On a point of order. Sir, Can the honourable Member 
go on pointing out the defects of the Select Committee for three months 
continuously. The point was raised and settled. Whether I accept his 
words or not is a different question, but the honourable Member cannot 
go on talking in the filibustering attitude which my friend Mr. Baijnath 
Bajoria took some years ago on my Bill to amend the Child Marriage 
Act. He quoted shastras and read from the Mahabharata and other books. 
Here the poor Select Committee is being hammered by my friend Mr. 
Nazirudin Ahmed for the last three months. This is not a law court. 
Sir, you ought to ask him to produce his views that the Hindu Code 
Bill should not be passed. Why should we go on interminably talking 
against the Select Committee? As the oldest Member of this House, I 
cannot understand it. 

Mr. Speaker : The honouable Member may indicate only the substan- 
tial changes. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, Sir. 

Sir, I object to my speech being called a filibustering speech. I think 
the honourable Member goes a bit too far. It seems that he has locked 
up his mind absolutely and he is not in a mood to hear. 

Sir, may I ask you to consider this and see if I am in the least 
irrelevant or wrong ? Unless the change is substantial, palpably, 
obviously it rules out texts of the Hindu Law and rule of interpretation 
by the highest Courts. The original Bill did not contain anything of the 
sort and the change was introduced to the Departmental Committee. Is 
it not, in all fairness, a substantial change ? Mr. Das cannot listen to 
legal matters. He is good in financial matters but in legal matters he 
is rapidly approaching his second childhood. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


479 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 479 


Shri B. Das : We are here to legislate. We are not here to understand 
the interpretation of lawyers or High Court Judges. (Interruption). 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, much depends on the substantial 
changes. Have not these been introduced by the Departmental Committee 
? On that issue the whole case depends. If it was introduced by the 
Departmental Committee and if it is a substantial change, then the Select 
Committee was not informed of it. It has been repeatedly made clear 
that the Select Committee considered the Departmental Bill and not the 
original Bill. If this is insinuation, I am sorry I shall have to discharge 
my duty faithfully but absolutely fearlessly though very respectfully. I 
submit the Select Committee was absolutely cajoled into believing that 
the Departmental Bill was a substantial reproduction of the original Bill, 
and even the Honourable the Law Minister is persuaded to believe that 
there was no change. It is not insinuation, it is a fact. Who has made 
the changes ? If it were the Law Minister, then he would have been 
aware of it. Is it somebody else ? Then is it improper for me to point 
out that somebody else has made the change ? I say he has done it by 
mistake or bona fide. Would it be proper for me to suggest that these 
changes were made fraudulently ? I do not suggest anything of the sort. 
The only thing I could do is to assume that these things were done bona 
fide — just a little flourish of the pen to improve upon it. “Why merely 
rule out customary law ? Let us abolish all the rulings of the Privy 
Council.” 

Sir, criticism is proper. If any language I have used is improper, I 
withdraw it. But what about the criticism ? 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Let us hear the other points. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Why be anxious? Why not listen to 
this? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. We cannot carry on the discussion 
of the Bill in this manner. There are Members who want to support 
the Bill and others who want to oppose it. Let everyone have his 
say in any manner he likes, without being offensive or speaking 
unparliamentary language. That is the only objection. Otherwise, at 
every stage there will be interruption and those who want to support 
the Bill will be the sufferers in the long run, because time will be 
spent in unnecessarily carrying on this kind of discussion. The Member 
honourable will have his say and if he says that the Select 
Committee did not give attention to this or that or that these points 
were not examined by the Select Committee, where is the ground 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


480 


480 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


for taking insult in that ? He is perfectly entitled to say so. But he should 
not insinuate something else; that is what I have to guard against. But 
I believe he is entitled to express his views. 

There is another point also to which I was going to invite the attention 
of the honourable Member. He says that because the Law Minister is 
unaware of a substantial change, therefore somebody else introduced the 
change. There is another aspect to it. If the point which he considers 
substantial is not considered by the Law Minister as substantial, then 
the Honourable Law Minister is perfectly entitled to say that he is not 
aware of any substantial change. Therefore, it does not necessarily mean 
that some other party in ignorance or behind the back of the minister, 
introduced it in the Select Committee. Let the points be substantial and 
let the controversy be limited to the question as to whether the points 
are substantial or not. That I believe is the chief point in dispute. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I stand subject to correction. It may have 
been done by the Law Minister without realising or without believing 
this to be a substantial change. But the matter is exactly where it was. 
These are substantial matters, whether introduced by the Law Minister 
consciously or by anyone else unconsciously, in any manner. It is not 
proper for us to argue on that. But by one stroke of the pen all texts, 
rules and interpretations of the Hindu Law have been abolished. The 
effect of this will be that all learned rulings of the Privy Council, the 
Federal Court and the High Courts are all gone, by one stroke of the 
pen. In fact, if this is not seriously interfering the original Bill, I do 
not know what is. There may be difference of opinions. But to one 
approaching the question absolutely impartially, and with a free mind, 
there would be no difficulty in agreeing with me that this is very serious 
interference with the Original Bill. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : Please speak of other substantial changes. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : This is dealing very lightly with a very 
serious matter. But I say these are very serious changes which verge 
on interpolations, bona fide or mala fide, it does not matter. 

Then Sir, the next cage made by the Departmental Committee is to 
remove the definition of ‘caste’ in Part I clause 5 sub-clause (b) which 
contained a definition of caste. This has been entirely omitted. 

Mr. Speaker : What clause does the honourable Member refer to ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad :I am referring to Part I, clause 5, subclause 
(b) which has the definition of ‘caste’. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


481 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 481 


Mr. Speaker : Is he referring to the original Bill ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes. And that definition has been entirely 
omitted in the Departmental Bill without any indication being given 
anywhere about this omission. There is a mere reference in the margin 
to the original clause. This sub-clause has been omitted, and there is 
no indication to be found of it. I submit, Sir, that the Select Committee’s 
attention was not specifically drawn to this omission, and whether these 
are substantial matters or not, there cannot be much difference of 
opinion. At any rate the Select Committee was entitled to be told that 
these changes were made ; whether these are substantial changes or not 
may vary from individual to individual. But the Select Committee was 
entitled to know that these changes were made. But they were not told. 

And then we come to sub-clause (f) of the same clause and here we 
find that the definitions of Gotra and Pravara have been omitted. And 
then in sub-clause (j) the definition of Stridhan has also been omitted. 
Therefore the definition of Caste, the definition of Gotra, the definition 
of Pravara, and the definition of Stridhan are entirely omitted. What 
effect this would produce on the Bill, cannot be explained shortly on 
the floor of the House. 

Shri A. Thanu Pillai (Travancore State) : May I know from the 
honourable Member whether even if the definition is not of a term 
required in the law, it should be defined ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I think the honourable Member is not 
proceeding as cautiously as he should. In fact, whether a definition is 
wanted or not wanted is not the question. A definition was in the Bill 
and that was removed by somebody, without any authority. The Depart- 
mental Committee removed it, and the attention of the Select Committee, 
who was alone competent to remove it, was not drawn to this fact. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : The Select Committee takes full respon 
sibility for it. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : This was not considered by the Select 
Committee. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao (Madras : General): Are you sure that the 
compositor did not omit it ? 

Mr. Speaker : Those who interrupt can also be called obstructionists. 
If interrupted he will take longer time over it. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-09 MK AMIT 19-10-2013>5-12-2013 


482 


482 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati : I may cut short further arguments 
by saying that the Select Committee’s attention was actually drawn to 
all these things. The honourable Member is unnecessarily harping on 
this point, that the attention of the Select Committee was not drawn. 
But as a Member of the Select Committee I may say that all these points 
were fully considered, all aspects of the matter were considered by the 
Select Committee. Therefore the honourable Member need not go over 
this matter over and over again. 

Mr. Speaker : I will say that even if the question has been fully 
considered, the honourable Member is perfectly within his right in giving 
his views. Honourable Members will see that he is making a case for 
re-committal of the Bill to the Select Committee, and for this he has 
been putting forth his arguments. The Select Committee might have 
given full, adequate, proper, reasonable attention, but in his opinion, it 
has been inadequate. Therefore, he is insisting that the attention given 
has been inadequate and the Bill should be re-committed to the Select 
Committee. That is the line of argument he is following ; and if he is 
following that particular line of argument, he must maintain that stand. 
As regards the fact of adequacy just as the Select Committee Members 
cannot be absolute judges of the fact, as to whether the Bill was given 
proper or adequate attention, similarly, his judgment also is not final. 
But he is placing his opinion. Let us proceed on that basis. Otherwise 
there will be no end to this discussion. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : I was only referring to the 
question of fact. 

Mr. Speaker : It is a question of opinion. What the honourable 
Member supposes to be a question of fact, is actually a question of 
opinion. Adequacy of attention of not is a question of opinion and to 
merely a question of fact. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The question is the adequacy of consid- 
eration. 

[At this stage Mr. Speaker vacated the Chair, which was then occupied 
by Mr. Deputy -Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyyangar ] 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I have been interrupted almost 
continuously the other day, and again a series of interruptions are made 
to-day. 

Mr. Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am supporting you all 
along. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


483 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 483 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : There is my friend Mr. Bharathi. Is he right 
in telling the House what took place in the Select Committee ? If so, I have 
equally strong authority, also from the Members of the Select Committee 
themselves to the contrary. It would be very wrong to compare one Member’s 
statement with that of another and I would rather draw a veil on what 
happened in the Select Committee. The honourable Member need not assure 
us that the Select Committee has considered everything. If he is so sure, 
I am equally sure that for many reasons, adequate consideration could not 
be given. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : I was talking only about myself. 

Pandit Lakshmi KantaMaitra : You could not understand things. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In fact, it is not the case of one man. It is 
the whole Select Committee and not a one-man affair. If one man has 
followed, it does not mean that others also have followed it. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Yes, one swallow does not make a 
summer. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Exactly, “One swallow does not make a 
summer”. If there is one man of the Select Committee who believed that 
no change was made, that would be enough to make out a case for 
recommittal of the Bill to the Select Committee. And I again submit that 
these are very serious changes. And then how many of them ? My friends 
wonder how many changes there are. I can show them many, many such 
changes. Take the... 

Shrimati G.Durgabai : In the meantime, on a point of information, may 
I ask whether the changes made by the Select Committee are absolutely 
binding on this House. Cannot the House accept the changes or reject them ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit with all respect that it is irrelevant 
to ask if the Select Committee’s changes should be accepted or rejected by 
the House. The Select Committee can make any change and the House can 
make further changes too. The House can make changes. There is no doubt 
about it. But the point is that the Select Committee for some reason did 
not or could not or failed or omitted to discharge its duties fully. If that 
is so, the right to go fully into the question rests with the House and it 
is for this reason that I appeal from the Select Committee to the larger 
House. There is of course the still larger house, the entire electorate of India. 
I now come to clause 7 of the original Bill. ( Interruption ). I think some 
Members have lost their heads. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


484 


484 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Tajamul Husain : I must strongly protest against the statement 
that the Members have lost their heads. I raise this point of order seriously. 
He must withdraw it unconditionally. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think it was not necessary for the honourable 
Member to say all that. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : Let him withdraw it. Was he in order in making 
that statement ? He has all along been making violent gestures against 
honourable Members. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not think it is proper for the honourable 
Member to say that the Members have lost their heads. It detracts from 
the dignity of the house. At the time I must say this: I have been noticing 
one member or other using language which may not be liked by the person 
addressed. There must be some amount of patience shown. There should 
not be interruptions either by the spoken word or by signs. Therefore when 
the honourable Member is turning over the pages of some of his papers, 
if they interrupt him he will miss it and their interruptions are likely to 
ginger him up. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I was told across the table that I had 
lost my head. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member has lost his thread — 
the thread of his argument. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : May I know whether he has lost his sacred 
thread ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I will proceed with my arguments, Sir. Clause 
2 of the original Bill gives the definition of ‘son’ thus ‘son’ includes a dattaka 
kritrima or godha son, etc, but not a dasiputra and others. This has been 
entirely committed in the Departmental Bill. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : When an honourable Member reads 
out something, should he not do so correctly ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I find that this has been omitted. If it is 
anywhere the definition or in any other part of the Bill, my attention may 
kindly be drawn to it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member who just now interrupted 
the speaker has been again and again giving advice. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
may be a bit slow in making the references he desires to make. He need 
not be interrupted. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit that the definition of ‘son’ has been 
omitted. If I am wrong, the mistake may be pointed out to me. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


485 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 485 


Dr. P. S. Deshmukh (C. P. and Berar : General): I think the honourable 
Member is wrong. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If honourable Members go on interrupting in this 
way it will be impossible to conduct the business of the House in an orderly 
manner. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad may go on without putting questions to 
other honourable Members. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : As I said the definition of son has been omitted 
as also the illustrations found in Part II, sub-clause (3) of clause 2 in regard 
to intestate succession. Four illustrations have been omitted. These are 
substantial changes. I am only trying to draw attention to the nature of 
the changes made. According to me these are omissions of a very serious 
nature. They are not omissions of a drafting nature. I am not questioning 
the right of the Select Committee to improve the Bill, or to make these 
omissions. These changes, however, were made not by the Select Committee 
but by the Drafting Committee and the attention of the Select Committee 
was not particularly drawn to these omissions. 

Then I come to another important part of the Bill to show the very serious 
changes introduced by the Drafting Committee. In Part II, clause 4 of the 
original Bill, the list of heirs has been given. It says that the inheritable 
property of a male intestate shall devolve according to the rules laid down 
in this part: (a) upon the enumerated heirs referred to in section 5, if any; 
(b) if mere is no enumerated heir, upon his agnates, if any ;(c) if there is 
no agnate, upon his cognates, if any; and (d) if there is no cognate, upon 
the heirs referred to in section 10, if any. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not know if the honourable Member has 

not a copy of the Hindu Code Comparative Tables, which was circulated 

to all honourable Members. The original Hindu Code as drafted by the Rau 

Committee has been revised in the Ministry of Law and the changes made 

have been indicated there. I would therefore suggest that the honourable 

. Member need not labour this point. I think he has spent 

4 P.M. 

sufficient time over the first point. I personally think that 
the point is sufficiently clear and of course illustrations can always be 
multiplied. If it is a point here and there, the House will take it into 
consideration. There are certain points which when made are sufficient in 
number. I agree they can be made clearer, but the changes made in the 
tables, are sufficient. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


486 


486 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, the list is neither complete nor accurate 
and does not indicate the changes made. In fact the remarks against the 
original clauses of the original Bill and as to the changes are extremely 
meagre. I have now come to a very important change, namely the inheritance. 
It has been so changed as to make it impossible to recognise with the new 
Bill or the departmental draft nor is it a substitute for the original Bill 
at all. I submit that with regard to the inheritance a larger number of 
changes had been made. 

I shall show first of all that in clause 4 of the Bill in Part II (a) regarding 
the enumerated heirs ; I am in a position to show that serious changes have 
been made in the enumerated list. In the original Bill was one and in the 
revised draft by the Departmental Committee they are completely different. 
The original arrangement has been made entirely topsy-turvey and then it 
is said that if there are no enumerated heirs the property devolves upon 
agnates. The definition of agnates is well-known. That was in the original 
Bill, but in the Bill as revised by the Departmental Committee the word 
‘agnate’ is now very much restricted. So in case of the numerated heirs failing 
the agnates, even the distant agnates would be entitled to be heirs according 
to the Hindu law, according to the Muslim law and every other law and 
that was according to the original Bill. But in the revised draft by the 
Departmental Committee the word ‘agnate’ has been seriously modified to 
be within certain degrees. So agnates which are beyond those degrees would 
have been entitled to inheritance under the old Bill, but under the 
Departmental Bill, they would be shut out. Similarly, cognates are also 
restricted in the Departmental Bill and this is a substantial change as it 
eliminates the distant Agnates and distant cognates. Then, Sir, in clause 
(d) of 4, the words preceptor and others are entirely eliminated. The scheme 
of inheritance in clause 4 of Part II of the original Bill is changed at every 
step and very serious changes have been made and the enumerated heirs 
have been changed. The agnates have been restricted; the cognates have 
been restricted and the other clauses have been entirely eliminated. I can 
quite understand that these changes may be legitimately made on a full 
consideration by the Select Committee, but these were changes not by the 
Select Committee, but by the Departmental Committee and Members asked 
me “Tell us what are the changes made ?” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Am I to understand from the honourable 
Member that if the Select Committee Members all got up and they 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


487 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 487 


address themselves to that, will the honourable Member be thoroughly 
satisfied with what has been done by the Select Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The point is that the Select Committee Member 
were not made aware of the changes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It serves no useful purpose. It is not a question 
of law whether this House has got jurisdiction over the Select Committee’s 
piece of handiwork. It has been decided and sufficiently discussed to show 
that the Select Committee has looked into every one of the clauses to come 
to a conclusion. But on matters of substance, the old law has been widely 
changed. There is some substanse in that. Those are the matters on which 
the honourable Member should address the House. I do not say that all 
that has been said is out of place, but sufficient has been said. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : To many honourable Members sufficient has 
not been said. It is said that these are not substantial changes and I shall 
take care to point them out. The difficulty is that the changes are too 
numerous to ensure the attention of the House. In fact the changes are very 
serious and very various and very substantial and my point is that they 
were introduced not by the Select Committee and whether they accepted 
them or not is a different matter. My thesis is that they were presented 
with a ready-made Bill with the assurance that no substantial changes had 
been made and so the attention of the Select Committee was not sufficiently 
drawn to that matter. Now let us consider the actual changes in the list 
of inheritance. In fact in the original Bill the list of inheritance is to be 
found on pages 4, 5 and 6 in the body of the Bill. This has been bodily 
lifted from this place in the departmental Bill and transported to the Seventh 
Schedule. While the other parts remain in the body of the text, the list of 
inheritance, strangely and for unaccountable reasons, removed. It is not very 
easy to compare the original list with the new list as it appears in the 
Seventh Schedule; there have been serious and substantial changes. The 
Honourable Minister wanted to know what are the changes made. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am quite aware of them. 

So far as I am concerned, you need not spend your labour in enlightening 
me at all. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If these are intentional changes, then 

what is the point in saying that no changes were made by the 

Drafting Committee, and that all the changes were made by the Select 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


488 


488 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Committee, and for the Select Committee say: “We confined our attention 
to the Departmental Bill”. Therefore, it follows that their attention was not 
drawn to this. It is a very simple conclusion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Give it in your own way. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It seems to me that the Honourable the Law 
Minister found himself in an inconvenient position and somehow or other, 
though the mistake is admitted, it is not done pointedly. In fact changes 
of a substantial nature were made. I was asked on the last day by the 
Honourable Law Minister himself: “Let us know what are the changes made 
by the Drafting Committee”, and now he says : “I know everything”. Of course 
he must have studied them later on, but these changes are of a serious 
nature. They were introduced not by the Select Committee, but by the 
Departmental Committee and the question is how far the Select Committee 
did actually notice them. At least in the note of dissent Dr. Bakshi Tek 
Chand says: “We confined our attention to the Departmental Committee Bill 
and not to the original Bill” because they were assured that in the 
Departmental Bill they did not introduce any substantial changes at all. So 
taking this into account, I do not know where to go. In fact, if that is not 
a serious irregularity and a matter requiring attention of the House. I do 
not know, what is. When the Department has committed an error of 
judgment, I think it is better and proper to admit it than to say: “I know 
all this but no changes were made; every change was made by the Select 
Committee” and when I say that the Select Committee did not make the 
changes and they were made by the Departments Committee then it is said: 
“I know it”. Then we ought to know where does the Department stand ? 
If the Department makes a change 

Shri B. Das : This is not a law court for us to hear point by point. The 
honourable Member should make a speech and sit down. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member, Mr. Das made this 
statement when the Speaker was in the Chair. It is a law court in some 
sense and not a law court when he wants to impress upon honourable 
Members as if he is arguing a case in a court of law. In any case we ought 
not to interrupt him. That kind of talk ought to be avoided as far as possible. 

Shri B. Das : We are talking among ourselves. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable Member has no right to talk when 
another honourable Member is on his legs and he ought not to disturb. 

Shri B. Das : He is talking at us. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


489 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 489 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : You ought not to talk. No honourable Member 
has the right to talk while another honourable Member is speaking. He ought 
to listen and not cause noise in the House. 

Shri B. Das : You understand the exasperation. I am ready to get out, 
but the honourable Member’s speech should not exasperate Members of this 
House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This is wrong. No honourable Member’s speech 
ought to be called exasperating, unless he uses bad language or 
unparliamentary language. We may or may not agree, but the honourable 
Member is putting his case before the House. Nobody has a right to dub 
an honourable Member’s speech as exasperating. 

Shri B. Das : I accept your verdict. But he used terms such as 
“fraudulent” about the Law Minister. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Honourable Law Minister is sufficiently 
strong to take care of himself. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to submit that the honourable Members 
should compare the original clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Are there any matters of substance by which 
the honourable Member can induce the House to change its mind ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : There are substantial changes. I shall have 
to point out these things. In fact, I shall have to go on enumerating a large 
number. The best thing is to admit the mistakes or listen patiently. I must 
enumerate all the points and if I repeat my argument or be irrelevant, I 
can be called to order. In Part II, clause 5, there is Class I. Sons, widows, 
daughters and so forth. A change has been effected in this by the 
Departmental Committee. Son of a predeceased son of predeceased son has 
been newly introduced in the corresponding part of Class I in the 7th 
Schedule in the Department Bill. In fact, the Schedule has been so far 
removed from its place in the original Bill that it is not easy to notice it 
unless the two Classes are placed side by side, to find out the change. In 
act, the son of a predeceased son of a predeceased son did not find a place 
in the original, but it has been introduced in the Seventh Schedule of the 
revised Bill by the Departmental Committee. 

Then we come in the other lists. The first in the list in the original 
Bill after the enumerated heirs in item No. 2 is daughter’s son. In 
the Departmental Bill, the daughter’s son has been brought further 
down. Then comes the father and the mother. According to the original 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


490 


490 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Bill, the mother would have been entitled to inherit in preference to the 

father. Here the father and the mother have been placed together in the 

Departmental Bill and their order has been changed and whereas under 

the Departmental Bill they inherit together under the original Bill the 

mother would have inherited first to the exclusion of the father, and in the 
absence of the mother the father would have inherited. The daughter’s son 
as has already been pointed out, has been brought down further in the 
Departmental list. It should be obvious to any one who cares to consider 
this matter that these are substantial changes. 

Then we come to Class III of the original Bill. The brother’s son’s son 
who was first in the list of Class III in the original Bill has been entirely 
lost sight of in the Departmental Bill. If this was deliberate an intentional, 
then we would have got some indication of it in the report of the Select 
Committee or in the speeches. I want to know if this is a substantial change. 
It may not be substantial to a man who is not the brother’s son’s son, but 
to the brother’s son’s son, it is a substantial change, because in the absence 
of, other heirs he would have been entitled to property. 

Next in the list comes the sister. We have now the brother and the sister 
inheriting together in the Departmental Bill. The brother who was very high 
up in the list in the original Bill has now been transferred and brought 
down to of Class III and is inheriting with the sister ( Interruption ). 

Am I to stop my argument ? 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : The honourable Member has no right to speak 
to another honourable Member. I object to it very strongly, Sir. 

Shri Lakshminararan Sahu (Orissa: General): There is no quorum it 
seems. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is quorum. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Supposing a man dies leaving a brother and 
a sister. Under the original Bill the brother would have inherited, the sister 
would have been postponed; but under the Departmental Bill the brother 
and the sister inherit equally. The brother is now brought down on a line 
with the sister having been superseded by 11 others in the list. I submit 
this is introducing very substantial changes. 

Then we come to brother’s son. He was very high up, in Class I. He 
is by the Department brought down to Class III along with sister’s 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


491 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 491 


son. If a man died leaving a brother’s son and a sister’s son, under the 
original Bill, the brother’s son would have inherited, but under the 
Departmental Bill the brother’s son and the sister’s son inherit together. 
I submit these are very substantial changes. 

Then I come to Class IV of the original Bill. In Class IV of the original 
Bill, a man dying leaving a father’s mother and a father’s father have been 
treated differently in the original Bill and the Departmental Bill. Between 
the father’s mother and a father’s father being the heirs under the original 
Bill, the father’s mother would have been preferred; the father’s father would 
have been postponed. But under the Departmental Bill both have been put 
together and they inherit together. I ask whether this is not a substantial 
change. 

Then, Sir, we have a certain class of heirs in Class IV, items (1A), (IB), 
(1C) and (ID). These were introduced by an amendment of the original report 
by the Rau Committee. In the original Bill, if there was a father’s widow 
and a brother’s widow, the father’s widow would have been preferred to the 
brother’s widow. In the Departmental Bill the father’s widow and the 
brother’s widow inherit together. I submit this is a very substantial change — 
whether good or bad, it is not the point. Then coming to two other heirs 
in the supplementary list introduced by way of amendment of the Rau 
Committee brother’s son’s widow and brother’s son’s son’s widow are entirely 
omitted in the Departmental Bill. In the original Bill they would have 

inherited one after the other. In the Departmental Bill they are omitted. 

There is nothing corresponding to this in the Departmental Bill. 

Then coming to item 2, Class IV, the father’s father is very low in the 
original Bill but he has been brought up very much higher in the list 
prepared by the Departmental Committee. 

Then Sir, we come to the father’s brother and also to father’s sister. 

Father’s brother is No. 3 in the list. Father’s sister is sixth in the list. So 

in the original Bill, if there was the father’s father and the others, the father’s 
father would be preferred. Then comes the father’s brother, father’s brother’s 
son, father’s brother’s son’s son and then the father’s sister. In the 
Departmental Bill the father’s father and the father’s sister have been 
brought together, the latter being brought higher up. 

Then there is a large list of heirs which has been entirely omitted. Nos. 
(4), (5), (7), (8) and (9) are heirs in the original Bill. They are nowhere in 
the Departmental Bill. They are entirely eliminated. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


492 


492 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I know, Sir, that it is a tedious business to refer to this but I am 
discharging a duty and I undertook to supply every Member with a copy 
of the comparative statement which is in course of preparation. I shall ask 
the Members to verify each change and I shall be most glad if I am proved 
to be wrong. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I hope it shall be supplied 
free of cost. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If the Government thinks I am a charitable 
institution then I shall be glad to deserve the hope. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Had it been supplied earlier all this time would 
have been saved ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The pity is that my printing press is worse 
than the Government Printing Press. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If the suggestion had been made to the 
Honourable the Law Minister, he would have had it printed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly, I would have had 
it printed. 

The Naziruddin Ahmad : I have the manuscript ready. I shall be glad 
if the Honourable the Law Minister would publish it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Now it would be of no use 

because you have said the same thing on the floor of the House. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Now we come to Class V of the original Bill. 
By strange accident — I should be afraid to insinuate anything — everything 
in it has been omitted in the Departmental Bill. It contains nine classes 
of heirs and four other supplementary heirs. Thirteen heirs in Class V of 
the original Bill have been entirely omitted, whether by mistake... 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Very deliberately ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : But then why did the report of the Select 
Committee say that no substantial changes were made ? If these were 
omitted deliberately, then the only point is whether these are substantial 
changes. The House has been assured by the Honourable the Law Minister 
that no substantial changes were made. That these changes were made 
deliberately is now admitted. The question now therefore is whether these 
are substantial changes. But we have been assured that no substantial 
changes have been made. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is a matter of opinion. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


493 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 493 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Then the question turns upon this whether 
these are substantial changes. It may not be very important from the point 
of view of the law-giver but it may be important to the heir. If you disturb 
the order of heirship in the slightest degree, it is a substantial change. Up 
to this time we had been assured that the changes that were made were 
only of a drafting character. The report of the Select Committee is that the 
Department made no substantial changes. The report is so clear and 
emphatic and they emphasize the points so clearly, that they say no 
substantial changes have been made — only renumbering and some merely 
verbal changes were made and that for this reason that the usual method 
of indicating the changes by side-lining or under-lining the changes had not 
been adhered to in the Departmental or the Final Bill. 

Now the question of questions at last boils down to this : Whether these 
are substantial changes ? What is the test for this ? Upsetting of heirs’ lists 
is not a substantial change ? I submit it is. If it is that I am arguing too 
much, arguing as if in a Law Court — if any honourble Member thinks it 
is so — then it seems that the seriousness of the changes has not been fully 
appreciated. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : Except by you ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is very unfortunate that this should be 
appreciated only by one man ! Of course there is a highly paid department 
and a highly qualified Law Minister, who is able to appreciate the slightest 
differences and I am sorry that I have had to undergo all the trouble and 
expenditure of time and money to find out and explain all this. It has not 
been a very easy matter and the difficulty was further enhanced by the 
fact that the Department which introduced all these changes could not make 
available to me a copy of their draft Bill. It was after a great deal of searching 
that I could procure a copy. So the search has been prolonged and 
the consideration has been prolonged and it has been for me a very 
difficult matter. I do not mean to say that any other Member is not 
capable of appreciating it, but few have the time or the inclination to 
go through them. And why should they ? Isn’t it the duty and the obvious 
privilege of every Member — and I say this in defence of Members — to 
rely on the Ministry of Law, to rely upon the express guarantee in the 
Select Committee report that no substantial changes have been made ? I 
think they would be fully justified and when an honourable Member 
said that none expect me knew this, I cannot blame him. The blame 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


494 


494 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


lies with the Department. Now, is that the end of these changes ? By no 
means. 

Come to Class V-A. It was introduced by the Rau Committee by an 
amendment of their earlier Bill. They have noted that this Class V-A should 
be introduced after Class V. Class V-A has been entirely omitted. I humbly 
suggest that it is an inadvertent omission, but inadvertent or intentional, 
it is absolutely damaging to the integrity of the Bill. 

Then, Sir, we come to Class VI. 

( Interruptions ) 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The honourable member will go on. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Then we come to Class VI, items (1) and (2) — 
mother’s mother and mother’s father. The mother’s mother would be 
preferred to mother’s father under the original Bill but they have been put 
together in the Departmental Bill. So they now inherit equally together. In 
item (3) of Class VI, the mother’s brother and mother’s sister inherit — the 
latter after the former under the original Bill, but under the Departmental 
Bill, they inherit together. Under items (4) and (5) mother’s brother’s son 
has been entirely left out in the Departmental Bill. Items (7), (8) and (9) — 
mother’s sister’s son, mother’s brother’s daughter, mother’s sister’s daughter 
are also entirely omitted. 

Then item (3) in Class VI is also entirely omitted. 

This concludes the list of inheritance in which there are no less than 20 
transpositions, additions and omissions. Heirs have been entirely eliminated 
either intentionally or deliberately but this does not appear from the Select 
Committee’s report. I have been repeatedly asked by honourable Members 
of the Select Committee in the House to point out where the differences 
lie. I do not want to blame any honourable Member for not noticing them. 
On account of the transposition or removal from their original places the 
changes would not be obvious. And there is the guarantee in the report 
of the Select Committee that there is no substantial change. These 
were changes through the Departmental Bill and may have escaped the 
attention of the Select Committee. At least their attention was not 
drawn to them in the Departmental Bill. There is a very respected and 
capable Member, Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand who says in his minute of dissent 
that the Select Committee confined their attention to the Departmental 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


495 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 495 


Bill, because they were assured that no substantial changes had been made. 
I would ask Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand whether his attention was drawn by 
the Department or Dr. Ambedkar to these things. These large omissions 
and transpositions of places would not have been noticed by any Member 
unless he goes through the laborious process of comparing the two like a 
laborious lawyer. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand (East Punjab : General): I would like to draw 
the attention of my honourable friend to page 9 of the report where my 
note of Dissent is printed. I have given there some of the substantial changes, 
at any rate changes which I considered to be substantial — and because of 
which I had suggested that the Bill should be recirculated for eliciting public 
opinion or in any case recommitted to the Select Committee. At page 9 the 
broad points on which changes had been introduced in the redrafted Bill, 
have been mentioned though not in such great detail as the honourable 
Member is doing today in his speech. It is not correct to say that no member 
of the Select Committee noticed them. Of course nobody had the industry 
or the patience which the honourable Member has, but the matter did not 
escape their attention. As he has mentioned my name I feel it my duty 
to bring this fact to the notice of the House. In the Note of Dissent I have 
referred to the changes to the order of inheritance which I considered to 
be substantial, and in regard to which I am in entire agreement with my 
honourable friend. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am extremely grateful for this clarification, 
A respected Member with the highest judical experience thinks that these 
are substantial changes and he thought that they were so substantial that 
the Bill should be recirculated. That is the thing which I am asking for. 
There is at least one Member of the Select Committee who thought the 
changes to be substantial. He noticed them, but was his attention specifically 
drawn to them ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab: General): Mr. Balkrishna 
Sharma has also signed it. 

An Honourable Member : He has had no judical experience. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : He has had social experience. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Pandit Balkrishna Sharma is also of the 
same opinion. It is however enough to quote the name of Dr. Tek 
Chand. His authority and position will not be seriously enhanced 
by the addition of any other names. These respected Members felt 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


496 


496 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that these are substantial changes and therefore thought that the Bill 
required recirculation. There are changes in other parts of the Bill which 
would required herculean labour to find out. 

In view of these changes made by the Departmental Committee and in 
view of the weighty remarks of Dr. Tek Chand that these were very 
substantial changes I think the matter should not admit of any doubt that 
the Bill should be sent to the Select Committee to reconsider these changes 
or to recirculate it. 

An Honourable Member : The same Select Committee. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have no objection to the same Select 
Committee. It consisted of men absolutely good and true, men with judicial 
and legal experience and who are practical authorities on those branches 
of the law. In fact, all kinds of talents were represented in the Select 
Committee. I have the fullest confidence in the Select Committee and I have 
not lost my faith in it. My point is that these matters should be carefully 
scrutinised and each change carefully weighed and deliberately accepted. 
Substantial changes have been quietly and deliberately introduced. We are 
assured by the Law Minister and again by the Select Committee that no 
substantial changes have been made. On the one hand we have the opinion 
of the highest legal talent in the House saying that these are substantial 
changes and on the other, another legal luminary says that he has 
deliberately introduced these changes and at the same time, that he has 
introduced no substantial changes. That is the guarantee under the signature 
of Dr. Ambedkar himself. So the Select Committee is hopelessly divided 
within itself. If two such eminent authorities differ on a broad matter like 
this I think the matter requires reconsideration by the Committee and that 
is what I ask for. Though the Law Minister thinks that these were not 
substantial changes only an unsophisticated House would agree with him. 
A man’s right to inherit is a substantial right. To say that changes therein 
are not substantial changes would be to say something that is palpably and 
obviously wrong. I submit therefore that the changes being substantial and 
the guarantee being that no substantial changes have been made, on this 
ground alone the Bill should be sent back to Select Committee or for 
circulation with the positive direction that their attention should be directed 
towards these changes and they should consciously, intelligently, wilfully 
accept or reject them. There are other substantial changes. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


497 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 497 


Shri B. N. Munavalli (Bombay States): He is simply repeating the same 
arguments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I thought he had concluded that topic. If he has 
no other topic he may sit down. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have other very serious changes. The point 
I would like to know is for how long the Honourable Law Minister would 
insist on saying that there are no substantial changes. 

Shri Khurshed Lai (Deputy Minister of Communication): Till you have 
finished. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Does the honourable Member with his experience 
as a lawyer ever expect the mover of a Bill to admit that what he has done 
is wrong ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I bow down to this weighty observation 
of yours. But this is not a law court for us to take sides. It is a Legislative 
Assembly where we have no sides. We may express our opinions honestly 
but we do not take sides for the sake of fees: we are not committed to one 
side or another. I submit that in the Legislature, a Law Minister responsible 
to the Legislature should make it his duty to make an admission if he is 
wrong. I therefore have a faint hope that this accumulation of errors, of 
changes, would induce in a slight degree the Law Minister to admit that 
he had made substantial changes and thereby to make further progress of 
my argument absolutely unnecessary. But in view of the fact that the 
honourable the Law Minister stands to his gun like a good fighter — he has 
been a fighter all his life and he is famous for his grit and moral quality — 
as he stands to his gun, I have to submit to him more and more changes 
just with a faint hope to induce him ultimately to concede. 

Shri Khurshed Lai : I do not wish to interrupt, but is it his intention 
to go on in this-manner till he has made the Law Minister admit that he 
has made a mistake ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Why the Law Minister alone ? Possibly other 
Members also agree with him for he has carried the House with him. 

Shri B. Das : How do you say so, Sir ? We can howl him down. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is not so very easy. Sir, I have been 
threatened with being howled down. I am yet to see a Member who can 
howl me down here — I have yet to see him. I respectfully invite anyone 
to howl me down. He will find that I do not even require the microphone 
to be heard in the House in the midst of howlings. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


498 


498 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I request that the challenge need not be accepted 
on the floor of the House ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : He will not find it safe to challenge me outside 
the House. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : You did not like us to interrupt and therefore 
I want your permission first to seek a point of information. The point I want 
to know from my honourable friend is that today is the 1st of April. Is that 
the reason why he is taking up the whole day on this Bill ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That question should be addressed to the 
Honourable Law Minister for bringing the motion on the All Fools Day ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whether it applies to anyone or not let the 
honourable Member proceed with his speech. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Then we come to the next clause of Part II 
of the original Bill. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal : General): Sir, it appears the 
honourable Member is not prepared. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I could not catch the honourable doctor. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He may go on. I hope he will conclude his speech 
at least today. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: I do not know. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I would only say that enough has been said so 
far on this point about changes of substance. After all it is not the honourable 
Minister in charge of the Bill who alone need be satisfied. He holds his 
point of view. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The House will decide. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes, the House will decide it ultimately. Therefore 
the honourable Member need not take further time in driving it home to 
one individual Member however important he may be. He may try to carry 
the House with him. As I have already said, enough has been said in regard 
to the matter of substantial changes. I thought he was going to refer to 
other matters of substance like marriage, divorce, adoption. I do not think 
the honourable Minister would be dogmatic and I am sure that though in 
respect of this he may have strong views he would like to wait and see 
how far there are arguments on the other side, and he may be convinced. 
I thought the honourable Member would come to matters of substance. A 
long time has been spent on this point already. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


499 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 499 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I must frankly express my gratefulness to 
the Law Minister for listening to me so patiently. I submit that I have other 
points indicating changes which I shall show briefly. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Leave along the changes. There are changes I 
may put it this way. I am not letting down a secret and there is no secret 
from the House as I conceive. When a matter comes before the House after 
having been referred to Select Committee, the Select Committee might 
commit a mistake and it is open to the Members to say that it is wrong 
and the wrong has to be corrected. Except one or two matters as for example 
what each member said in the Select Committee which ought not to be placed 
before the House as things are in a fluid condition and it would result in 
a disturbance and antipathy. I may say this. So far as the Select Committee 
is concerned any draft may be considered. The draft was of the Ministry 
here. At the outset it is said in Para. 2 of the Select Committee’s report 
here: 

“The draft Hindu Code, as introduced in the Legislature, did not receive 
any Departmental scrutiny prior to its introduction, and the Ministry of 
Law (which certainly includes the Minister of Law at its head), which had 
an opportunity to examine the Bill during the period between the end of 
the last session of the legislature and the beginning of the present session, 
have now produced a revised draft ” 

The draft was placed before the Select Committee and the ruling of the 
Speaker is that the original Bill that was sent to the Select Committee, 
along with the draft — which we will assume is the complete list of all the 
amendments which the Law Minister wanted to introduce — was all consid- 
ered by the Select Committee. It is open to the honourable member to say 
that the Bill and the clauses in it are wrong, that they upset society and 
that sufficient attention was not paid to the changes that were effected in 
the Select Committee to the original Bill. I think that would help the House 
to come to a conclusion regarding either the whole Bill or individual clauses 
in it on matters of substance. We have already spent a lot of time over 
this matter. It is necessary that on this matter there may be clarification 
and I do not think anyone here wants to dogmatise upon a particular matter. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I might say openly that I have 
not an empty mind but I have an open mind. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is what we expect. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I am very grateful to him. Sir I come 
to another branch of the Bill. I would like to draw the attention of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


500 


500 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the House to clause 102 of the Departmental Bill which corresponds to clause 
101 of the final Bill. This was introduced for the first time by the 
Departmental Bill. The Select Committee made some changes, but the 
Departmental Committee had introduced a serious change. It is provided 
in the Departmental Bill that if there was a male and a female in the same 
line, the male shall take double of the female. In the final Bill their shares 
are made equal. As regards the justice of the final Bill, it does not matter, 
but I submit this new introduction is a departure. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even if there are, say, 100 departures, is it 
necessary to exhaust all the 100 departures ? Only some ten or fifteen — 
even these are many — by way of illustration will be enough. He may take 
a few departures and say that for these reasons the matter should be sent 
back to the Select Committee or sent round for eliciting public opinion. I 
thought the honourable Member concluded that portion referring to various 
items where there is a departure. There are departures and the list which 
has been circulated contains a list of departures extending over thirteen 
pages, though it does not state how the departures have been made. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Departures have not been noted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : True, they have not been noted in the manner 
of departures. It is admitted there are departures but only some important 
items may be taken for the purpose of showing that on account of these 
departures the Bill should be sent to the Select Committee or to another 
Select Committee or that it must go round the country for opinion. I think 
we are taking too much time on this. 

Shri B. Das : Sir, I said that all along. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I can quite appreciate the exasperation of one 
or two Members. 

Shri B. Das : Sir, he is using the same word ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I draw attention of the House to clause 
103 of the Departmental Bill which corresponds to clause 102 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have already pointed out with reference to this. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : This is an important matter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can only suggest to the honourable 
Member. I cannot argue for him. I can only say that instances need 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


501 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 501 


not be multiplied. According to him there are a sufficient number of 
instances, but if he thinks he has forgotten one point which is more important 
than others then he may point it out. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Clause 103 of the Departmental Bill corre- 
sponding to clause 102 of the final Bill restricts the agnates to five degrees. 
The change restricts the heirship to five degrees only. In case there are 
no enumerated heirs, then according to the Hindu Law the property will 
go to the agnate, but the definition of agnate has been seriously curtailed 
and reduced to five degrees. In the next clause, clause 104 of the 
Departmental Bill corresponding to clause 103 of the final Bill, cognates are 
also similarly restricted to five degrees. This is a serious departure from 
the conception of the Hindu Law and from the original Bill. Any agnate, 
however distantly connected, would be an heir in the absence of preferential 
heirs. With regard to cognates also, in the absence of agnates any cognates, 
however distantly connected, would be heirs. So, with regard to cognates 
the change is entirely new. With regard to agnates it is a serious departure 
from the original clauses. They merely described that in the absence of 
enumerated heirs they go to agnates, and in the absence of agnates they 
go to cognates. 

Mr. Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Cognates or agnates ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Cognates. 

I submit these are serious changes. According to Dr. Ambedkar these are 
not serious because he has made the changes. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : Serious and substantial changes ! 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Substantial if you like. I think thay are not 
merely substantial but also serious. Serious goes a degree further. In fact, 
this restricts the right of heirship of certain people. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is the honourable Member not closing at five? 
Enough has been said on this topic. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : No, Sir. Not enough to convince some of the 
Members. I want to absolutely convince them. 

Shri Khurshed Lai : Then you will have to argue till doomsday. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If he has not been able to convince for five hours 
now, he will not be able to convince him at the end of another five hours. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Honourable the Law Minister has though 
not a vacant mind, an open mind and he will in the long run be convinced. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


502 


502 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


An Honourable Member : He will ponder over your speech tonight. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Clause 10 of the original has been entirely 
omitted in the Departmental Bill — absolutely forgotten. In fact in the Hindu 
law, as in the Muslim law, in the absence of enumerated heirs, in the absence 
of agnates, cognates other unrelated heirs succeed. They are the preceptors, 
acharyas, shishyas and sahabrahmacharis and pupils under the same tutor, 
are the heirs. According to the Departmental Bill, the respect for acharya, 
respect for sahabrahmachari and consideration for them is entirely thrown 
overboard. This again is a serious change. The cumulative weight of these 
serious changes as well as many numerous others will I hope succeed in 
ultimately winning over the Minister of Law to my side. 

Then we come to clause 109 of the Departmental Bill and 108 of the final 
Bill. This provision is absolutely new. In that clause some new heirs have 
been introduced which were not in the original Bill. 

With regard to succession to stridhan, some changes have been 
made. And then in Part II, clause 14, where heirs stay together 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If the honourable Member is likely to 

5 p. m. conclude soon, we will stay on for a few minutes more. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : No, Sir. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : We will stay on for five minutes more, if the 
honourable Member will conclude. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall leave it to the speaker. 

The House now stands adjourned to 10-45 a.m. tomorrow. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock Saturday 
the 2nd April, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


503 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 503 


* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Speaker : The House will proceed with the further consideration 
of the motion that the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu 
Law, as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P. General) : May I know, Sir, till what time 
we will discuss this Bill, for there is some Government business and so we 
want to be sure as to how long the consideration of this Bill will take ? 
Now filibustering is going on at this stage and all the Members are anxious 
to speak and they may not get any chance to speak for two or three days. 
I would like to know, Sir, as to how long they are going to discuss this 
Bill, for the present. 

Mr. Speaker : It is difficult for me to say as to how long a particular 
Bill is going to be discussed. It much more depends upon the Members 
themselves. All I can say is that excepting perhaps one day, i.e. the 4th, 
I think all the days in the next week are allotted to Government business; 
and it is a matter for Government to say as to what Bills they want to 
bring or not to bring before the House and it depends on the priority with 
which they look upon the different measures. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : May I through you, Sir, request that the 

Government might be pleased to take over urgent business first and leave 
the consideration of this Bill to the end or let us know definitely as to which 
Bills are to be taken, so that we can come prepared for the next Bills. We 
are anxious to participate in the discussion of the other Bills. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal : General): Sir, the 

question raised by my honourable friend, Mr. Mahavir Tyagi has really 
got some importance. I quite appreciate the observation made by you just 
now that in such a matter the House decides how long a Bill should 
go on and this necessarily means that when there are a sufficient number 
of speakers and they want to continue for a sufficiently long time, they 
may continue. This is what I understand to be meaning of that 

observation. Of course, I quite see that it is not in the hands of 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. Ill, Part II, 2nd April 1949, pp. 2246-89. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


504 


504 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the Chair to say how many days are going to be allotted. At the same time, 
I think, the Chair would realize how difficult it is for Members who want 
really to speak on this motion and debate it fully that they know at least 
if any more Bills are going to be taken up during this session. I was 
submitting yesterday at the very beginning when this motion was taken up 
that most of the members had the impression that this Bill was not going 
to be taken up again in this session. As a matter of fact when a Bill of 
this importance and magnitude, was to be brought again for consideration, 
we expected that sufficient notice would be given to the Members in time. 
It was not done. The whole importance of my contention arises in this way 
that if we are to know that this Bill will be discussed and that it will continue 
only up to day, we can understand, but on the other hand we are given 
to understand that additional days would be provided in this session, it 
becomes another matter. Members who want to speak for, or against it, would 
not be able to come and participate in the discussion. We started yesterday 
and many honourable Members had already left, for instance, Mr. K. M. 
Munshi came here to speak on this motion and he went away and there 
were many members who wanted to speak one way or the other on this 
important Bill and if the House could get to know through you — it is for 
you to say — it is possible for you to do so — that some additional days are 
going to be provided, that will be really helpful; otherwise, we do not know 
where we stand with regard to this important Bill. 

Mr. Speakers : I should like to know if the honourable the Law Minister 
is in a position to enlighten us. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law) : The only 
thing that I can say is that this Bill will be debated. What would be the 
next stage, I am quite unable to say, because the question of the arrangement 
of the business of the Government is entrusted to a Committee of the 
Government, which is called “the Priorities Committee”. That Committee 
have assigned these days to this Bill. This Committee will be meeting in 
the afternoon and be taking its own decision. I am unable to say anything 
further than that. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : In view of this, I would submit 
respectfully to the Chair that the Chair has sufficient inherent powers 
to see that this procedure is not adopted with regard to this Bill unless 
sufficient notice is again given, to the honourable Members when this 
motion comes, it is certainly within your competence to say : “I am 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


505 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 505 


not going to allow this motion to come, because that prejudices the right 
of honourable Members to participate in this important debate.” That the 
honourable Minister cannot make up his mind, is exactly my grievance from 
the very beginning about the way in which the consideration of this Bill 
is taken up from time to time during this session. This itself has been a 
subject of great adverse comment on my part as well as other honourable 
members. Even today the honourable the Law Minister is not in a position 
to say if any other day is going to be or not going to be allotted for this 
important Bill. If that is so, I hope you will sternly turn down any proposal 
brought at the end of this week if a motion for consideration of the Bill 
is brought on a very short notice. 

Mr. Speaker : Any way that question is at present hypothetical. Today 
we are going on with the Bill. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava (Ajmer Merwara): It is obviously 
very unfair that the Government are not able to make up their mind even 
today. On 30th March you were pleased to ask the Leader of the House 
as to what the position was. A specific question was put by Mr. Maitra as 
to whether the Hindu Code was going to be taken up or not. No answer 
to that query was given by the Government Bench with the result that on 
the 31st, for the first time, we knew that the Bill was going to be taken 
up. Mr. Chaudhuri who wanted to participate in the debate left for Assam 
on the presumption that this Bill would not come before the House. It is 
therefore obviously unfair to the members that it should be brought up in 
this fashion. The Chair has ample power to protect the rights of Members. 

Seth Govind Das (C. P. and Berar : General) : You will remember 
that on that date the Leader of the House announced that very probably 
we would be adjourning on the 7th April. I raised the question whether 
the Hindu Code Bill was going to be taken into consideration in this 
session or not and you, Sir, said that it was not your business to say 
anything in that matter and that it was for the Government to arrange 
their business for the House. Now, at this fag-end of the session, when 
many members are absent, it is not proper to proceed with a controversial 
Bill of this nature. I would join with the Members who have just 
spoken and submit that the protection of the rights and privileges of 
the Members of this House is your responsibility and you have that 
right vested in you. Therefore I would request you to say to the 
Government that at this fag-end of the session and without giving 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


506 


506 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


sufficient notice to Members it is not proper to proceed with this Bill. I 
would request you at least to adjourn the debate on the consideration stage 
of the Bill this evening, so that this business may be taken up in the next 
Session of the Assembly, when we meet in the autumn. 

Mr. Speaker : Just at present the question is a hypothetical one, because 
the Law Minister does not say that he proposes to continue the debate. The 
question as to when, if at all, the consideration motion is to be discussed 
further, interruption) depends, as he said, upon the decision of the priority 
Committee. I shall try my best to see that all ‘equitable and reasonable 
demands of Members for debate are acceded to as far as it lies in my power 
in the House. On the question of the arrangement of Government business, 
I think, it is a bit too much to ask me to interfere. The Government are 
the best judges of priority of their business. As regards this particular Bill, 
I do not think anything further need come from them, in view of what is 
said in the House. I believe they are responsive to the feelings of Members. 
I do not think we need go any further into this matter. We may proceed 
with the motion under consideration. 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar : General): May I know from you, 
Sir, who has the last word on the arrangement of business here ? 

Mr. Speaker : So far as Government business is concerned, it is -the 
Government. I have nothing to do with the arrangement of business so far 
as priority is concerned. 

Seth Govind Das : The ultimate authority rests with you. They can bring 
any business they want to put before the House. But, after all, the ultimate 
authority is yourself. 

Mr. Speaker : At present, it suits the honourable Members to vest it 
in me I think that responsibility is too great for me. I am not acquainted 
with all the details and the needs of the Government administration. I do 
not think I can interfere with their discretion to adjust their business in 
matters of this kind. The best way is for honourable Members to let the 
Government feel the pressure of their opinion. Then the things will be 
adjusted. All I can do is to see that a reasonable debate takes place. From 
that point of view I shall certainly do what I can. 

Seth Govind Das : We are requesting the Government through you. 

Mr. Speaker : There are many other channels for Members to do so. 

Shri Arun Chandra Guha (West Bengal : General): We should be 
informed now as to when the House is going to be adjourned. If 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


507 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 507 


this is not done we would find it difficult to make arrangements for our 
business. 

Mr. Speaker : As regards that; the position was made clear by me 

the other day. I requested the honourable the Prime Minister to give 

. . the information and he said that this may go on for a day or 

11 A.M 

two. It is not possible for him also to say definitely, because 
there may be some urgent measure which they might wish to put through, 
without stilling discussion. So, that matter also rests with the Members. 
But I may say that we are not going to sit beyond the 9th April. 

Shri Arun Chandra Guha : In that case, urgent matters may be taken 
up first. 

Mr. Speaker : That is a matter of opinion as to urgency. 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani (U.P.: Muslim): To remove this difficulty of 
Dr. Ambedkar I would make a suggestion. I think that any legislative 
measure involving social reform should not be made part of official business, 
I could understand a Bill of this kind involving social reform being introduced 
by Shrimati durgabai or Shrimati Renuka Ray. To thrust an official Bill 
of this nature on an unwilling public is absolutely unreasonable. I would 
therefore invite my honourable friend to take courage in both hands and, 
realising that discretion is the better part of valour, postpone consideration 
of this Bill and withdraw the Official Bill leaving it to be sponsored at some 
future date by an ordinary Member who, in consultation with public opinion, 
may bring forward measures of this kind involving social reform. 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member need not further argue the matter. 
It is enough he has made a suggestion. 

Mr. Muhammad Ismail Khan (U. P.: Muslim): As the honourable 
Minister told the House, the priorty for this Bill has to be determined by 
the Cabinet Committee. Surely we arc entitled to know from him whether 
he is going to urge for priority for this Bill or not. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not wish to add anything, 
All that I want to say is that the Government has no intention of getting 
this Bill passed by a snap vote. 

Mr. Speaker : Mr. Naziruddin will finish his speech now. I do not 
wish to impose a time limit on speeches. He has spoken the whole of 
yesterday and I believe had spoken for 48 minutes on the previous 
occasion. The time taken in all comes to 3 hours and 28 minutes, to 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


508 


508 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


be more exact. I am not measuring his speech by the length of time taken. 
What I would like him to do is to take into consideration the fact that the 
present is a general motion for taking the Bill into consideration. It will 
not, therefore, be either in order or proper to go into the details of every 
clause. The honourable Member’s argument, as I understood it yesterday, 
is that there are some substantial changes made in the Bill and that, 
therefore, the measure has to be considered a new or that public opinion 
has to be consulted in the matter. For developing that argument he need 
not go into each and every clause of the Bill and suggest that every change 
made is a substantial change. He need only point out, by way of illustration, 
a few instances of really substantial changes made. I think that should be 
enough for the purpose of his argument at the present stage. When the 
Bill comes up for discussion clause by clause, he will have every facility 
to move any amendment he likes. 

* Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): Sir, I am grateful 
to you for that suggestion. I dealt with substantial changes yesterday but 
today I shall confine myself to a few more substantial changes. (Interruption ). 

Mr. Speaker : There is one difficulty that I feel about interruptions. They 
distract attention from the original point and my hands are weakened in 
pulling up the speaker and bringing him up to the proper scope of relevancy 
in debate. If there are no interruptions, therefore, the matter will be 
shortened. 

An Honourable Member : But it becomes very dull. 

Mr. Speaker : Of course it gives relief from dullness but too much of 
it is dangerous for the House. Therefore, let there be no interruptions or 
side remarks because they sidetrack the issue. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall confine myself, Sir, to a few more 
substantial changes introduced by the Departmental Draft. I shall turn to 
part III of the original Bill and draw attention to sub-clause (2) of clause 
126 of the Departmental Bill which corresponds to sub-clause (2) of clause 
124 of the Final Bill. It is a new sub-clause which introduces a new principle, 
namely, that any transfer of property would not defeat the right of 
maintenance paid therefrom. In fact, maintenance has been made a statutory 
charge on the property. Whether good or bad, it is a new matter which has 
been introduced not by the Select Committee but by the Departmental 
Committee. 


*C.A.(Leg.)D.,Vol.III, Part II, 2nd April 1949, pp. 2249-76. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


509 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 509 


Then turning to part III-A of the original Bill which deals with succession, 
clauses 1 and 2 which are important substantive provisions have been 
entirely omitted in the Departmental Bill and of course also in the Final 
Bill. I will not deal with them in detail but leave them for consideration 
by the Honourable Minister. 

Then coming to clause 131 of the Departmental Bill (clause 130 of the 
final Bill), sub-clause (1) which deals with maintenance is a new matter 
which introduces a very substantial change. Again clause 133 of the 
departmental Bill (clause 132 of the final Bill) lays down certain tests; they 
introduce an innovation of a very substantial nature. Part (b) of sub-clause 
(2) of this clause is an innovation which corresponds to clause 6(1) of the 
original Bill, part III-A. 

Then parts (g) and (h) of sub-clause (1), part III-A in the original Bill 
are also important provisions which have been entirely omitted in the 
Departmental Bill and also in the final Bill. Again parts (g), (h) and (i) of 
clause 133 (2) of the departmental Bill are very important and are entirely 
new. 

In part III-A the proviso to sub-clause (1) of the clause 6 in the original 
Bill has been omitted in the Departmental Bill rather unceremoniously. This 
is omission of a very important matter. 

Sub-clause (2) of clause 134 of the Departmental Bill (clause 133 of the 
final Bill) deals with marriage expenses of an unmarried daughter. This is 
a new provision which was not in the original Bill. 

Then I come to clause 7 of part III-A of the original Bill dealing with 
the maintenance of a widow residing outside the family house. This has been 
omitted in the departmental Bill and also in the final Bill. 

Therefore in part III-A of the original Bill, there are sins of omission and 
commission of an important character. I refer to them because I wish to 
rely not only on the individual changes made but also on the cumulative 
effect of those changes. 

Then I come to part IV of the original Bill dealing with marriage 
and divorce, corresponding to Part II of the departmental and final 
Bills. I shall deal only with the salient points. Provisions about 
marriage have been entirely and radically changed and require some 
detailed consideration. With regard to sacramental marriage the form 
of that marriage prevalent in Hindu society is well known. The original 
Bill left those forms to be applicable according to custom and social 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


510 


510 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


practice. There was no provision in the original Bill for registration of a 
sacramental marriage as a condition of the validity of the marriage. I shall 
try to show that the Departmental Bill has introduced such changes. They 
may be unconscious but the change to me appears to be that no marriage 
will be valid unless it is registered. Registration has not been made optional 
as in the case of Muslims, but in this case by the Departmental Bill the 
optional character of the old formalities have been interfered with and the 
validity has been made subject to registration; otherwise, as I shall try to 
show, the marriage would be invalid. 

The original Bill, Part IV dealt with this subject. In clause 2 it was laid 
down that there shall be two forms of Hindu marriage, namely, the 
sacramental marriage and the civil marriage. Leaving aside the civil 
marriage, with which I am not at present concerned, “there shall be two 
forms of Hindu marriage — sacramental marriage and civil marriage”. That 
is what was provided in the original Bill. The forms were left to the well- 
known custom and well-known requirements of Hindu marriage and provide 
nothing for registration. The House will be pleased to consider the corre- 
sponding provisions in the Departmental Bill. The original Bill merely said 
that the sacramental form of marriage will be one of the forms of marriage. 
Details were left to the descretion of the parties. 

In Clause 6 of the Departmental Bill which also corresponds to Clause 
6 of the final Bill, the following provision is made. 

“Save as otherwise expressly provided herein, no marriage between 
Hindus shall be recognised as a valid marriage unless it is solemnized 
either as a sacramental marriage or as a civil marriage in accordance with 
the provisions of this Part.” 

The original provision was that marriage might be performed in the 
sacramental form in the usual religious form well known to Hindu society, 
but in the departmental Bill it is said that no marriage shall be valid unless 
it is performed in accordance with this Part. 

Let us consider the provisions of this Part. We come at once to 
another part of the Bill, namely, clause 6 of part IV of the original 
Bill corresponding to clause 9 of the departmental Bill as well as the 
final Bill. (An honourable Member: ‘Please note that Dr. Ambedkar is 
away.’) Clause 9 deals with registration of sacramental marriage. In 
the original Bill it was stated : “For the purpose of facilitating proof 
of sacramental marriage, rules may be prescribed for the entering of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


511 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 511 


particulars relating to such marriages in such manner as may be prescribed 
in the Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate book kept under section 6 of this 
Chapter.” 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar : General): On a point of information, 
may I know who is listening to the debate on behalf of the Government? 

Mr. Speaker : There must be someone ! 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras : General): I am taking notes 
for him. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The Minister should, in courtsey, be here. 

Shri B. L. Sondhi (East Punjab: Genral): The Law Minister is there — 
just coming. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The original clause provided for rules made 
by the Government for the entering of particulars in a register for the 
purpose of facilitating proof : that is, it left the validity of marriage absolutely 
intact. It gave additional facility in the matter of proof that particulars of 
marriages might be registered in the Hindu Civil Marriage Certificate book 
and this could be provided by rules. This was only to facilitate proof. This 
was not a compulsory condition, nor any condition affecting the validity of 
the marriage. All that was laid down was a very usual rule, a very salutary 
rule, that particulars might be entered in a register and that might be 
prescribed in the rules. It would be only for the purposes of facilitating proof. 
It would not affect the validity of the marriage at all. In fact a marriage 
of which the particulars are not entered in this register would be perfectly 
valid, but registration would offer, or supply a ready-made method of proof 
of marriage, and a certified copy of the entry would be taken judicial notice 
of by a Court of law and much evidence would be dispensed with. But in 
the corresponding clause in the Departmental Bill, it is like this : 

“For the purpose of facilitating the proof of any sacramental marriage, 

the Provincial Government may by rules provide (and here the sting comes 

at the tail ) — 

(a) That particulars relating to such marriages shall be entered in the 

Hindu Marriage Certificate book ” 

In fact the compulsion is not yet complete, but only begins here. 

Then, Sir, we come to clause (b) of the Departmental Bill. Subclause (3) 
of clause 6 of the original Bill says : 

“The making of such an entry shall not be compulsory.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


512 


512 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


I shall ask you, Sir, to consider the corresponding language of the 
Departmental Bill. The original Bill — I shall repeat with your permission — 
is 

“That the making of such an entry shall not be compulsory.” 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Does it mean that the married parties will go 
to the Registrar’s House? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : According to the original Bill, the making of 
such entries is not compulsory. That is absolutely clear. But let us consider 
the corresponding provision of the departmental Bill: 

“The making of such entries shall be compulsory.” 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor (U. P.: General): In which place ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall come to that later on. “Which place” 
is also mentioned. It is at very inconvenient places ! 

So the original law was that by rule particulars of marriages might be 
entered in a book for the purpose of facilitating proof, “but the entry shall 
not be compulsory”. But in the revised clause in the departmental Bill, the 
particulars shall be entered and the making of the entries shall be 
compulsory in such cases. 

And then, what is more, there is sub-clause (2) and clause 9 of the 
departmental Bill which reads : 

“In making the rules under sub-section 1, the Provincial Government 

may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine 

which may extend to Rs. 100” 

The position is a little vague as to whether the compulsory character 
attaches to the registering officer or is addressed to the party. But more 
of this later on. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Which clause are you referring to? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Clause 9(2) of the Departmental Bill as well 
as to clause 9(2)of the final Bill. In fact it gives authority to the Provincial 
Government to impose a fine for not complying with it or even a vague 
suspicion that parties who fail to register or have them entered, will also 
come within the mischief of this provision. But the matter has not been 
left in doubt and it is clear later on. 

Mr. Speaker : The validity of the marriage is not affected, in which case, 
where is the substantial change? It is only a matter of detail which, it would 
be as well for the honourable member to speak on, when we come to clause 
by clause consideration of the Bill. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


513 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 513 


Shri Mahavir Tyagi : It is a matter of importance, Sir. In that case 
it is a great change. The parties will have to be directed to the house of 
the Registrar instead of the House of the father-in-law. 

Mr. Speaker : The scope of the present discussion is with reference to 
changes in the substantive law as proposed by the Rao Committee and as 
adopted by the Select Committee. A minor detail of registration is made 
compulsory. So far as validity of the marriage is concerned, it is not affected 
at all. I do not want any discussion on that. I do not say as to whether 
the change is desirable or not but for present purposes a discussion on that 
would be outside the scope. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I would like to refer to one or two sentences 
in that connection as well as on the final Bill. Clause 138 — 

Power to make rules — (2) sub-clause (ii) reads: 

“The cases and areas in which particulars of sacramental marriages 
shall be compulsorily entered, and the punishment for any contravention 
thereof,” 

This provides for compulsory registration, I am coming to the question 
how it affects the marriage. (An honourable Member : ‘It is in the discretion 
of the provincial government’) It is in the discretion of the Provincial 
Government no doubt. But the Government is given a new power which 
it may enforce. 

I come back again to clause 6 of the departmental Bill. It also corresponds 
to clause 6 of the final Bill. 

“No marriage between Hindus shall be recognised as valid unless it is 
solemnised either as a sacramental marriage or as a civil marriage in 
accordance with the provisions of this Part.” 

According to the clause in the original Bill these formalities were not 
required. The “provisions of this part” in the departmental Bill require 
compulsory rgistration of the marriage. In fact sacramental marriage and 
civil marriage are brought on a par with each other. In civil marriage of 
course registration is compulsory. The combined effect of the change of 
phraseology in clause 6 of the departmental Bill as well as the compulsory 
requirement of registration would make it appear that a marriage which 
is not registered — of which particulars are not entered which is made 
compulsory under this clause — would be an invalid marriage. No marriage 
shall be valid unless it is done in accordance with this Part. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Where is it ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is my interpretation which is 

submitted for the consideration of the House. In fact it may be farthest 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


514 


514 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


from the mind of the honourable Law minister to effect this result. He made 
it quite clear in his speech that the provisions relating to marriage are not 
compulsory but rather optional. It may be that the effect was unintended. 
But whether intended or not, the effect is the same. No marriage shall be 
valid unless it is performed in accordance with this Part, which also carries 
the liability of a fine for an omission. However reluctant the house or even 
the author of the Bill may be to put this interpretation, it is yet a question 
of interpretation and it is not a question of sentiment. The point is whether 
this interpretation is valid. If that is so, it introduces a very important 
change. To provide, though indirectly that a marriage would be invalid unless 
it is registered would be a dangerous proposition and it would lead to 
wholesale breaches of the law. The registering officer may live miles away 
from parties living in inaccessible regions, and at this stage of the civilisation 
of our country, especially for the backward people, this provision would be 
absolutely tyrranical and meaningless. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : If you would permit me, 

Sir 

Mr. Speaker : Let there be no discussion on the merits of the argument. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Only for the purpose of clarification 
that I rise. 

Mr. Speaker : If we enter into clarification and further discussion, it 
would be an unending speech. The point is that the honourable Member 
is putting his interpretation. I have drawn his attention to the fact that, 
it does not affect the validity of the marriage. If he wants still to persist 
in that line of argument, let him do so. That will cut short the speech. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : If you would permit me, Sir, there 
is only one point which he may clarify. The clause begins with the words 
“For the purpose of facilitating the proof of any sacramental marriage 


Mr. Speaker : That point is quite clear to my mind. I put it to 
him though not in that form. I pointed out to him that this does not 
affect the validity of the marriage at all. Still he thinks it does. How 
can we go on convincing him ? Let him proceed now. That would be 
the shortest way of having his say before us. Otherwise we shall have 
to discuss with him every provision in respect of which, he is giving 
his inferences. When honourable members are hearing his speech in 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


515 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 515 


silence, it does not mean that they are accepting his interpretation. He may 
proceed to the next point now. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I come to clause 8 of the departmental Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : It would be better if the honourable member gives 
references to the final Bill as it is before the House and then point out 
the change. Otherwise I cannot follow. He is referring to three or four Bills. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have been starting from the original Bill. 
Of course it is clause 8 in the final Bill also. In clause 4 of Part IV of the 
original Bill it is said: 

“A sacramental marriage may be solemnised in accordance with the 

customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto.” 

In the revised draft clause 8, sub-clause (1) says : 

“A sacramental marriage shall not be complete and binding on the 

parties unless it is solemnised in accordance with such customary rites 

and ceremonies of either party thereto as are essential for such marriage.” 

Sir, I do not think it is a point of argument — this is by mistake. But 
the point which I wish to submit is that I do not insist on this interpretation 
as a necessary logical consequence but I believe it is introduced unconsciously 
and there is a certain amount of doubt as to the validity of the marriages. 
I know that the feeling of every lawyer, judge and statesman would be 
against the invalidity of the marriage on this ground of registration. But 
that is political; the approach should be entirely legal and constitutional. 
What is the interpretation ? If you do not perform your marriage in 
accordance with these new provisions the marriage will be invalid. It follows 
therefore, whether we agree with the justice of the provision or not, it follows 
to my humble mind that unless the particulars of the marriage arc entered 
in the register the marriage itself would be invalid. I submit that for the 
consideration of the House. 

I have already referred to the provisions in regard to the making of the 
entries, that the making of the entries shall be compulsory. 

Mr. Speaker : That he has said; he need not repeat it. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Is it compulsory for the parties or for the 
registering officer ? 

Mr. Speaker : That is a matter of detail into which we need not go at 
present. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


516 


516 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : All right, Sir. (Interruption). 

Mr. Speaker : Let there be no asides. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : But, Sir, I have a quick ear and this is not 
conducive to good debate. My learned friend who is an experienced 
parliamentarian should not try to discourage speeches. He should forget that 
he was addressing the old Council when the British were there. He should 
remember that he now belongs to a party which is ruling and I belong to 
no party at all but am an individual who is opposing. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us not carry on this discussion. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa : General): Do you want us to keep our mouths 
shut ? 

Mr. Speaker : Mr. Das. The remedy is open. We can afford to be deaf 
on such occasions and proceed further. I also hear many whispers when 
the debate is going on, but I do not take any notice of them. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, you are in a more fortunate position. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us now proceed. What is the next substantial 
point ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I now come to another part — Part V of the 
original Bill relating to Minority and Guardianship. Clause 3 thereof has 
been entirely omitted in the final and departmental Bill. I need not go into 
the details of the clause, but this is a substantial clause which has been 
omitted. That is introducing a serious change. There are other unimportant 
changes and I will not deal with them. 

I now come to the Part relating to Adoption, that is Part VI of the original 
Bill. Clauses 1 and 2 thereof have been omitted. In departmental Bill clause 
55 — also clause 55(1) of the final Bill — there is a sub-clause (3) which is 
new. Then again in Part VI of the original Bill sub-clause (1) of clause 19 
is omitted. A new clause has been introduced with entirely different 
conditions. In departmental Bill clause No. 68, which also corresponds to 
clause 68 of the final Bill, sub-clause (1) is a new clause. And the Proviso 
to this sub-clause of clause 68 of both the Bills is also new. Then again 
sub-clause (3) of clause 19 of the original Bill with two conditions is entirely 
ommitted in the final Bill. Sub-clause (5) of this clause again has been 
omitted. So also clause 21 of the original Bill — Part VI — has been omitted. 
Then again clause 25 of the original Bill in Part VI. with two sub-clauses 
and two other parts, is entirely omitted. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


517 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 517 


I submit that these are most important changes made by the Departmental 
Bill. Although it is clear that some honourable Members of the Select 
Committee realise that there were substantial changes introduced in the 
departmental Bill that may have been a later realisation in view of the 
guarantee that no substantial changes have been made. In fact their 
attention may not have been specifically drawn to it and there is a danger 
that all these details may not have been fully considered by them. That 
would not have happened if they had confined their attention to the original 
Bill and proceeded clause by clause or if they had sat first and given a 
direction to the Department to prepare. 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member is again covering the same 
ground; he has covered it yesterday. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I do not wish to repeat the grounds. In 
these circumstances I submit that the simple point is that this is a very 
substantial matter which has prejudiced the fair and full consideration of 
the Bill by the Select Committee. 

I do not wish to cast any aspersion on the Members of the Select 
Committee, but without a proper comparison of the clause it would be 
extremely difficult for the Members of the Select Committee to follow all 
the changes. 

We then come to the other matters in connection with this Bill. The 
question of inheritence is agitating the mind of the country for a long time. 
The position of the daughter is the most contentious provision of the Bill 
that I can think of. In fact, I was asked why it was that I was refusing 
to my Hindu sisters what I have given to my Muslim sisters. The reply 
is very simple. Under the Muslim Law, the daughter has been given a share. 
We are not permitted to question the wisdom of that Law; that Law has 
got to be taken along with various other circumstances, historical, social and 
others which justify that. There is a kind of justice which has been tolerated 
and accepted by the Muslim society for 1350 years. But our Hindu sisters 
have tolerated their lot for about three to four thousand years under a 
different system. A comparison between the two systems so far as the 
daughter’s position is concerned, would not be quite relevant. In fact, the 
two systems of law approach the matter from different points of view 
and they depend upon different historical accidents. Under the Muslim Law, 
the system of inheritance was taken from the old Arabian customs. It arose 
out of obvious and inevitable circumstances. In Arabia there were no 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


518 


518 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


immovable properties, all was desert, and the properties consisted of 
movable. When a man died 

Mr. Tajamul Husain (Bihar: Muslim): On a point of information, may 
I ask this. The honourable Member says that in Arabia there was no 
immoveable property. What about the houses ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The question is needless. I will ask the 
honourable member to read a very learned book of Von. Kremer, a German 
authority, on “The Orient Under the Caliphs”. That book will give the desired 
information. There is a translation of it by the Late Mr. Khuda Baksh. It 
is the only book on the subject. It has dealt the entire subject from a 
specialist’s point of view. I will humbly ask my honourable friend to read 
that book for further elucidation, but I am not concerned with giving the 
entire details of it in the House because that is not quite relevant. 

I was submitting that my learned friend’s question as to there being 
absence of immovable properly does not really arise. Arabia consisted, 
certainly, of immovable property also but most people had no immovable 
property, interruption). No further interruption. I have been asked by the 
honourable the Speaker not to mind interruptions but it is difficult to close 
one’s ears to what is happening. 

An Honourable Member : Close your mouth. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall as soon as I feel satisfied that I have 
discharged my duty and as soon as I feel that the majority do not want 
to hear me. I shall certainly do it. 

Sir, in that book the whole history has been given. When a man died. 
He left a bedstead or some clothing or a horse or camel and things of 
that sort, and according to old Arabian customs they were divided among 
the near relatives. No trouble arose. The Qoran does not give any specific 
share to each individual. The present system of inheritence is a growth 
of the old Arab custom and amended and changed by Muslim doctors, 
especially by that great authority on Muslim Law, Abu Hanifa and others. 
I need not go into that. All that I was concerned in saying was that 
the Muslim approach is a matter of history. Whether good or bad is 
not to the point, and the fact that I oppose the share of the Hindu 
daughter is not because I am unwilling to give my Hindu sisters 
what I would give to my Muslim sisters. If what is good to a Muslim 
depends upon ancient customs and sentiments what is good to a Hindu 
should also depend upon the ancient customs and sentiments of the 
Hindus. When the Arabs conquered the areas surrounding the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


519 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 519 


Mediterranean difficulties arose because they acquired immovable prop- 
erty. It is a matter of history that they felt the difficulty of a large 
number of shareholders inheriting the property leading thus to disrup- 
tion. Then it was that the system of wakf, which we now find today, 

was thought of. Some passages in the Holi Book were developed by 
Muslim divines and they tried to develop the law of wakf That was 

now they wanted to counteract the evil effect of division. In India 
the law of wakf was further developed by Indian courts and especially 

by the Privy Council and this to a large extent thwarted the 

application of the wakf law in domestic purposes. It is well-known that 
Mr. Jinnah, in 1913, brought a Bill in the House and got an Act 
passed — the wakf Act — which recognised the validity of certain wakfs 

which were regular in practice among the Muslims. This was an 
attempt to counteract the evil effect of infinitesimal divisions. The 
Muslim approach to the division of property is entirely different. The 

outlook of a Muslim is individualistic. In fact, the infinitesimal division 
induces in them separatist tendencies. Brothers do not live in the joint 
family for long; they quickly divide. We have seen a separatist 

tendency on a large scale in recent Indian history. So, the approach 
of a Muslim is individualistic whereas the approach of a Hindu is 
from the family point of view. The Hindu lives in a family. There 

the unit is the family and they approach the women’s rights from 

the point of view of a family. The Muslim approach is different. In 
fact women in a Hindu family are not unequal to men, the question 
of inequality as has been pointed out does not really arise; they are 

equal to men in every way but each has a recognised part in the 

economy of the Hindu family. That is the way of approach of the 
question. Although I do not question the authority of this House to 

legislate on any matter, I question only the propriety of this House 
entering into this legislation without discussing and going into details 
of the system under which the Hindu civilisation has lived. The 

position of a Hindu widow should be considered from that angle and 

if on adequate consideration it appears that the system is rotten, it 
is for the Hindu society to change it. It is not for me to change 
it. It is up to me only to point out certain things which come to 

my mind as a member of the Legislature; it is not my vote that 
will carry; the vote of the majority will carry. I have a duty to submit 
certain points as they appear to me. I submit therefore that the Hindu 
law is not unjust to the female. It has done full justice to the female 
considering her as a part of the family system where she has a part 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


520 


520 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to play. In fact, in this legislature we have different parts to play. There 
is no question of inequality or discrimination. We have all parts to play. 
In these circumstances I submit that the position of the Hindu women has 
to be considered from this point of view. The division amongst Muslims has 
gone too far. How the share of a daughter leads to disruption of the family 
is worthy of consideration. As soon as a man dies, leaving sons and daughters, 
the daughters at once inherit their shares. They are married and in a 
majority of cases they are transported to different families. In fact, inter- 
marriage in Muslim Law is a device to counteract infinitesimal division. 
There is again a provision that in case person having a share transfers the 
property to an outsider, the original co-sharers have been given the right 
to re-purchase the share on payment of the price. But as every lawyer knows, 
a suit for presumption is hedged in with so many legal difficulties that it 
hardly succeeds. The Wakf is another attempt to counteract this tendency. 
The share to a Muslim daughter has not conduced to the solidarity of the 
family property. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I do not wish to interrupt, but as it is a case 
of Muslim Law, I am interested in it. I want to know from my honourable 
friend whether he does not approve of the inheritance as enunciated under 
Muslim law ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I should submit that the question does not 
arise. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : It is for the Speaker to say whether it arises 
or not. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Even then, I shall not be drawn into a 
controversy over this. How the Muslim family deteriorates and desintegrates, 
is a matter of long experience to us, as also I believe to many lawyers like 
yourself. When a daughter is married, for some time family amity keeps 
them together, but a time comes when the daughter comes to her father’s 
house and a misunderstanding arises between the daughter and the brother’s 
wife. Women differ on more unsubstantial matters than men. They being 
more sensitive differ. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : You are casting aspersions on women. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is not casting aspersions. It is 
analysing their character. The sentimental nature of women makes 
them more attractive, more interesting and more loving. If women were 
as hard-hearted, as strong, as rugged, as we are, life would have been 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


521 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 521 


impossible. In fact, it is the beauty of feminine nature that they are so 
different from men. It is the union of two distinct types that makes life 
bearable and happy. So it is not by way of disparagement that I was making 
this remark. 

When the daughter gets offended with her sister-in-law, she goes back 
to her husband and says “I want my share.” Then the trouble 
begins sooner or later. It has happened in every home. The 
sister’s husband comes to his brother-in-law and demands a 
share and it is refused and then he wants to sell the share to the brother. 
The brother of course would not be willing or able to pay the full price 
demanded, so this man goes to another man in the village and sells the 
property for a small cash and a promise of more after the trouble is over. 
Then some physical demonstration of new right begins. A criminal or civil 
case follows. From ordinary injury to murder, from registration proceedings 
to partition proceedings and so on. Lawyers will be thankful if this Bill is 
passed, because it will give them a considerable amount of business. 
Litigation begins and does not end in five or ten or twenty years. Litigation 
after litigation follows in bewildering succession and the whole village is 
rent with party factions. If there are only several brothers, they can live 
together and manage the properties together, although their wives may 
quarrel with each other. Brothers hardly quarrel. In this way the Hindu 
joint family system goes on. There is nothing inherently different between 
a Muslim family and Hindu family except in this. Muslims have been 
habituated to think of partition and individualistic life. The Hindu is 
habituated to joint and corporate life. Probably, very few of my esteemed 
Hindu friends can visualise the real difficulty that would arise out of the 
daughter’s share. In fact, it is never a gain to the daughter. There is a 
corresponding loss to counterbalance the gain. Suppose out of a litigation 
and a share a daughter is enriched to that extent. She goes to her husband’s 
house and has her own sons and daughters. All that she takes from her 
brother, her daughter will take from her sons. Instead of considering the 
women individually and separately, if we consider her as part of family life, 
then the gain is not counterbalanced by the loss. I submit that the daughter’s 
share will introduce endless complications and litigation, quarrel and 
misunderstanding and what not. In fact, it is my unhappy experience that 
no prosperous Muslim family has lasted for three generations. This and other 
things make them paupers. The point is not whether the system is good 
or bad. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


522 


522 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Muslims have accepted it as part of their religion and will accept it so 
long as the majority do not think it is bad. So far as Hindus are concerned 
they have accepted their system and unless the majority are convinced that 
that system under which they have been thriving and been made so 
prominent, a system which has outlived many ravages of foreign invasions, 
unless they are convinced that that system is bad, there should be no 
interference. My point is that comparison between the Hindu sister and 
Muslim sister would be extremely dangerous, because their positions are 
not analogous and actually there are differentiating elements which arise 
from different histories, considerations and environments. Therefore, there 
is no simple analogy between the position of the Hindu sister and the Muslim 
sister. I think the effect of a daughter’s share must be considered dispas- 
sionately in all conceivable aspects. It is not a net gain to the daughter 
herself. It leads to fragmentation. I would not have referred to this in detail 
but for the fact that on 9th April when the Bill was sent to Select Committee, 
I referred to this mischievous tendency and Mrs. Hansa Mehta expressed 
surprise that the daughter’s share would lead to litigation or fragmentation 
of property. It is due to the fact that perhaps the mischief which we have 
experienced has fortunately not been experienced in the Hindu society. It 
is for this reason that there was a possibility of misunderstanding, and that 
is why I have referred to this matter. I submit, Sir, that the position of 
the daughter must be considered in the context of Hindu ideas and of Hindu 
families. Every one is affectionately disposed towards her. She is well 
married, and at the time of marriage various gifts are made, there is the 
dowry and besides that large properties too are sometimes given. And she 
is a welcome guest in her father’s house. But if you give her a share, then 
the relations between the brothers and sisters will no longer be one of 
affection, but it will turn into one of business, one of hostile and clashing 
interests. In fact, love will be extinct, if the daughters’ shares are allowed 
to penetrate the folds of Hindu society. Sir, these are some considerations 
which I believe should be considered dispassionately. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : What is your experience ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : My experience is that we have become 
impoverished. If Hindu society thinks that impoverishment is a virtue 
they are welcome to accept the system. After all we hear talks of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


523 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 523 


introducing a classless society of absolute equality. It will be the equality 
of poverty and indigence. But I do not complain of my system. And after 
all, this is not the place to discuss it. I only submit here that the whole 
subject must be considered deliberately by Hindu society and not merely 
viewed in the light of equality of brother and sister. That is too much of 
a slogan. We as serious legislators in this House should not be taken in 

by slogans. Here I have only given a slight hint on some of the aspects. 

There are many other matters but it is impossible for me to deal with all 
aspects. It may be that I have over-emphasised certain minor aspects, and 
left out others. But these are only a few observations which may make people 
think and not rush on, so far as the daughters are concerned. 

And now comes the question of equality. Is not the women sometimes 
superior to man in certain aspects ? I believe that she is in many spheres 

superior. She is the mistress of the house. She is the mistress of her 

husband’s soul, his purse, his property, his inclinations, his whims, every 
thing is controlled by her. I submit, therefore, that the women should not 
consider herself as ignored, merely because she is not being given a share. 
In fact, her position is unassailable in the family. What woman is there 
who is not respected and loved in the family ? Does she require anything 
personal ? Does she require anything herself, apart from the welfare of her 
husband, of his brothers and of her children and the children of her brothers? 
That is the Hindu system. Whether it is good or bad, it is not for me to 
discuss. 

An Honourable Member : Quite right. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is for the Hindu community. It is for that 
community to say whether the system which has lasted for over four 
thousand years 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : More than that. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is for them to say whether it is really so 
rotten and so rickety — to quote Dr. Ambedkar — that it requires overhauling, 
that it requires breaking up and resetting, in fact whether a problem akin 
to that Relief and Rehabilitation has arisen in Hindu society. I feel that 
it is nothing of that sort. The problem is merely an intellectual upheavel. 
It is an abstraction of legal theory. It is an unnecessarily fine question of 
equality that is at the root of this division, of all this discussion and so 
much hostility. The whole thing is a simple affairs. Are you satisfied with 
your family system ? Does it give you satisfaction ? Has that system saved 
you from the ravages of time? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


524 


524 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal : General): And that has increased 
the number of Muslims in the country. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

The subject before us is not the structure of society. We are discussing 
only certain provisions in the Hindu Code. So let us not go into too many 
details or go on to other questions. Otherwise I will have to ask the 
honourable Member to discontinue. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If you allow shares, to the daughter, there 
will be wholesale evasions, and lots of cases relating to wills will come up. 
When the father dies, there will be wills. In fact, it will lead to lots of 
litigation. The sons will try to retain the property in their own hands and 
it may be that the dying father may be prevailed upon to execute a will 
under duress, or wills may be manufactured. Such things do happen. In 
fact, these are certain matters which have got to be considered. 

Sir, then there is the general aspect of inheritance. In fact, this is a matter 
which should be carefully considered. 

Then, I come to another part of the Bill, namely, marriage. In fact, with 
regard to monogamy. I submit that monogamy is good in theory, and good 
in practice also. And I also believe that numerous people would not have 
two wives. One is costly and troublesome enough. In fact, two wives would 
be a rarity. It is a rarity. I do not find two wives very common. It is extremely 
rare. It is only confined to very exceptional cases. Exigencies of political 
or economic conditions make it impossible for any one to marry two wives. 
But the point is whether we should try to introduce monogamy by legislation 
or by public opinion. There may be a tendency on the part of some men 
to marry two wives, not for the sake of caprice, but lor the sake of having 
a son. According to the Hindus, a son is needed to save the father from 
a certain Naraka, called puth. A person who saves you from Puth is called 
‘Puthra’, the son. Otherwise the man goes to a certain hell called puth. It 
is a religious necessity according to the Hindus to have a son and to have 
a son means that if the wife is barren, he tries to marry another. It has 
happened within my experience, and it may be within the experience of many 
others that a second marriage of the husband has been brought about 
because the first wife is barren. I have seen very happy families, where 
the senior wife without a child actually induced or compelled the husband 
to marry a second wife, and the senior wife considered herself absolutely 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


525 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 525 


happy with the family. A similar belief in at a son is desirable is also 
prevalent amongst the Indian Muslims in Bengal. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I want to put a question for my information and 
for the information of other honourable Members. I understand that a Hindu 
father must have a son for his own salvation. Does a Hindu mother also 
require a son for her salvation ? If she does, she should have the right of 
polyandry. 

Mr. Speaker : We may have a fund of information outside the House. 
In the House, let us continue ourselves to the Hindu Code. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I submit, therefore that polygamy is not as 
dangerous as it is supposed to be in point of view of abstract logic and 
abstract legislation. It has got to be considered in a particular context. If 
there is a desire on the part of a Hindu husband to have a child and for 
that purpose to marry again, and if he cannot do so for the existence of 
the first wife it may lead to divorce proceedings. The provision of monogamy 
and the prevention of a second wife during the lifetime of the first wife 
or during the existence of the marriage with the first wife may lead to 
divorces. We must not think it to be fanciful. In fact this has happened 
even in European countries in our history. Napoleon Bonaparte married a 
loving wife, Josephine. He had no children and Napoleon wanted a heir to 
the throne of the vast empire which he created by his own genius and what 
did he do ? He divorced the first wife, although his love for her was intense, 
but the desire for a son and the perpetuation of the family got the better 
of him and he married a Princess and he thought by that princely alliance 
with the Princess of Austria he would consolidate his power for ever and 
he would be happy with both. This is a historical example. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What happened to Napoleon ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : He died in St. Helena — an unhappy man. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If he had not desired the 
founding of an empire, he would have lived otherwise. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, This is an example from history. 
If a Hindu is prevented from marrying for the purpose of a son, if 
he thinks that a son is necessary, and if he believes his wife would 
not give him the son, then he would think of some evasion. He will 
in many cases enter into a morganatic marriage. Can you prevent a 
man from entering into a morganatic marriage or to commit a technical 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


526 


526 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


crime in the full religious belief that what he is doing is just and 
proper according to his own conscience ? This would be interfering 
with sentiments of a people deeply immersed in religious thoughts and 
religious beliefs. In these exceptional cases therefore the matter should 
not be dealt with by legislation, but rather on public opinion. Polygamy 
is dwindling from within and the process must not be artifically 
hastened in order to create evasions. Absolute prohibition of polygamy 
is a defect and a practical difficulty in the way of the Bill. If a man 
requires a second wife, what prevents him from crossing over to 
Pakistan ? ( Shri Mahavir Tyagi: What about a second husband ?) The 
second husband is also prevalent in some places. Mr. Tyagi is well 

aware of this. Polygamy would be prohibited in India and you will 
refuse to recognise it, but the man must have a son and what prevents 
him from bringing the married wife — the second wife married in 
Pakistan — to his house and it may be that the first wife may be 
consenting. Would you then pass a law which is against deep-rooted 
sentiments and beliefs of the Hindus. There are serious matters to 
be considered. This is hardly a subject for drastic legislation going 
against the very principles, the fundamental ideas of the Hindus. The 
matter should be very carefully considered before we should indulge 

in a drastic law of this kind and then there is the provision of a 
penalty, legal punishment in case of a second marriage. I submit that 

we should not pass a law which would not be popular with our masses, 

which would inevitably lead to violations and evasions. We know the 
fate of the Sarda Act. The first effect of the Sarda Act was that many 
millions of infantile marriages were performed before the law would 
come into force. The first effect was to bring about the very mischief 
which it was the purpose of the law to prevent and then what is 
the story today. Supposing a man has a marriageable daughter, not 
up to the age standardized by the Sarda Act and suppose a suitable 
bridegroom is available, can you morally blame the father or the 

guardian if he contracts the marriage for the minor daughter ? Would 
it be merely indefensible simply because it may offend against the 

theoretic legal sense or the political sense of the man ? Current practices 
should not be made impossible all at once by law. Old practices are 
in consonance with the faiths and inclinations of the people. The sarda 
Act has largely failed and public opinion is so strong in this respect 
that there is hardly any prosecution against the alleged violation of 

the Sarda Act today. In fact legislation had been imposed by way of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


527 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 527 


amendment and there are some difficulties in the way of a complainant. 
The first difficulty is that he must deposit the costs, which will be forfeited 
in case he loses his case and other additional difficulties are put in the 
way. What has happened ? Infantile marriages are still prevalent. Nobody 
supports infantile marriages, but it could not be stopped by criminal 
prosecutions or by force, unless it is supported and backed by popular 
sentiment. Amongst the upper educated classes infantile marriage is 
practically out of the question, but just look at the poor people. If unmarried 
girls of the poorer classes, not coming up to the marriageable age are to 
be left unmarried without the care and protection of a husband, it would 
not be a very safe thing to allow and it may be that many abuses and 
difficulties will arise if such girls are left without the protection of a husband. 
The result would be that if she is forced to wait till she attains the statutory 
age, a husband would not be readily available and she cannot be married 
readily, and this will lead to all sorts of abuses. I submit, Sir, that 
remembering the fate of the Sarda Act, we should also consider the idea 
of compulsory monogamy under all circumstances in all its rigour and 
without any reasonable exceptions. I think, Sir, the matter is one of serious 
practical consideration and not a matter of theories and slogans. I now come 
to the question of divorce. Divorce is not a panacea for all family unhappiness. 
There is hardly a man who does not have misunderstandings with his wife 
and there is hardly a family which does not suffer on this score. Life would 
be unbearable if the relation between husband and wife was all happiness. 
Such happiness would be no happiness. Unless happiness is punctuated by 
moments of unhappiness and quarrel, it will be no happiness. In fact it is 
these misunderstandings which are followed by re-union — virah and milan 
in our society — that conduces to happiness. So, misunderstandings are some 
times necessary. I am addressing these remarks to all experienced men. Only 
lunatic would be happy all his life. If he is intelligent and has a personality 
there will be differences of opinion, but in the long run, the wife will prevail. 
Therefore if you leave the couple to live together for a time, misunderstand- 
ings will be blown away as the autumn clouds. I submit therefore that we 
should not hastily provide for divorce. 

Now, the analogy of the Muslim custom is brought in. “A Muslim 
can divorce his wife, so, why should not the Hindu have the same 
right ? A Christian can divorce his wife; why should not the Hindu 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


528 


528 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


do so to ?” I may point out that the three systems are entirely different 
and differ radically in these matters. A Muslim is not free to divorce his 
wife for practical reasons. He has unrestricted right to divorce, but he has 
to find the necessary dower money which is usually far beyond his means, 
because even if it is worth only Rs. 10,000 his dower would be something 
like Rs. 50,000 or a lakh. It is expressly provided in the Muslim Marriage 
Law that dower is a check on the Muslim husband’s unrestricted right of 
divorce. So there is a very effective practical check on every Muslim husband, 
however, dissatisfied he may be with his wife, against divorcing his wife. 
In fact this is considered to be a sufficiently deterrent condition to prevent 
many bold husbands from attempting a divorce. If a Hindu husband is 
dissatisfied with his ‘wife, we should allow some time for the dissatisfaction 
to blow away. If you widen the door and make divorce easy, the result will 
be the parties will rush to Court and benefit the very lawyers who are 
anathema to a section of the House. Those who have experience of divorce 
proceedings in Court know what sordid details are narrated there. They are 
such as should not be heard by any decent man. Adultery is to be proved 
to the letter otherwise divorce will not be allowed. The unhappiness is so 
complete in divorced families that divorce is not a panacea for family 
unhappiness. If the Hindu wife or husband is given the right to rush to 
court, the effect will be that temporary misunderstandings which may be 
healed by lapse of time will result in lifelong unhappiness. In attempting 
to remedy existing problems you will only create many new problems. 

[At this stage Mr. Speaker vacated the Chair, which was then occupied 
by Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar).] 

If resort to Court is provided what will happen is that, the male 
will take advantage of this provision more than the female. It is sheer 
nonsense to suggest that an aggrieved woman would get relief in divorce 
proceedings, as it is very likely that she will be the victim herself. 
The husband will more often go to Court alleging this and that wrong 
mentioned in the Bill and get an ex-parte divorce. Those who know 
our society can imagine what possibility is there for a woman to go 
to Court and disprove the allegations made against her. Who will defend 
the case of a woman whom the husband wishes want only to discard? 
It is the man who will more often rush to Court. Then again, the 
tendency to rush to Court will be accentuated if the wife is barren 
and there is a desire to have a son by another marriage. Now, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


529 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 529 


supposing a man gets divorce against his wife, what will happen to the 
woman ? Where would she go ? After being divorced, she would be without 
a husband, and without moral and physical means of livelihood ? Who would 
befriend that woman ? The sponsors of the Bill ? I do not think they will 
come forward. Would she go to her brother ? No. Has she not antagonised 
the brother by taking a share of the family property for the benefit of the 
husband who has discarded her? The result will be that her father’s relations 
will be entirely apathetic to her sorrows. Then how will she maintain herself? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : She will marry Naziruddin 
Ahmad. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not think, Sir, that any divorced woman, 
with any sense of taste in her, would select me. I think the honourable 
Minister would be a better selection. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : God forbid that any such thing should happen. 
Let us not make personal references. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It was not meant to be heard seriously by 
the Chair. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But I am serious. The honourable Member invited 
that remark by the Honourable Minister when he asked : ‘Where is that 
woman to go’ ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As he was expressing so much 
commiseration, I suggested that for the benefit of his own mind. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I did not resent it. I fully enjoyed the joke. 
But jokes apart, I ask seriously and again, where she is to go ? Take the 
case of a divorced European woman. She has resources. She is educated. 
She can get a job. She can be a shorthand-typist. She can get a job in one 
of our Embassies and can get a free lift in a plane and a pay as well as 
allowances. Such women are absolutely free. They can make friends with 
strangers. They are trained and accustomed to rely on themselves. 

So a civilised European woman can stand on her own legs and 
her position is different from that of our women, not the advanced 
fashionable ones but poor unfriended woman discarded by the husband 
and fathers’ relations. It is not easy, as the Law Minister jocosely said, 
for a divorced woman to get a husband; even if she is willing a suitable 
husband is not to be readily available. So her position would be extremely 
difficult and such women would be the worst victims of the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


530 


530 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


system of divorce. Then allegations in Court would be too serious to be 
thought of. Proceedings in Court in such cases are sordid in the extreme 
and it would be impossible for us, in the present state of our society, to 
allow the husband and wife to rush to Court. 

Then there is another aspect. There are among tribal and other people 
a kind of customary divorce which involves very simple formalities. They 
get divorced very cheaply and expeditiously but if they are forced to go to 
Court it will mean that they could not do it for financial and other reasons 
and divorce, which they can get easily according to their own custom, will 
be forbidden to them. You want to complicate matters when you want to 
achieve uniformity. The law may be the theoretically uniform but it will 
work hard against the poorer people. In the name of easy divorce people 
will rush to Court when time would have effected a reconciliation; domestic 
happiness will be shattered and the parties and society will then repent 
for ever. To impose this artificial law upon the simple ways of living of these 
poor people would be very hard; it will make things costly; every decree 
would have to be supported by a decision of the High Court and it would 
be a costly affair. Instead of all this I submit the parties should be left to 
themselves. To introduce divorce in this way, making the same for all classes 
of people in different stages of civilisation and training would be highly 
mischievous. It is customary for people here to quote Sanskrit slokas to 
support or strengthen their arguments. I will also attempt one. 

“Aja juddhe, krishin sradhlie, prabhate megharambarah, 

Dampati kalahaschaiba, babharambhe laghukriah.” 

When two goats fight, they stand on their hind legs and a severe impact 
of the horns seems imminent, but the actual clash is very slight; when a 
million rishis meet for a sradh with great ceremony, only a minute quantity 
of food suffices the thunder clap of the morning cloud looks menacing, but 
it ends in no heavy rain; and marital quarrels, though seriously and 
menacingly begun, end in nothing serious. 

In Domestic quarrels natural and social forces should be allowed to work 
to bring about reconciliation. 

Instead of divorce you should give them time. The question of 
divorce is not all one way traffic. It has got to be considered from 
every point of view. The Honourable the Law Minister advanced a very 
novel argument that as 90 per cent of the people are sudras and 
these 90 per cent, of the people practise divorce, it is just meet and 
proper that the law of the majority should be made also applicable 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


531 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 531 


to the remaining 10 per cent. This is not legal logic. It is not acceptable. 
The Muslims are microscopic minority in India. Should that be a reason 
for converting all the Muslims into Hindus or imposing upon them the laws 
of the Hindus and to cremate their dead bodies, for example, according to 
the Hindu custom ? Or take the other example. The Hindus are in a minority 
in Pakistan. Would the Hindus call it justice if the Muslim law is forced 
upon them — if according to the customs of the majority the Hindus are made 
to bury their dead ? Therefore, the argument of the majority is nothing. 

With regard to the statement that 90 per cent of the people have their 
system of divorce, the Hindu of Madras, in an editorial, said that so far 
as Madras is concerned it is a “damn lie” or something of the sort and that 
it is entirely inapplicable to the Scheduled Classes or the Sudras in Madras. 

May I now speak from my experience in Bengal. There are many 
distinguished Members from Bengal, particularly Pandit Maitra. He will 
correct me if I am wrong. Is it the custom amongst the 90 per cent Sudras 
in Bangal to 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : That is sheer nonsense ! 

An Honourable Member : He is not a Sudra ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Maitra, a Sudra ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : We live amongst them. Is it customary among 
the majority of the Sudras to resort to divorce ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : In some cases. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Certainly. But that does not make it 
the rule of the 90 per cent Sudras. Some Assam Members whisper 

from behind that it is, I hope Assam grows tea and also divorce ! 

But Bengal produces tea without divorce. I submit Sir, that the 
argument of the majority is based on a mistaken notion. The facts 

are not true. It may be that in Bombay it is very prevalent and 

for that reason the Honourable the Law Minister might have been 

impressed with the applicability of the theory in other parts of India. 
Therefore, the assertion that 90 per cent of the people accept divorce 
is not based on facts, and even if it was true, that should not be 
made applicable to those who do not observe that system. That 

argument would fail and should not be used to support the result. 

A system of straight divorce or an uniform divorce, though a uniform 

procedure and rule would produce hardship in those cases where a 
simple form of divorce is prevalent by custom, and would 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14\V14-10 MK Chandan 21-10-13>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


532 


532 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


produce unhappiness and disruption in families where divorce is not 
prevalent. In these days of easy approach to the law Courts, it would be 
the wealthy classes that would seek the so-called advantages of this 
procedure rather than the poorer classes. Therefore, divorce, if it is to be 
provided, must be provided with the consent of the people. At any rate the 
second marriage may be permitted with the consent of the first wife under 
special circumstances. Polygamy is fast dying out and should not be stepped 
by legislation. This may lead to divorce proceedings, or a man may cross 
over to Pakistan or to Burma, or to Malaya or to other places and take 
a second wife and come back. So if society is not sufficiently advanced and 
educated and sufficiently alive to the need of monogamy and divorce, a 
provision of this nature would not be accepted by them and would lead to 
evasions in many cases. Court proceedings should not therefore be encour- 
aged. Again, if divorce proceedings are frequent, it will lead to considerable 
amount of unhappiness. 

Shri Khurshed Lai (Deputy Minister of Communications): May I know 
if divorce is so bad, then would the honourable Member support the abolition 
of divorce in Muslim law ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Although a Member of the Select Committee, 
the honourable Member was absent from the House when this matter was 
argued earlier. I think the honourable Member should concern himself more 
with further increase in the rate on postcards than intervening in the debate 
in a scrappy manner. This matter has already been very elaborately argued 
out in the absence of the honourable Member. 

Shri Khurshed Lai : Is ‘postcards’ relevant in this ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is better that we divorce ourselves from 
‘postcards’! 

Shri Ramnath Goenka (Madras : General): I think you should move 
for changing the Shariat Law ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let there be no personal remarks. One remark 
of such a nature always leads to another. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Removal of the Shariat Law would interfere 
with the existing law. The introduction of monogamy and divorce among 
the Hindus would be an interference with the existing law. Therein lies the 
difference between the two. In fact you must not readily interfere with 
accepted law and therefore the analogy of the Muslim law should not be 
applied. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


533 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 533 


Shri H. V. Kamath : Does he accept everything that exists or does 
he want a change in anything at all ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House is not concerned with changes other 
than in the Bill. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The question of change is an academic 
question. The question of changing the law has been as old as history. 
In fact there are temperaments who try to make changes simply because 
it is a change. They would effect a change on the mere ground that 
it is a change. There are others who will never agree to any change 
because any change is a innovation. This was discussed in a classical 
passage by Macaulay and he said that the best brains lie near the border 
line, between the two extremes. So a change in the law is not to 
be adopted merely for its own sake. Again, a strict adherence to the 
old law, irrespective of all considerations would be equally bad. The 
position is that you must march with the times and the overriding 
consideration would be that you must take the people with you. I am 
referring to moral right. Legal right we have. We have ample legal right 
to break any law we like and create any law we like. That legal right 
is assumed. I do not question it. But what moral right have you to effect 
a change 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : No. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: affecting large classes of people — 

30 crores — without their consent ? I am not here to oppose all changes. 
I am here to oppose any change which is not sanctioned by public opinion. 
What moral right have you to introduce drastic changes without their 
sanction ? 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: We have got their consent; we 
represent them. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: You then raise a very important constitu- 
tional question. This House was elected for the purpose of drafting the 
constitution 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am afraid so far as the constitutional issue 
is concerned there is already a ruling by the Chair. This is a sovereign 
body which can legislate on anything. If the honourable Member has 
other grounds he can go on. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: I do not dispute the authority of the 
House. We have the right to destroy the Hindu society or Muslim 
society and blend them into something new devoid of religion. That 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


534 


534 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


right is never for a moment in dispute. But the question is are the people 
behind this law ? 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Some other Honourable Members: Yes, yes. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: I believe they are not behind the law, they 
are against it. (An Honourable Member: ‘They are for it’) How do you 
know they are for it ? A matter of this gigantic magnitude should be 
placed before the electorate. That is the constitutional procedure. In fact 
the day before yesterday Mr. Osborne told us that he could not agree 
to add certain things unless the matters were specifically brought to the 
notice of the electorate and permission is given by them. In fact they 
cannot do any such thing. They consider themselves incapable of 
proceeding in a constitutional manner without the consent of the 
electorate. But we are so far advanced that we can afford to disregard 
the opinion of the electorate. In fact at one time it was argued that the 
dilatory method is meant to defeat the purpose. If there is any election 
the Hindu Code would not be passed. This session the argument has 
been entirely the reverse. They say that they have shown that the 
electorate is with us. It is with their sanction that we have brought this 
Bill. It is neither with their sanction nor with their consent that you 
have brought forward this legislation. 

How did this law start ? It was framed under the authority of a foreign 
government which was then desperately fighting for its own existence. 
English power was threatened with total extinction. It was a life and 
death struggle for the British. It was in these times that a Home member, 
Sir, Reginald Maxwell appointed the Rau Committee. So the thing was 
conceived under the pressure of a global war when the existance of 
England was at stake. When the Bill was prepared it was introduced 
by Mr. Jogendra Nath Mandal, the Minister of Law of the Interim 
Government. At that time the country was being ravaged by destructive 
struggles, enormous loss of life and disturbance to public peace on an 
unprecedented scale, when the then Minister knew the temporary 
character of the tenure of his office, when his thoughts were already 
focused on Pakistan and when he was no longer interested in the Bill, 
it was under those circumstances that the Bill was presented before the 
House. In fact Pakistan was more than a conception at that time it was 
already a reality. It was at that time the Bill was introduced in the 
Assembly 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I find that there are a number of people on 
the waiting list. The honourable Member has already taken one and a 
half days. When is he likely to conclude ? Has he any idea himself ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


535 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 535 


An Honourable Member: In this House nobody has any idea. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Even the Law Minister has no idea. In 
fact this remark arose out of interruption. I may take some-time. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : How long ? The House is anxious. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The House was entitled to know how long 
the Bill would be considered and there was no reply and therefore my 
position is more difficult. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the 
Clock. 


The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of the 
Clock, Mr. Speaker (The Honourable Mr. G. V. Mavalankar) in the 
Chair. 


Shri H. V. Kamath : Sir, there does not appear to be a quorum in 
the House. 

Mr. Speaker: I think there is a quorum. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, when we rose before Lunch I was 
dealing with the question as to whether it will be proper for this House 
to pass this legislation. With regard to the constitutional power of this 
House I have no doubt that we are constitutionally competent to pass 
a law of this nature. The question really is whether we have the moral 
right, or whether it would be morally proper for us to pass this law. 
The whole question would be whether this House has been authorised 
directly or indirectly by our constituencies to agree to this law. Some 
honourable Members say that the people are behind the Bill. My 
impression is that the people are not behind the Bill. The number of 
objections which are already on record is great. I believe that objections 
are pouring into the Legislative Assembly Department and they are so 
numerous that they could not be classified or docketed or dealt with in 
any systematic manner. They are pouring in on a gigantic scale. That 
shows the intensity of public feeling. The question is whether we in a 
democratic society, in a Legislature constituted on a democratic basis, 
should pass the law without ascertaining the opinion of the public. As 
I was submitting the Bill owes its conception to an alien Government 
which was, at the lime of its inception fighting for its own existence 
and was busy and otherwise occupied. The Bill was submitted to the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


536 


536 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


House by a Minister of Law who was Minister of the Interim Government 
at a time when that Minister was contemplating a departure to Pakistan 
and had no interest in the Bill at all. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : He is repeating what he said in the morning. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Now the present Bill was continued by 
the Honourable Minister, Dr. Ambedkar, when India was very much 
occupied with a large number of serious problems. It is evident, as it 
appears from the admission of the Minister of Law himself, that the 
present Bill was merely continued without any adequate thought. It was 
only when it was sent to a Select Committee that it occurred to the 
Minister of Law that the Bill had not been properly drafted, that it 
required amendments — whether substantial or not is a different matter, 
but it required amendments all through. So he himself set down to 
redraft the whole Bill. In fact the product of that Committee is a book 
called “The Hindu Code” which is almost exactly the same as the present 
revised Bill, and it purports to be “a Bill to amend and codify certain 
branches of the Hindu law” by “Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Minister of Law”. 
So what was a Bill submitted by Mr. Jogendra Nath Mandal was 
informally transformed into a Bill by Dr. Ambedkar. The point I was 
driving at is this that the Bill not at any time received any consideration 
or any adequate consideration before the Government first tried to 
sponsor it. In fact as soon as it was apparent that the Bill was not 
properly drafted, that it required to be re-written wholesale and that 
it required to be changed in a large number of particulars, that was 
the moment to withdraw the Bill. But without withdrawing it the 
Minister of Law made numerous changes and presented a new Bill. This 
shows that the Bill was never considered in detail. If it is a fact that 
even the Government had to change its mind to make serious alterations 
in the body of the Bill it shows that the Government with its enormous 
resources were unable to accept it — much less has the country accepted 
it. 

Now, Sir, the present Constituent Assembly was elected for a specific 
purpose. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : I am afraid the honourable Member is 
repeating the same thing. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not know whether he said this. 

Shri L. Krishnaswamy Bharathi : He said it in the morning. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I had hardly begun it. This House was 
not elected for the purpose of passing this legislation. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


537 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 537 


Mr. Tajamul Husain : Sir, he said exactly this. It was in your 
absence. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Let me develop my point. The question 
is whether we had been authorised in this direction. In fact the authority 
of this House is based upon an indirect election; there was no direct 
election. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : He said the same thing earlier and the Deputy 
Speaker gave a ruling also on the point. 

Mr. Speaker : I leave it to the honourable Member, if he has said 
it because I do not know. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir. I want to elaborate it. 

Mr. Speaker: Then, of course, no elaboration is necessary. He may 
go to the next point. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : We rose at that time for Lunch. 

Mr. Speaker : The point seems to be very clear and it does not require 
any elaboration that this House was not elected by direct election, that 
the election has been indirect, that it was elected for a specific purpose, 
namely of making a Constitution, and therefore it should not go into 
this kind of legislation at this stage — that is the point. It hardly requires 
any elaboration. If it is the idea of the honourable Member to carry on 
for a long time. I shall be unable to support him. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The point is that as soon as I began I 
was contradicted by Mr. Krishnaswamy Bharati. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharati : On a point of personal explanation, 
Sir, I never opened my mouth at that time. 

Mr. Speaker : Whether a particular Member asserts or denies a 
particular thing, it has no effect so far as the real fact goes. If he has 
authority he has, if he has not. Mere assertion by one Member in one 
way or the other really does not make any difference. He may just state 
his point without going into detail. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The question is that it is not so obvious. 

Mr. Speaker : It is obvious. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : No, Sir, To Mr. Bharati it is not obvious. 

Mr. Speaker : The honourable Member need not care to convince one 
Member who refuse to be convinced, He is addressing the whole House. 
He should know the House consists of Members, who have some level 
of understanding. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


538 


538 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It is not the understanding that I deny, 
it is the mind being locked up — that is the difficulty. Some people are 
unwilling to be convinced. 

Mr. Speaker : They cannot be convinced. Let us not take our time 
to convince them. The honourable Member may take his next point. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : You would be pleased, therefore, to 
consider that we have no moral authority to pass the law. In fact, 
the Government framed a Bill and then sent it out for circulation. 
I refer to appendix II at page 41 of the second Hindu Law Committee 
Report. “The Bill as framed by the Rau Committee was sent for 
circulation and the Bill was sent to large number of public bodies 
and individuals of weight and authority and their opinion was 
sought”. It is made absolutely clear in the notification dated 5th 
August 1944 that the Hindu Law Committee intend to revise the draft 
in the light of public opinion as elicited by them in writing and orally. 
This is very important and should supply a key to unravelling the 
present matter. The Bill was submitted for public opinion and it was 
clearly stated therein that the Bill would be revised in accordance 
with public opinion. What was the public opinion. The public opinion 
at one stage of the matter is contained in the “Written Statement 
submitted to the Hindu Law Committee, volumes I and II”. I believed 
this opinion has never been adequately considered by the Members 
of the House or it was never considered by many Members of the 
House. When these opinions were received they were analysed and 
then oral evidence was also invited and a large number of witnesses 
were examined. That is to be found in the “oral evidence tendered 
to the Hindu Law Committee dated 1945”. These volumes, if analysed 
and carefully read, would show that public opinion which was 
consulted was very preponderatingly against the Hindu Code. There- 
fore, it follows that the Hindu Law Committee proceeded to adhere 
to there own views and revised the Bill here and there not in 
accordance with public opinion, but in spite of it. The effect of this 
evidence has been carefully analysed in the dissentient note by 
D. N. Mitter, the ex-Judge of the Calcutta High Court who was also 
a Member. In fact, he had written an elaborate minute of dissent. 
I do not wish to go over this matter, but he has analysed this opinion 
under different headings, namely whether we should have codification 
or not, whether the marriage law should be changed, whether 
there should be divorce and so forth. He has analysed the opinions 
and the evidence, for and against under each head, and I submit 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


539 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 539 


his report deserves careful consideration at the hands of the House. The 
opinions are again classified according to Provinces as according to 
subjects. With regard to the effect of the evidence, according to Dr. D. 
N. Mitter the opinion on each point is preponderatingly against the Bill 
for codification, for divorce proceedings and for other matters. The 
opinion of the public was directly against the codification. These opinions 
and evidence are preponderatingly against the principles of the Bill. The 
Hindu Law Committee Report is only a majority report. It was definitely 
opposed by Dr. D. N. Mitter but the other Members thought it fit to 
stick to their original Bill amended in slight respects here and there, 
not according to public opinion, but according to their own ideas. I 
therefore submit that the Bill has been framed in direct defiance of public 
opinion. That is the basis upon which my argument stands. Though 
Mr. Krishnaswami Bharathi said that the public opinion is behind the 
Bill, I venture to submit that public opinion is against it. 

An Honourable Member : Question. 

Mr. Tajamul Husain : No, not at all. It is for the Bill. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: So far as the written opinion is concerned, 
it is definitely against the Bill. 

I submit, therefore, that public opinion has not been properly consulted 
as a democratic Government ought to do. In fact, this Bill is a negation 
of democracy and it is conceived under circumstances which no longer 
prevail today. A full-fledged democracy is now in operation and public 
opinion should be taken into account and followed in giving effect 
to legislative proposals. I submit therefore, that so far as written 
opinion goes it is against the Bill, but what about the unwritten opinion ? 
We have a large number of protests lodged in your own office and we 
hear of proceedings of large number of meetings. In fact, we had meetings 
in the very heart of this city. The meetings were largely attended and 
many honourable Members and also the Honourable Minister for Law 
were invited. Some Members attended but the Minister for Law did not. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : He did not have the courage to attend. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : He did not think it necessary to attend, 
because it seems to me that public opinion is not the criterion or his 
guide so far as this Bill is concerned. In fact, Dr. D. N. Mitter gave 
a clear analysis of the opinion. The Honourable Minister for Law said 
that he would quote an earlier of Dr. D. N. Mitter to contradict him. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


540 


540 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What did the honourable 
Member say, I did not follow ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That he would quote an earlier writing 
of Dr. D. N. Mitter to contradict his present report. We have his earlier 
writing as well as his later writing and I have considered both. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : His later writing I have 
not seen. What is it ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Later writing is in the report. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That you call later writing. 
I thought it was something after this. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The question is what was his earlier writing 
and what was his present writing and is there any change and if so 
what. He had long ago written a pamphlet. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A pamphlet ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : A book. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I thought you said pamphlet 
just now. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Give in any name you like. I do not quarrel 
with the name. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : How big is that book ? Have 
you any idea ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : You will have it in the Library. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You call it a pamphlet. How 
big is that pamphlet ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : If I am to be cross-examined, I should be 
put in the witness box and I will then answer. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I should like to know that 
my friend has ascertained the facts before he refers to them. If it is 
a pamphlet I should be very much surprised. The book is a book of 700 
pages, somewhere about that. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The most important thing is not the size, 
but the view expressed therein. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, what was the view? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : The view expressed therein was that the 
rights of Hindu women should be better safeguarded and given better 
rights. I cannot repeat everything to the honourable Minister because 
I do not like to trouble the House and I do not like to speak louder 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


541 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 541 


than what, I am doing. In the present opinion he has opposed the 
Bill and the Honourable Minister evidently had his earlier writing 
in view and that is taken advantage of by the majority Members. I 
submit that the reason for the change of opinion has been given by 
Dr. D. N. Mitter himself. If change of opinion is a crime, blind 
adherence to an opinion, although it is proved to be wrong, is a worse 
crime than change of opinion based on reason. Dr. Mitter clearly 
expressed an opinion in favour of giving more rights to women. I have 
read the passage in Appendix II that the Government gave an 
undertaking to the people that the Bill will be re-shaped in accor- 
dance with public opinion. That was the thing that trouble Dr. Mitter. 
In fact, he found that his individual opinion was far ahead of public 
opinion in India which was definitely against it. So he has referred 
to this passage in the notification declaring the intention of Govern- 
ment to change the law in accordance with public opinion. Dr. Mitter 
was faced with a volume of opinion against the Bill and he changed 
his opinion. This is a legislation which affected the whole country 
and it was this reason which induced him to go against the Bill, 
because this is the public opinion. There is no illogicality in giving 
up one’s personal opinion in deference to public opinion. I believe 
the Honourable Minister and other Ministers too have their personal 
opinions, but they have to subordinate them for the collective good. 
We have often heard Ministers speaking against their personal 
conviction. This is neither improper nor wrong. It is perfectly natural. 
Here Dr. D. N. Mitter had accepted a position of great 
public responsibility with the express object of ascertaining public 
opinion and changing and re-shaping the Bill in accordance therewith. 
I ask : is there anything improper if Dr. D. N. Mitter changed his 
opinion ? He accepted a job, and what was it ? To ascertain public 
opinion, and public opinion was against the Bill. He himself was 
present when the evidence was taken and there is one passage in 
the report on oral evidence which is very significant which has been 
specifically referred to. When the Committee was in Lahore and was 
sitting... 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They were greeted with black 
flags ? 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : No black flags ; something more. A large 
number of ladies, thousands — I do not remember the exact number — I 
do not wish to trouble the House with the exact number. 

Mr. Speaker : What year was it in ? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


542 


542 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : It was in 1945 in connection with this 
enquiry. They went to Lahore and a large number of ladies came and 
absolutely blocked the progress of evidence. They said, “We do not want 
it. It is not to our benefit. It is against our idea.” 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Hear, hear. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : In fact, the situation was so grave, that 
this gentleman when he was faced with the sad spectacle of thousands 
of ladies opposing the Bill, he could not proceed and it was difficult to 
repress them and their sentiment and so further evidence was absolutely 
stopped. This is what he has referred to. If he is guilty of inconsistency, 
he is certainly to be credited with some amount of honesty. 

Bahu Ramnarayan Singh : Hear, hear. 

Mr. Nazruddin Ahmad : Does consistency lie in sticking to one’s 
opinion although it is proved wrong ? This is inconsistency. This is 
doggedness. This is neither good nor fair. This gentleman when found 
that not only male opinion but female opinion was absolutely against 
him, he said he was also against it. Would it be fair or proper on 
anybody’s part to quote that stray personal opinion of his ? If so, 
one could quote writings and speeches of the honourable Minister 
himself against him. This would not be fair. Every writing and speech 
has to be taken in the context. It may often happen that we have 
to act in public capacity and therefore, for that purpose, we have to 
sink our personal opinion. So Dr. Mitter acted patriotically and 
courageously in giving up his personal opinion in deference to the 
opinion of the public. In this Dr. Mitter performed a patriotic and 
obvious duty, and no blame should be attached to it. On the other 
hand, the other respected Members, what did they do ? I do not wish 
to be hard upon them, but they all of them, though they promised 
that the Bill would be considered in the light of public opinion, they 

3PM stuck t° their own opinion, and actually taunted Dr. Mitter 
for having changed his opinion. Is it to be, Sir, that we should 
never change our opinions ? If that be so, then mankind would cease 
to be rational. We have got to change our opinions. 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. May I tell the honourable Member 
that on each point he need not necessarily go into the general principles 
and all the details. He may just invite attention to the point and 
then go to the next point; because if he carries on like this — he has now 
gone on for nearly two days — there will be no end to this discussion. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


543 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 543 


And I do not propose to allow him to go on in this manner. He must 
bring his remarks to a close within a reasonable time, and I think another 
fifteen minutes would be quite reasonable. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I bow down to your decision. I hops, Sir, 
that these fifteen minutes will be entirely mine. 

Mr. Speaker: Yes, he may finish by 3-15. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : Next I want to emphasise the fact that 
we are a democratic body. We are working as a democratic body. 
We cannot say that democracy is unfit for our society. It is democracy 
that has brought us into being. That democracy was sufficient to wrest 
power from the British Government. That democracy is sufficient to 
empower us to frame our Constitution. And I say that democracy would 
be intelligent and competent enough to understand its own interests in 
the matter of the Hindu Law. Therefore there should be no shirking, 
no by-passing, no flouting of public opinion. Where is the harm in 
ascertaining public opinion ? In fact, the Bill, I submit, has been 
mutilated. It has been interpolated upon. I do not mean to say 
there has been dishonest interpolations, but honest interpolations, but 
they are not the less interpolations. There have been interpolations 
in the Bible — honest interpolations. There are great authorities pointing 
out that fact. So, I say, there are interpolations in the Bill. The 
Bill, however, was presented to the Select Committee with the guarantee 
that there was no serious change, and that some changes made had 
been noted by the Members. Yet, is it possible, or practicable, Sir, for 
any one unaided to note all the changes ? In fact, all these changes, 
it is impossible to take note of. And therefore, the Select Committee 
was told, and they were asked to take it, that the Departmental 
Bill was merely a reproduction of the original Bill, and that no 
substantial changes had been made, and therefore, they failed to note 
and consider the changes. That is not their fault. In these circumstances, 
the Select Committee, although they tried their best, unconsciously, I 
submit, they must have omitted to note many important changes, on 
account of the guarantee. And then, Sir, if that is so, if there are so 
many changes, and when these changes are substantial, then the 
guarantee given by the majority of the Select Committee that the Bill 
was not so changed as to require re-publication is only the usual 
guarantee. They said that the Bill had not been so altered as to require, 
under Standing Order 41(5), any re-publication and that the Bill be 
passed as amended by the Select Committee. This is only the usual stock 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


544 


544 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


certificate. I ask in all seriousness, is it contented, in the light of the 
disclosures of changes made that the Bill has not been substantially 
altered ? On the original Bill we have not got public opinion, and what 
public opinion we procured, was against it. We have, therefore, got to 
ascertain public opinion. And then, the Bill was sent to the various 
Provincial Governments for opinion. The opinions of the various Gov- 
ernments have not even been referred to in the House. They are collected 
and circulated to the Members. I shall, however, confine myself to the 
opinion of the Government of Bengal. I assert without fear of contra- 
diction that in Bengal the opposition is the greatest. You propose to 
abolish the Mitakshra system of inheritance and do honour to Bengal 
by accepting their theory of family life. In Bengal you have the greatest 
objection. 

An Honourable Member: Objection is from everywhere. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Of course, from everywhere there is 
objection, but the greatest objection is from Bengal. It is the most 
persistent, and so very authoritative. The whole of Bengal, including 
some educated and cultured ladies think that the Bill is not wanted there. 
In fact, many ladies like the wife of the late Sir Asutosh Mookerjee, 
the mother of Dr. Mookerjee, here, lady Ranu Mookerjee, wife of Mr. 
B.N. Mookerjee, and a host of other ladies have opposed this move. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das : Who are the other ladies please ? Please 
name them also. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I have to respect the request of the Chair 
to finish soon. I cannot give my honourable friend preference over the 
request of the Chair. Sir, the names are there in the report. My 
honourable friend’s request to name them shows that he has not read 
the report. It is a pity that this volume of opinion has not been read. 
It is a pity that the Department has not supplied the report to all. It 
is a pity that private Members have to undergo all the labour and expense 
to collect the information and to supply the House with the information. 
But the names are on record, and it is useless for any member to ask 
questions about facts which are on the record. It is pity that I have got 
to refer to this matter. 

Well, Sir, I was submitting that there is lot of opposition in Bengal. 
There are five High Court judges of the Calcutta High Court — and 
one of them now adorns the Federal Court and they are against it. 
Their opinion is to be found in the Report also, and it is referred 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


545 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 545 


to in Dr. Mitter’s report. Then there are ex-Judges of the Calcutta High 
Court. One of them is Mr. N. C. Chatterjee, and he is now a Judge of 
the High Court, and he was against it. The Hindu Mahasabha was then 
under the Presidentship of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mookerjee and it opposed 
the Bill, evidently, with the consent of the President, Dr. Mookerjee on 
a major matter like this. And then there is Dr. R. B. Paul, a distinguished 
jurist of continental fame, and he has opposed it. Their opinions are 
before us. In fact, in the face of all this opinion in Bengal, I am surprised 
that a Member from Bengal should have asked for names. 

I submit, therefore, Sir, that the Bill should go out to the public for 
eliciting public opinion. If Hindu opinion is against it, why should you 
thrust upon it a law which is not wanted by them ? 

An Honourable Member: It is dictatorship. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Yes, it is sheer dictatorship. There is the 
fear that if it is sent to the public before the elections, possibly it will 
lead to complications. But do you know what complications will come 
up if you pass it before the elections ? The illiterate people will get 
furious. This Bill will dislocate their lives. It is not easy for them to 
change their lives all at once under the dictator’s command. Even in 
Russia, Lenin did not go so quickly or remorselessly as we seem to be 
going here, in utter disregard of public opinion. There is in Russia a 
desire and a pretence to respect public opinion. But here there is no 
such things. It is sheer dictatorship born of fear that if the Bill goes 
to the public it will be rejected. I find it is asserted that the public are 
in favour of it. If so, why not be public arm you with the authority to 
pass the law ? Sir, it is injurious to the Hindus in general; it is injurious 
to the ladies in the larger interests and it is injurious to the public at 
large, and it is no use forcing your opinion upon an unwilling public. 
Had it not been a matter of personal interest any one is entitled to 
enforce his opinion, but having come here as the Minister of Law in a 
democratic Government and basing their authority on public opinion, is 
it fair and proper for them to flout that public opinion and to bypass 
it, to circumvent it or avoid it ? It is a devious method, a circuitous 
course which is not warranted by any system of democratic Government. 
Why should you not go to the people if the law is favoured by them ? Are 
the people so backward in their ideas that they will not be able to determine 
what is good or bad for them ? The question is not what is good in the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


546 


546 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


abstract, but what is good in the circumstances, and that depends on 
local conditions. There are certain practices which are considered to be 
good and there are others which are not and you make every body 
uniform; you are trying to make all the people uniform. The Honourable 
Minister for Law should try to make everybody as intelligent and as 
forceful as he is. Why should you stop at inequality; inequality is not 
bad. It is nature that there should be inequality in diversity. India is 
a big continental countries and it has developed according to its own 
genius and each province has a distinct culture of its own and why should 
you by one stroke of the pen remove all this and make the law the same? 
In fact, the great Hindu law-givers, they were extremely... 

The Honourable Dr, B, R. Ambedkar : This is only a peroration 
and not an argument. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: They had tolerance and they did not enforce 
their law by force. A study of Manu Smriti will show that he never 
enforced his law. He said that the law should be enforced subject to the 
custom of the locality. That will be found by any one who has read it 
and therefore, the Hindu law givers did not like the law should be 
uniform. Their method of propagation of their law and their civilization 
was not by force, but rather by persuasion and they allowed free scope — 
I speak with authority, having read the whole thing; they allowed their 
law to spread on their own merit, not by their force. Local custom plays 
not only an important part now, but played an important part in the 
time of Manu and that is the reason why law is different today. It is 
an organic method according to local circumstances that leads to this 
difference of opinion. In fact differences are not bad. It is not a small 
country; it is a big country with all the attributes of a continent and 
this diversity as a matter of fact should not be done away with without 
adequate and careful thought. 

Sir, Mr. Kamath compared the present Bill to a new Smriti, 
Dr. Ambedkar’s 138th Smriti. I think this is not a Smriti at all, the 
Smriti proceeds from the srutis. There is a pretence to agree with 
the principles of these srutis. This is a Bill which is not a smriti but 
a new Veda, ( Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : ‘It is vismriti !’)■ It is 
Vismriti i.e., forgetfulness of the past. All sacred laws and customs, 
rules, laws, decisions, principles of the Privy Council are brushed aside 
by one stroke of the pen by Dr. Ambedkar himself in defiance of 
the report of the Rau Committee. Everthing is gone. It is Vismriti 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


547 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 547 


as Pandit Maitra with good humour suggests. It is vismriti — absolute 
forgetfulness. It is a new Veda. There are four Vedas, the Sama Veda, 
Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda. I think the new Veda should 
be called Dr. Amba Veda and this is the fifth veda in utter defiance 
and disregard of all the four Vedas which it supersedes. Sir, I thank 
you. 

* Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Mr. Speaker, Sir, we have 
been discussing the Hindu Code Bill from yesterday. We had discussed 
it in February also. Before I proceed to discuss the merits of this measure, 
which is admittedly of a highly controversial nature, which aims at the 
utter demolition of the structure of Hindu society. I would like to put 
on record my emphatic protest against the way in which the Government 
is pursuing this measure of vital importance, a matter of life and death 
to the Hindu Society. It is well known that this Bill was rushed through 
in the legislature almost on the last day, that is on the 9th of April 
1948, when it was not discussed even to the extent that a very ordinary 
measure is usually discussed in this House. Further, in this session, we 
find that instead of giving consistent consideration to this matter the 
Government on the plea of want of time due to the Budget session, wishes 
to rush this Bill through this House. I would ask respectfully, though 
humbly, is it fair to the House that a measure of this vital importance, 
an equal of which, I submit, has never been on the anvil of this 
legislature since its inception should be rushed through in this manner? 
However, it is for the Government to decide and I feel it my duty to 
sound a note of warning to the Government that it should pause and 
consider as to what is the haste and hurry about this matter, and why 
in preference to a number of very important and emergent measures, 
this Bill is being rushed through. I would ask what will happen to the 
Hindu society if the Hindu society could survive the onslaught of 
centuries of foreign aggression and foreign rule ? Will it die out of 
existence if this measure is not brought on the statute book ? I submit, 
Sir, this unusual haste and hurry is due to the fact which was hinted 
by my learned friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, that my honourable friend, 
the Law Minister is now sure that the public opinion of Hindus is behind 
the measure. I take courage even to submit, Sir, that the weight of public 
opinion is against the measure. What is the criterion to judge whether 
the public opinion is in favour of this measure or against it ? The 
only criterion that can possibly be applied to is: What is the weight of 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. Ill, Part II, 2nd April 1949, pp. 2276-89. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


548 


548 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


opinion that has been on record ? I should submit in all himility that 
the weight of opinion that was sounded by the Rau Committee was 
predominently against every section of this measure. Consequently, Sir, 
without any fresh sounding of public opinion, it would be presumptuous 
on the part of any person, including the Law Minister, to claim that 
this measure has the support of public opinion in the country. 

The question arises where is the necessity and what is the utility 
of the codification of Hindu law ? Who demands the codification of 
Hindu law ? We know, codification is essential only in two conditions. 
If on a particular point there is a serious conflict of judicial opinion, 
it becomes essential for the legislature to intervene and clarify the 
ambiguity. This is one condition. The other condition is that public 
opinion wants to have a change in the law. These are the only two 
conditions which could justify the attempt at codification of Hindu 
law. In this particular case, I would submit that neither of the 
conditions exist. So far as the main principles of the Hindu law are 
concerned., I venture to submit that they are well understood and 
well settled. In many text-books of Hindu law the principles of it as 
deducible from Smritis and nibandhas as orally interpreted and 
construed by the judicial courts in India, have been published. It will 
be quite obvious that on every intricate point of Hindu law there have 
been clear interpretations. It has been pointed out by the Law 
Minister, in his speech while moving for the consideration of this 
Bill, that Hindu society or the joint families as was originally 
conceived in Hindu law, have by judicial opinions been shorn 
of their characteristics. But does this afford any justification for this 
Code ? The judicial opinion of the Privy Council and of the High 
Courts have by now laid down the principles which are not open to 
any doubt at this stage. Whether it may be the powers of the karta 
or manager of a joint Hindu family when he happens to be a non- 
father, whether it may be the powers and functions of a manager 
of a joint Hindu family as father, his rights and powers stand well 
defined in Hindu law. The disputed doctrine of the pious obligation 
which for some time was the subject matter of serious conflict of 
opinion between the different High Courts and the Privy Council has 
also been settled. And we know what are the duties of the son and 
we know the extent of his liability for the debts of his father. 
Similarly in the spheres of marriage, etc. the Hindu law is 
quite definite. The question then arises, is there any opinion 
and overwhelming public opinion in the country which requires the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


549 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 549 


Government to codify the Hindu law ? My respectful submission is that 
there exists none and there is no justification for this attempt at 
codification of Hindu law. 

So far as the history of codification goes, this is not the first time 
that an attempt has been made. I would respectfully invite the 
attention of the House to the various efforts that have been made 
during the British rule for the codification of Hindu law and submit 
that on each such occasion the matter was deferred and for very 
cogent and sound reason. As early as 1833, a Commission was 
appointed by Royal Charter. In the year 1853 a Law Commission was 
appointed. The reports of these Commissions published in the year 
1856 turned down the proposal for the codification of Hindu law on 
the ground that it would be a vain attempt and that it would stunt 
the growth and development of Hindu law. Similarly, in the year 
1861 and again in 1921 the Secretary of State for India in the former 
case and the Governor-General of India with the sanction of the 
Secretary of State in the latter case appointed Law Commissions. 
Their decision on the point of codification was identical with the 
findings of the Law Commissions. On 23rd March 1921, one distin- 
guished Member of this House tabled a non-official resolution requir- 
ing the appointment of a Commission for the purposes of codifying 
Hindu Law. When that motion was debated in this House the 
Department of Law was in the hands of a very distinguished scholar 
on Hindu Law and a jurist of eminence, I mean Dr. Tej Bhadur Sapru. 
The motion whether codification was essential or not, was necessary 
or not, would be to the good of Hindu society or not, was hotly 
debated. I would respectfully invite the attention of the House and 
of the Honourable the Law Minister to the reply given on behalf of 
Government by Sir T. B. Sapru who was himself an authority on 
Hindu Law. He pointed out that the codification of laws of the 
personal laws of the community was not an easy matter, that it was 
a stupendous task and one which would entail the best energies of 
the best legal talents for centuries. He invited the attention of 
the House to the German Code which was drafted and codified after 
50 years of labour, from 1834 to 1896 and to the fact no less than 
three Commissions drafted the Code. He pointed out that it was not 
until 1896 that the final form of the German Code was reduced to 
writing and after a continuous hard struggle for and against codi- 
fication between the two sections of eminent German jurists repre- 
sented on the one hand by Savogry and on the other by Thebaut 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


550 


550 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and that even then it took no less than 4 years. Thus, it was only 
in 1900 that the Code drafted after almost 50 years of continuous 
labour was sanctioned by the Imperial German Government. Simi- 
larly, Sir, the Swiss Code in the continent of Europe as well as the 
other Codes were the result of continuous efforts for a number of 
years by the best legal talents of the country. Compare those 
territories and their condition with the conditions of India and the 
ancient history of India and the continuous streams of law that have 
been flowing into the development of Hindu law from ancient times 
upto the present time. I would submit that it will be a vain effort 
to codify the Hindu law. It will be futile to attempt codification of 
the personal laws of the Hindus. What is the source of this law I 
would respectfully ask. It is obviously not human in the sense that 
no human power ever attempted to promulgate Hindu law. The 
sanction behind the law was not of a sovereign power but a moral 
sanction of learning and the result of meditation of the sages. It is 
difficult to trace its origin; the smritikars — 138 as they are said to 
be — did not purport to create the laws. They based their smritis on 
the Vedas and we know the Rig Veda is the oldest book in the world. 
Even Vigneshwar and Jimuta Vahana, the learned authors of the two 
main treatises which have held sway in India, did not attempt to 
codify the Hindu law or create new law for society; they only based 
their commentaries upon the smiritis. And during the long years of 
British and Muslim rule what has been done is simply an interpre- 
tation of the well known principles of Hindu Law. Now why should 
there be any codification of Hindu Law ? If the German and Swiss 
nations — which are no insignificant compared to India — took 50 or 60 
years to bring about a satisfactory code to control their relations, why 
should we in India, where the origin and source of Hindu law are 
shrouded in mystery, try to codify the law ? We are told that it is 
sought to itroduce uniformity in this land of diversities ; the other 
reason advanced is that women in Hindu society have been subjected 
to age-long oppression and tyranny at the hands of men from which 
they have to be relieved. With regard to uniformity I submit that 
it has not been achieved in this present measure and cannot be 
achieved at all. 

[At this stage Mr. Speaker vacated the Chair, which was then occupied 
by Mr. Deputy -Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar.)] 

Even in regard to the law of succession, in cases where the rule 
of primogeniture exists by custom or in case of grants or inams they 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


551 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 551 


have said that the rules of succession as laid down in this measure 
would not apply. Similarly in clause 7 although marriage between 
sapindas has been prohibited, it is said that it will be subject to local 
custom and so allowed where it prevails by custom. So the ghost of 
uniformity which haunts the draftsman of the measure is still there, 
and the so called freedom from slavery of women ends in nothing. 
I submit that those who want to deal with Hindu law and the place 
of women in Hindu society should look at the question not through 
Western glasses but through the glasses of our own civilisation. We 
must know how our own law-givers approached these very difficult 
and intricate questions. The views prevailing in eastern and western 
countries on these questions are diagonally opposite. Our life, we 
believe, has connection with our past life and will have connection 
with our future life; and therefore the rules of law will stand 
on a special footing. That is why our sages approached these questions 
from the point of view of the well-being of Hindu society as a 
whole. And in attempting to frame our law we have to keep in view 
the ideals that motivated our law givers in framing the law in a 
particular manner. Unless we can do that we cannot appreciate its 
value. 

Sir, I would not mind if the Law Minister had honestly declared 
that this measure stands on its own merits, moulded on his ideas 
of Hindu society as it now exists. But what has pained me is that 
he asserts that its provisions are in consonance with the accepted 
principles of Hindu Law. It is well known that Satan can quote the 
Bible. I submit that every provision of this measure — whether in 
relation to marriage or divorce, adoption or inheritance — goes against 
the fundamental principles of Hindu law. Then the result that I 
envisage is not a very happy one. In fact every House in Hindu society 
will be converted into a hell in which there will be a quarrel between 
the brother and sister, between the husband and the wife and between 
the children and their father. The very fundamentals of Hindu society 
are sought to be demolished by this law. It is a question of vital 
concern and there must be a plebiscite on it or a referendum to find 
out whether public opinion in the country is in favour of this measure 
or against it. 

I was submitting that there was no necessity for the codification 
of Hindu Law. The question then arises whether the uniformity that 
is sought to be achieved by the enactment of this law will be achieved 
if it is brought into force ? What is our experience of the statutory 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


552 


552 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


law ? The Government of India in the year 1923 appointed a Civil Justice 
Committee and that Committee after going through the various statutes 
made a recommendation that the Transfer of Property Act, the Contract 
Act, and the Law of Evidence should be modified and their revision 
should be taken in hand by the Legislature at an early stage. Has the 
Legislature found time for it ? What is the result ? The result is that 
the law is being administered in accordance with the provisions, which 
according to the authority itself; has outlived the utility for which they 
brought it into existence. That will be the condition if the Hindu Code 
is brought on the Statute Book and is made a rigid code upon which 
the rights of the people will depend. The Hindu law will lose its vitality, 
its elasticity, its adaptability to the prevailing conditions and will be 
reduced to immobile rigidity. May I know whether the object of reducing 
conflicts and of fighting differences of opinion will be achieved by the 
codification of Hindu Law ? I dare to suggest it will not and our 
experience of the various pieces of legislation leads one to support my 
conclusion. 

Take for instance, the Hindu Law Remarriage Act which was enacted 
in 1871. Now, Sir, it is a very simple piece of legislation but has there 
been an unanimity of opinion in respect of the construction of the various 
provisions of that Act ? 

Shrimati G, Durgabai (Madras : General): Are you opposing the 
Widow Marriage Act also ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : I hope my friend will have 
the patience to hear me. We must learn tolerance and patience for 
opposite opinions. My point was that mere bringing in of an enactment 
does not lead to uniformity or to the resolution of a conflict of opinion. 
Even in the interpretation and the construction of the provisions of 
this Hindu Widow Remarriage Act of 1872, we find that there is a 
serious conflict of opinion between different High Courts about 
the construction of section 2. The question arises whether a woman 
who remarries according to customary law loses her rights in the property 
of her husband. This is the point, and we have the opinion of 
the Allahabad High Court and Oudh Chief Courts to the effect 
that merely because she remarries according to custom she does not lose 
her right in her previous husband’s property. The other High Court has 
taken the other view. Similarly, in this Act there has been a serious 
conflict of opinion upon the interpretation of the simple word “sister”. 
Some High Courts say that the word “sister” does not include a “half 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


553 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 553 


sister” : while the Nagpur Chief Court, after an elaborate consideration 
of this word came to the conclusion that it is included. My submission 
is that in view of the above, the difficulty that exists today in the 
construction of the Hindu Law will not come to an end by the fact that 
the Hindu Code Bill is there. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Do you mean that the conflict 
should be permitted to continue ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : I say that even if this Bill 
becomes an Act, the conflict will be there and it will be open to the 
High Court to interpret its different provisions in a different way. The 
divergent opinion and the divergent points with regard to the Hindu Law 
will not be resolved because it will be open to the High Courts and to 
the Supreme Court to give their construction on any particular provision 
and the conflict is bound to arise as our experience of the previous 
legislation shows. My respectful submission is that it is a vain and futile 
attempt to codify the Hindu Law and any attempt in that direction is 
bound to deprive Hindu Law of its mobility, its elasticity and its vitality, 
which by no stretch of imagination is advisable in the present circum- 
stances. 

My next point is a very important one. How did the present legislation 
originate and did the circumstances in which it originated justify its 
being pursued any further ? I would respectfully invite your attention 
that in the year 1941 the Hindu Law Committee was appointed and it 
considered the question of the codification of Hindu Law by compart- 
ments and two Bills were prepared by this Committee. One was the Bill 
concerning the Intestate Succession of Hindus and the second was the 
law relating to Marriage. When these two Bills came before the 
Legislature there was a joint meeting of the two legislatures (at that 
time our Legislature was of a bi-cameral character) and it was decided 
that it would be better if the Hindu Law was enacted as a whole rather 
than by compartments, and with this object in view the present Rau 
Committee came into existence. 

Now, Sir, when a lady member addressed the House — of course 
a zealous enthusiast in favour of this piece of legislation — she said 
that this piece of legislation had been before the country for a number 
of years — say for 10 years, and the Rau Committee has examined 
thousands of witnesses and has had an extensive tour of the country. 
I respectfully submit that there was little truth in the declaration made 
by the lady because let us examine what was the quantum of evidence 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


554 


554 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that was before the Committee. And what was the weight of that little 
quantum of evidence ? The Rau Committee which came into existence 
on the 20th January 1944 drafted a Bill which was circulated to selected 
and distinguished lawyers for opinion. After their opinions had been 
received the Committee decided that the draft which they had originally 
prepared should be circulated throughout the country. The Bill was 
translated into Indian languages and about 6,000 copies were distributed. 
Opinions were invited on the 5th August 1944 and the opinions were 
to be submitted by the 31st December 1944. After the opinions had been 
received the Committee toured the country. I would like the House to 
note the extensiveness of the tour undertaken by this Committee. It 
visited the leading towns and cities of the provinces and as far as I 
remember it is not more than a dozen — Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta, 
Poona, Patna, Lahore and others. This was the extensive tour of the 
Committee. What is the population of these few leading towns and cities 
as compared to the total mass of population of the country ? Can the 
tour undertaken by this Committee for the purpose of examination of 
witnesses in these cities by any means give an indication of the real 
feeling of the counrty on this Bill ? 

What was the extent of the evidence recorded ? Let us see. In all 
121 witnesses and 201 associations represented by about 257 persons 
gave evidence. This was the total evidence taken. May I venture to ask 
a very pertinent question: Is this by any stretch of imagination sufficient 
evidence, considering the vastness of the country and considering the 
fact that the real India, the real Hindu India resides not in the cities 
but in the villages. They are agriculturists who represent 90 per cent, 
of the population. Can it be pretended by any stretch of imagination 
that the examination of witnesses by this Committee was in any way 
sufficient and commensurate with the vastness of the country and with 
the great divergences of opinion prevailing in the different provinces ? 
I respectfully submit that it was not. 

Let us further analyse the result of that evidence. My submission is 
that on every basic point which forms the basis of the present Code the 
opinion was predominently and overwhelmingly against any change. Look 
at for instance one basic doctrine that is propounded within the four 
corners of this piece of legislation — introduction of simultaneous heirship 
of sons, daughters, widows etc. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : A widow is a simultaneous heir today under 
the existing law. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


555 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 555 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Even that he is opposing now. 
Perhaps he wants it to be repealed. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: For the introduction of 
simultaneous heirship of daughter with son the witnesses number only 
78 and the number of those against was 215. Regarding conversion of 
widow’s limited estate as a female heir into an absolute estate the 
opinions for were 49 and against 107. In case of divorce options for were 
112 and against 119. In case of adoption and the changes that are 
introduced opinions for were 36 and against 38. On other points the 
opinions against change were overwhelmingly larger than for it. Where 
is the justification, I ask, for pursuing this legislation ? 

Some Honourable Members: No justification. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: It is claimed by a number of 
Members of this House that public opinion is over-whelmingly in favour 
of this piece of legislation. 

Shrimati G, Durgabai: What about monogamy ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: I will come to that also at 
the proper stage. My submission is that if this is a democratic legislature, 
if this legislature claims to legislate in consonance with the predominent 
volume of public opinion in the country, the only course for it is to throw 
out this piece of legislation, because whatever public opinion there was 
in the country distinctly points out that it is against it. I am sorry I 
have not got with me the particular newspaper in which the opinion 
given by the Law Minister was published. It was a few days before we 
commenced the consideration of this measure in February and he took 
his stand not upon the quantum of evidence in his favour, nor upon the 
public opinion in his favour but upon its quality. That was an open 
admission by no other than the Law Minister himself that the weight 
of public opinion so far as number was concerned was against him. If 
it is a fact that a few individuals, however distinguished they may be, 
because they wish this legislation to be thrust upon the country, it cannot 
be accepted. The only criterion of public opinion is the public opinion 
taken by the Rau Committee. There is absolutely no other criterion upon 
which it is open to any Member of the House to say that public opinion 
is in favour of this piece of legislation and not against it. Similarly, we 
are receiving a number of representations from different bodies 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Daily. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


556 


556 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: from different 

distinguished High Courts and other Civil Judges also, from Bar 
associations in different parts of the country. As far as I have been 
able to go through the opinions very few persons. I find, favour 
the enactment of this piece of legislation and public opinion is overwhelm- 
ingly against it. ) 

The next point is this. Even assuming that public opinion is not so 
far of a decisive character where is the necessity of pursuing this 
legislation in the present legislature ? As has already been pointed out, 

4PM an< ^ * n °^ re P eat the argument, but I would respectfully 

submit that the present legislature is to frame the Constitution 
as also to legislate on emergent matters about which legislation is 
absolutely essential. It can by no stretch of imagination be asserted that 
the Hindu Code Bill is a piece of legislation that the Government should 
not pursue this piece of legislation in the teeth of public opposition in 
the country. 

I would now proceed with the examination and scrutiny of the various 
provisions incorporated in this piece of legislation. As I had remarked 
I feel — and I feel honestly — that the fundamentals of then provisions that 
stand incorporated in this piece of legislation are fatal to the existence 
of Hindu society as envisaged by our sages and therefore it is my painful 
duty to oppose this measure tooth and nail provision by provision. The 
question arises what are the basic changes that are sought to be brought 
about in Hindu society through the medium of this piece of legislation 
and how far those contemplated changes are in consonance with Hindu 
ideology and Hindu ideals. My respectful submission is this Hindu Code 
may well be styled as Islamic Code rather than a Hindu Code. 

Shri A. Karunakara Menon (Madras: General): That is the reason 
why our friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is opposing it. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Of course this remark cannot 
apply to me. I feel as keenly as the learned member on it. Now Sir, 
the main question is about the Second Part of this piece of legislation 
under the head Marriage and Divorce. These are incorporated in 
clause 5 to 51. Let us see how far the type of marriage that is 
envisaged in these provisions of the Bill is akin to the Hindu conception 
of marriage. My respectful submission is that the show of a sacramental 
marriage provided in clause 7 of this Bill of an absolutely different 
character than what is the conception and ideal of Hindu marriage. 
It is only a camouflage to conceal the real type of marriage that is 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


557 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 557 


envisaged. Otherwise the incorporation of the provision in clauses 10 
and 21 would not have been there. To Hindus — and I think there 
cannot be any dispute on this point — there is no two opinion on the 
subject. Of course if we aim to dare Hindu ideals and ideologies, if 
we intend to say good-bye to them, then it is another matter. To a 
Hindu the marriage is sacramental and as such indissoluble. It is 
a religious bond of unity between the couple. It is not a union for 
such purposes which may be brought to an end at any time. It is 
not a contractual relationship. It is a relationship that has got some 
spirituality about it. By no stretch of imagination can it be brought 
to an end by the sweet whim and caprice of any of the parties. That 
is the conception of Hindu marriage. I would challenge any smriti 
or citation of any scripture, so far as Hindu scripture is concerned, 
which would negative this idea of sacramental marriage and will 
propound any other sort of marriage that is understood by smritis. 
Therefore my submission is that so far as the provision about civil 
marriage in this Chapter on Marriage and Divorce as incorporated 
in clause 10 is concerned it is absolutely foreign to Hindu law and 
should not find a place therein. Civil marriage has been in vogue 
in this country ever since 1872 when Act III of 1872 came into force. 
It was further amended in the year 1929. Civil marriage as envisaged 
by that piece of legislation must continue. But it should not find any 
place whatsoever in the Hindu Code. I want to ask why should civil 
marriage find a place in the Hindu Code. Is it in consonance with 
any smriti ? I ask this question because you claim that there is 
nothing revolutionary, nothing radical in this measure, and that in 
fact everything is just in accordance with Hindu conception, ideology 
and ideals. It is a preposterous claim which I must refute. My 
submission is that the incorporation of a provision like clause 10 in 
this Bill, which envisages marriage of a civil type, is absolutely 
unknown and foreign to Hindu ideals. Previously I have asserted that 
this form of sacramental marriage is only a comouflage for the other 
type of marriage and it is quite obvious if a reference is made to 
the provisions of clauses 7, 10 and 21. 

So far as clause 7 is concerned it lays the conditions for sacramental 
marriage. Here I respectfully invite the attention of the House to clause 
6. This says that it will not be open to the parties to contract any 
marriage if they happen to be sapindas. If we proceed to clause 10 
which lays down the requisite conditions of a valid civil marriage 
it omits the provision contained in sub-clause 6 of clause 7 therefrom 
and restricts it to the other five sub-clauses of clause 7. Thereby a 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


558 


558 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


marriage between sapindas is perfectly valid if it happens to be a 
civil marriage under clause 10. This is the difference or gap between 
the validity of the sacramental marriage and the validity of the civil 
marriage. What does clause 21 lay down ? It says that it is open 
to the parties who have entered into a sacramental marriage of the 
type envisaged in clause 7 later on go to the Registrar and ask him 
to register it as a civil marriage and the poor Registrar will have 
no option. What is the legal effect of these three provisions read 
together ? Whatever sanctity is attached to the sacramental marriage 
is eliminated. Mind you, one of the requisite conditions of a valid 
sacramental marriage is that there should be no marriage between 
sapindas. This condition does not exist in section 10 and the poor 
Registrar, inspite of the fact that the sacramental marriage was an 
invalid marriage because of this, has to register it as a civil marriage. 
Therefore, the camouflage, the curtain of a sacramental marriage is 
lifted here and the effect of invalidity, because it was a marriage 
between sapindas is circumvented by this device. I ask, is it in 
accordance with Hindu ideals of marriage ? Will not all persons be 
inclined, wherever they choose, to celebrate a marriage between 
sapindas ? They can do it as a sacramental marriage and subsequently 
go and cure the invalidity by undergoing civil marriage. 

We come then to provisions of Section 9. It has been stated that 
even the sacramental marriage must be entered into a marriage 
certificate register and that if it is not so entered the defaulter 
may be punished under the law. As regards its validity, it is very 
doubtful whether it will be valid or not. Of course, the Rau Bill did not 
go so far. The Rau Bill left it at the option of the parties to either 
get an entry made in the register or not. The only object with 
which such a provision was incorporated in the Rau Bill was to facilitate 
the proof of marriage. But that object has been told good-bye in 
the present Bill. What is stated here is that it will be open to any 
Provincial Government to make the registration of sacramental mar- 
riages compulsory. The provision of section 6 says that a marriage in 
order to be valid, must be in accordance with the provisions of the Bill. 
If not, then it is not a valid marriage. Therefore, the conclusion is 
irresistible from the reading of Sections 6,7,10 and 21 that any marriage 
which has not been registered by the married couple in the certificate 
register will be invalid. I respectfully submit, what are the legal 
consequences flowing from this sort of a provision ? Are they not 
repulsive to the very ideal of Hindu society, to the very injunctions 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


559 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 559 


of the shastras which lay down that a marriage solemnly entered into 

is an indissoluble tie and cannot be brought to an end ? Here if the 

married couple was foolish enough not to get an entry made to that effect 
in the register, their marriage will be invalid. 

Coming to the next important provision in this Bill, that is, the 
provision regarding divorce. The question arises about past practice and 
we were quoted the smritis of Narad and Parasar by the Honourable 
the Law Minister to prove that divorce did exist in the Hindu society. 

I respectfully submit what has been pointed out by Mr. Dwarka Nath 

Mitter, the dissenting Member of the Rau Committee, before whom these 
very scriptures were put forward; he has interpreted them not merely 
on his own knoweldge of Sanskrit but upon the knowledge of learned 
pandits. He says that the only and the reasonable interpretation and 
construction of Narad and Parasar is that there can be a breaking of 
relationship only upto the betrothal stage, not after the actual marriage 
had taken place. Therefore, it is no use relying upon the smritis to 
establish the practice of divorce. 

One of the arguments advanced by the Honourable the Law 
Minister, and repeated by Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, was that 
divorce already exists in 90 per cent of the Hindu society. Accordingly 
to Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, not only in 90 per cent of the Hindu 
society but even in 95 per cent it exists. I would respectfully ask, 
if what you say is a fact, where is the necessity of enacting any piece 
of legislation on divorce ? You are expected to legislate for the 
majority and not for a hopeless minority. The divorce of the form 
you have introduced in this piece of legislation will make the life 
miserable of the 90 or 95 per cent of the Hindu society amongst whom 
you say divorce already prevails, because according to the provisions 
of the present Bill it will be incumbent upon each party to the 
marriage, before it can resort to divorce, to go for the dissolution 
of marriage before a competent Court of Law. As has been pointed 
out by one of the gentlemen who wrote a dissenting note to this Select 
Committee Resort in most of the parts of the country among the 
agriculturists divorce is resorted to in a very simple manner by 
the execution of a deed of relinquishment or in any other manner, 
before the panchayat of the village. You must take into consideration 
the effect your legislation will have upon the agriculturists who 
form 90 per cent of your population. What will be the effect if 
clause 34 is brought on the Statute Book? Every couple, every 
Member, every party to the marriage will be compelled to knock 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


560 


560 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


at the door of the Court of Law, to go to the district court and also 
in appeal and till that takes place no divorce can come into effect. I 
submit this will not be to the advantage but to the great disadvantage 
of the overwhelming majority of people amongst whom you say the 
custom of divorce prevails. Therefore, by enacting provisions of this type 
you are not helping the hopeless minority of 5 per cent but you are 
putting to disadvantage the majority of 90 per cent. Therefore, until and 
unless your provisions undergo a drastic change and amendment they 
should not and ought not to be brought on the Statute Book. I now come 
to the question of adoption. Here also the learned author and the 
draftsmen of this Bill have ignored the fundamental conception under- 
lying adoption in Hindu law. As far as my meagre knowledge goes, 
adoption is not recognised by any other law. In Muslim law it was in 
vogue by custom, but even that has been brought to an end by legislation. 
According to Hindu conception, the life of a Hindu is so inter-mixed and 
inter-mingled with his religious conceptions and religion that it is 
impossible to separate the two. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Is the Honourable Minister for Law resting 
or meditating? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am hearing the honourable 
Member. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: I was submitting that adoption 
in Hindu law rests upon religious belief which says that it is essential 
for the salvation of the soul of a departed man that he should have a 
son who may be able to give him oblations so as to make him attain 
moksha. So if you are going to legislate about adoption, you must keep 
in mind the underlying conception. Otherwise, you eliminate it. If you 
keep it, you keep the spirit underlying the doctrine of adoption. (An 
Honourable Member: What is the spirit?’) What are the criteria you have 
fixed in this Bill for validity of adoption? While the Hindu law says that 
the eldest and the only son cannot be taken in adoption, instead of 
retaining that very salient principle, you want to reverse it and say that 
even the eldest and the only son can be adopted. An Honourable Member. 
‘It is unfair.’) 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : It is due to ignorance. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : It cuts at the very root of 
the conception of adoption, because according to Hindu law there must 
be the eldest or the only son to attend to the oblations for the departed 
natural father. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


561 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 561 


Similarly, what are the qualifications you have laid down in this Bill 
for a boy to be taken in adoption ? The three conditions laid down are 
that his age must be below 15, he must not be married and he must 
be a Hindus. I would respectfully submit that by putting a provision 
like this, you are putting the Hindus in great trouble, because according 
to the well known conception and custom of Hindu society relating to 
adoption marriage is not a disqualification, nor is age a disqualification. 
Why, I ask, are you imposing these limitations ? Has your experience 
of the administration of law in the past convinced you that these 
restrictions are necessary ? As far as my meagre knowledge of law goes, 
there has been no case where any difficulty has arisen. In fact, law by 
custom has recognised the validity of the adoption of a married boy. 
Similarly, whatever his age may be, the adoption is valid. What are the 
difficulties experienced that make the change in the existing law 
necessary ? It cannot be disputed that when you attempt any change 
you must have cogent reasons; otherwise, you must recognise the existing 
law. 

Then, about the effect of adoption. You have given a good-bye to every 
well-established custom of Hindu law. The Rau Bill proposed that the 
effect of adoption would be to digest ownership of property vested within 
three years of the adoption. The present Bill goes further and it says 
that as soon as adoption takes place, there will be no, question of 
divesting of property. From that date half will go to the widow or the 
man and the other half to the boy. My respectful submission : why do 
you want to bring in a novel doctrine of adoption ? Where is the reason 
for it ? Has any difficulty arisen in the past ? 

Then the question of disruption of the joint Hindu family. To me 
it appears that a most vital and fundamental change is sought to 
be brought about. Why should the time-honoured institution of Joint 
Hindu family be an eye-sore to you ? It has been said that the joint 
Hindu family as it was originally conceived has been shorn of its 
true characteristics by a galaxy of case law. I admit. But if the institution 
of joint Hindu family is an institution worthy of respect then your 
duty is not to bring it to an end because it has been dilapidated in 
the days of foreign rule, but to legislate for removing the difficulties 
and defects that have cropped up in the joint Hindu family institution 
and restore it to its previous position. We should have restored it to 
its previous vigour. That has not been done. I have not heard a word 
from the Honourable the Law Minister pointing out any fatal defects 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


562 


562 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that existed in the joint family system. His only point is that true 
characteristics have been shown off by case-law and therefore, the 
institution should be put an end to. I say it is a counsel of despair. That 
is a view which, at least I for myself cannot support. To me this joint 
family institution is an institution of which any nation in the world can 
well be proud of. It is an institution, Sir, which anticipated the socialistic 
and communistic form of society, centuries before our time. It is an 
institution, Sir, where even the invalid and the disabled members of the 
family have equal right to the corpus of the family. It is an institution 
which 

Sirjut Kuladhar Chaliha (Assam : General): It is not prevalent in 
Bengal. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Bengal, as far as my meagre 
knowledge goes is partly governed by Mitakshara and partly by the 
Dayabhaga system. 

An Honourable Member: No, all by Dayabhaga system. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Therefore, Sir, my point 
was that the axe of legislation should not have been applied by the 
learned Law Minister to cut at the very root of the joint family tree, 
if it does not rest on such firm and solid foundations as it did at 
the time of our ancients. Legislation should have been undertaken 
to protect it. In the time of the British, because we were subjected to 
foreign rule, and they were not at all interested in keeping in tact 
our time-honoured institutions. In fact, they had contempt for them. 
When our own national government has come into power, is it too much 
to expect that they should attempt to revive and restore this 
time-honoured institution to its previous glory rather than destroy it. 
I submit, Sir, by this Bill, the Hindu joint family is being shattered to 
pieces. What the Rau Committee proposed was not so fraught with 
danger as what is proposed in the provisions of this Bill. I invite attention 
to clauses 86 and 87 of the present Bill. The Rau Committee in 
clauses 1 and 2 of Part III-A only laid down that on the demise of a 
coparcenar in the family, the right in the property will not devolve by 
survivorship but will be by succession. That is intended to keep intact 
the coparcenary for at least one generation. Even that was not tolerated 
or liked by the present Select Committee and some of its members, 
including the Law Minister, with the result that what sections 86 and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


563 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 563 


87 lay down is that there will be automatic disruption of every joint 
family existing in India, simultaneous with the enforcement of this Act. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi; There is difference between joint 
family and joint property. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: I am coming to that. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : They are trying to put you off the 
rails. You go on, please. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : The Bill provides in clauses 
86 and 87 that no court of law will take cognizance of any claim on 
the basis of birth. On the day this Bill comes into force, and further, 
that every joint family will be deemed to have disrupted so that joint 
tenancy would be converted into tenancy in common, simultaneous with 
this legislation. But I ask, why do you want this? Is there any uncertainty 
in the law to-day, in the existing Hindu Joint Family Law ? I respectfully 
submit there is none. Everybody knows what is meant by coparcenary 
and what are the incidents of coparcenary property. Why do you want 
it to be partitioned? My respectful submission is that this is against what 
was provided even by the Rau Committee. And public opinion, scanty 
as it was, was taken not upon the Bill as it exists today, but upon the 
Bill as was drafted by the Rau Committee. Therefore there is absolutely 
no information why a point of such vital change in the structure of the 
Bill has been brought about. 

Now, what are the advantages of a joint Hindu family? What are the 
advantages of having coparcenary property ? I submit that 

Shri B, N. Munavalli (Bombay State): Are there no disadvan- 
tages ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: Of course, there are disad- 
vantages, if everybody wants to go on living in a selfish way, entirely 
for oneself, without any regard to their relatives. But if you look at 
society in the way in which the Smritis wanted us to, we should renounce 
something for others also, for the other members also, to sacrifice 
something to make the family, a joint family then there is no disad- 
vantage. There is every advantage and no disadvantage. My submission 
is that it cannot possibly be accepted by every Hindu family. 

One of my friends here reminded me that Mitakshara is not governing 
Bengal and Assam. But Sir, you must keep the whole country before 
you and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


564 


564 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: The joint family is also there. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: You are dealing with a 
population of 300 millions — of 30 crores — and a population that is 
extending from Kashmir to Cape Comorin, a population that extends 
from Gujarat to the farthest end of the country. And you want to 
disrupt the status of the joint family system, and that will affect 
overwhelmingly vast population. Therefore, you must think thrice 
before doing such a thing as will disrupt such a vast population. In 
this legislation you want to disrupt the family. If it is decrepit, if 
it is dilapidated, if it is, as one of the Members said, in such a 
condition that we need not even shed tears about it, let it die a 
natural death. Why should you apply the axe of destruction and bring 
about its end ? 

Then Sir, I proceed to the question of inheritance. Now, here I have 
got the greatest grievance. As my friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad said, 
the Rau Committee Bill was substituted by a departmental committee 
Bill and in this departmental Bill innovations were introduced. Clause 
94 lays down that property will be excluded from the rules of 
succession laid down in this Bill. It is in the original Rau Bill it was 
that every piece of Agricultural property will not be governed by the 
rules of Succession laid down there, because under the Government 
of India Act it is not within the purview and jurisdiction of the 
Central Government. The Rau Bill did not say that there will be any 
exception in the case of the Centrally Administrated Areas, which 
are under the direct control and supervision of the Government of 
India 

Now, Sir, in the departmental Bill the words “in the Governors 
provinces” were introduced with the result that every agriculturist 
in my province of Ajmer-Merwara as also in the provinces of Delhi 
and Coorg, which are the Centrally Administrated areas and even 
the agricultural property situated in these provinces will be governed 
by the rules of succession laid down here. Look at the anomaly that 
is sought to be perpetrated by this piece of legislation. The law that 
will govern the bulk of property will be absolutely different in 
the Governors Provinces, while it will be just the contrary in the 
Centrally Administrated areas. Is it the uniformity which is aimed 
at by this unique piece of legilsation ? Whether this will be in consonance 
with the ideal of uniformity or it is the opposite of it. May I respectfully 
ask ? My submission is that all the rules of Succession that you 
have laid down in the provisions of the Bill if they are applied to the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


565 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 565 


agricultural property in my province — and I can speak with some 
knowledge of my own province and the people inhabiting my province- 
I submit the law will be obeyed more in infringement than otherwise, 
because the rules of succession that you have laid down are so 
contrary to the established usage and custom of the people, that they 
will not accept them as a rule governing them, even at the risk of 
their lives. What are the rules of succession that you have incorpo- 
rated in this Part VII, Chapter 2 and Schedule VII? Are they in 
accordance with the accepted principles of Hindu law either as 
propounded by Mitakshara or by Dayabhaga and where is the 
indication of it ? What is the basis you have taken for inheritance? 
You say it is ‘natural love and affection’. So far as propinguity and 
consanguinity is concerned in the case of inheritance, one of the 
fundamental principles of Hindu Law is violated. One of the funda- 
mental principles of succession in the Hindu law is that it depends 
upon the capacity and the liability of the descendants to offer 
shraddhas to their parents. This is the fundamental capacity which 
has to be taken into any law of inheritance. Of course, the view was 
that we are not going to care for Hindu Law; that is a different 
matter; then delete the word ‘Hindu’ from there, I have no objection, 
but if you are to incorporate the fundamentals of Hindu Law, the 
first thing that you have to take into consideration in the principles 
of inheritance, is the capacity and the liability of the descendants 
to offer shraddhas to their ancestors, and this is the basis of the 
Dayabhaga. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: All of them can offer 
shraddha for you and get the property. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : What is the reason for the 
promulgation of this novel Rule of succession ? Brother and brother’s 
son has been relegated to a very, very inferior position. Brother and 
brother’s son comes after daughter’s daughter, daughter’s son, son’s 
daughter. Is it in accordance with the accepted principles of Hindu 
Law ? Is it likely to bring peace to the family ? (Many voices : ‘No, 
no.’). Will it not disrupt the family ? Will it not create perpetual 
disturbance, discord in the members of the family ? This is 
inconceivable. According to the Hindu society even today, though it 
has been the subject of outrage for centuries, even today there is love 
and affection between brother and brother. When I make certain 
observations, I keep the agricultural population in view. You go to any 
village and you will find that 9 out of the 10 families live jointly. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


566 


566 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The brother is living with brother. He is not separate and as soon 
as you give the right of inheritance to daughter’s daughter, to 
daughter’s son in preference to the brother or the brother’s son my 
respectful submission is that the society will not tolerate or even if 
it tolerates, the peace and quiet that exists today will disappear in 
no time. Therefore, you have to be very wise before laying any novel 
rules of succession so contrary, so repugnant to the accepted prin- 
ciples of Hindu law. 

Now, I come, Sir to the doctrine of bringing daughter in the category 
of simultaneous heir with son. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I thought he had said 
something about it. No elaboration is needed. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Now, Sir, it has been argued 
that the daughter had a specific share in the inheritance of her father 
according to the scriptures and the reliance is placed upon Manu and 
Yajnavalkya, but my cursory knowledge of these Hindu law texts is 
that whatever share is allotted is in the case of an unmarried daughter 
and we have no objection at all, even today to allot any share to an 
unmarried daughter. The question arises even today, what is the 
position? Can anybody deny that ? Not one daughter among thousands 
remains unmarried. The daughter is given, according to the status of 
the family, the best education and is treated on the same footing as the 
sons. When her marriage takes place she is given a dowry according 
to the status of the family. On marriage her relationship to the brothers 
is not cut off. As far as my experience goes, she is invited for every 
function in the family and on occasions of marriage in her parent’s family 
a quota is assigned to her according to custom. Can anyone say that 
resort to a court of law will bring peace and franquillity in the home? 
Such a step will only aggravate the situation and the provisions in 
the Bill for resort to court are there to our utter shame. We do not 
want that our daughters and sisters should go to a court of law. It 
was never contemplated by our sages that they should seek the 
help of the law. The position assigned to our daughters in the 
family is of such a unique character that it is difficult to find a parallel 
to it anywhere. Even after marriage, as I was saying, the daughter 
has a definite share in the family budget for festive occasions. 
The question was asked, whether she can go to a court of law to enforce 
her rights ? Sir, if in a family the father or the brother of a girl 
is unmindful of his duties to her, he is looked down upon by the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


567 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 567 


community. According to the well-established custom, every daughter of 
a family must be present at the time of her brother’s marriage. I may 
tell honourable Members that there is particular ceremony which must 
be performed by the sister and her husband before the bride and the 
bridgroom can enter the house. These are time-honoured customs. We 
give the daughters a definite position. What will you gain by giving her 
a share in the family property ? One of the justifications for this reform 
is that there must be absolute equality between a son and a daughter. 
May I know is there any equality in fact ? Is it not a sham equality 
that you are going to assign to the daughter ? The conditions are 
absolutely different. The daughter has to go in due course to a different 
family. The son has not to go. These are the conditions inherent in the 
situation. Therefore, whatever law you make must be suited to the 
conditions and not in violation of them. If you make a law in violation 
of these conditions, the society will go to pieces. 

Now, what is the percentage of property owners in Hindu society 
today ? It is a very relevant question because, according to the existing 
custom not only the father has the moral obligation to arrange for the 
marriage of his daughter, but even the brother, whether he inherits any 
property or not, thinks it his moral duty to arrange for the marriage 
of his sister in the absence of his father. 

Shrimati G, Durgabai: Do you think he would not discharge his 
moral duty if he allows his sister a share ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : The honourable Member is 
talking of a share while I am talking of a family without property. What 
will become of the sister in such a family ? You may go to any village 
or town. You will find cases where the father is dead and the unmarried 
sister is living with her brother. This brother thinks it his moral duty 
to arrange for the marriage of his sister and he even borrows money 
for this purpose. Unless and until he has discharged that sacred trust 
he never thinks of himself. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is the honourable Member likely to finish 
soon ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: I require one hour more, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Then the House stands adjourned. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Monday, the 4th April, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


568 


568 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We will now proceed to the further consider- 
ation of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of Hindu Law, 
as reported by the Select Committee. Shri Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava 
will resume his speech. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar : General): Before we proceed 
to the further consideration of this Bill, we would like to know what 
is going to be the programme in regard to it. Will it go on indefinitely? 
I would request that by common consent some time-limit may be fixed 
on the speeches of members so that as many members as may be possible 
to be accommodated may participate in the discussion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I may inform the House that this is an official 
Bill and they have provided for two days. The Speaker has not concern 
with it. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava (Ajmer-Merwara): Sir, I have 
to resume my unfinished speech on the Hindu Code. But before I do 
that, Sir, I have respectfully to draw your attention to the declaration 
that was made by the Hon. Prime Minister on the opening day of this 
momentous session. 

Sir, the Hon. Prime Minister was pleased to characterise this measure 
as a piece of simple and essential legislation. I respectfully protect 
that the measure that is for consideration before the House is not a 
simple one. I may also be permitted to point out that some of the 
opposers of this Bill have been accused by the Hon. Prime Minister 
of adopting delaying tactics. Those are well conversant with this 
Assembly and the proceedings that have taken place here will readily 
recognise that this measure has not at all been sufficiently discussed 
this vital measure which affects the life and death, as I would say, 
of the Hindu society has been on the anvil of this legislature for only 
a very short time. If you refer to previous occasions when social 
legislation like the Sharda Act and the Hindu Women’s Rights to 
Property Act was brought before this legislature, you would find what 
an amount of controversy they raised. Compared to those Bills, this 
Bill is enormously of great importance. It affects the entire structure 
of Hindu society. This Bill, Sir, if placed on the Statute Book — people 
may differ with me, the Hon. Prime Minister may differ from me, 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 464-91. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


569 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 569 


but I do feel so — will result in the utter extinction of the Hindu society, 
not in the sense that thirty million Hindus will cease to exist, but that 
the distinctive features and characteristics of the Hindu society will cease 
to continue. 

This is not a simple measure. But the fact is that this Bill aims at 
the utter demolition of the entire structure and fabric of Hindu society. 
It aims at changing the law of marriage, the law divorce, the law of 
adoption, law relating to minority and guardianship, the Law of the 
Hindu joint family, the law of succession and everything that constitute 
and what remains of the features of Hindu society. The very foundations 
not only of one pillar but of all the pillars on which the Hindu society 
rests, are shaken. Therefore, Sir, it is but neat and proper that we as 
legislators, we who are the guardians of the interests of the people should 
discharge our duty to the best of our ability and see how far the measure 
that we are considering is wanted by public opinion in the country. To 
characterise this measure as a simple piece of legislation is, I respectfully 
submit, not fair. 

My further submission is that if it is not proper to characterise it 
as a simple piece of legislation, it is still more unbefitting to characterise 
it as an essential measure. What is the need, I respectfully ask, for this 
measure ? What will happen if this Bill is deferred and not brought on 
the Statute Book till the new legislature, the sovereign Parliament to 
be elected in free India on adult franchise is elected ? Is there any malady 
from which the Hindu society is so vitally suffering that if a few months 
pass without this Bill being placed on the Statute Book, the whole society 
will crumble ? I submit that in no sense of the term is it essential. We 
can very well afford to wait for one or two years more. The Hindu society 
which had successfully stood the test of centuries, the clash of many 
civilisations, the clash of foreign aggression and had been subjected for 
centuries to political subjugation can very well survive without this piece 
of legislation for a year or two more. 

Sir, if we wait for . . . 

Shri S. Nagappa (Madras: General) : Sir, on a point of order. The 
hon. Member is casting aspersions on the House when he said that this 
house is not competent to deal with this matter and that we should wait 
till a new house is elected. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is no point of order in what Mr. Nagappa 
has said. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


570 


570 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: Sir, in spite of the interruption 
of my hon. Friend, I must assert that this house as at present constituted, 
is thoroughly incompetent to deal with a measure of this vital nature. 
The question is . . . 

Mr. Tajamul Husain (Bihar: Muslim): On a point of order, Sir. It 
has been decided by the Chair that this house is competent to deal with 
this Bill. After that ruling, can any hon. Member question whether this 
House is competent or not ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no harm. It is a ruling of the Speaker 
that this House is competent to deal with this Bill, and according to 
this, Bill is being pursued. If the hon. Member wants to raise other 
questions, or raise other reasons, other than legal technicalities, it is 
open to him to do so. But I would advise the hon. Member that this 
point has been raised by almost every one of the previous speakers and 
it has almost become state. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Sir, it is only the interruption 
of my friend here that provoked me to make that remark, I do not 
question the constitutional power of the Legislature to pass this vital 
measure. But the question is one of propriety. Can you usurp the 
functions of a full-fledged legislature, can this House which was specially 
brought into existence for the particular purpose of drafting the Con- 
stitution of India, do that? Therefore, I submit apart from the consti- 
tutional aspect of the question, apart from the point of legal power of 
this Legislature, it is a question of propriety, and propriety is of immense 
importance. And I feel that I have the right to assert, in spite of the 
interruption of my learned friend and those with him, that this House 
must think thrice before dealing with a measure of this vital importance. 
And my submission is that this measure is not essential and this 
Government need not have a declaration of a nature to make this 
question an issue of confidence before the House. The question has to 
be dealt with a calm mind, and we have to take into consideration the 
devastating effect that this measure will have upon the entire structure 
and fabric of Hindu society. 

Now, coming to my speech from the stage I left it, I was dealing 
with the question of innovation that has been introduced in this piece 
of legislation, namely, the bringing in of a daughter in the rank and 
file of simultaneous heir with the son. My respectful submission was 
and is, that this innovation is wholly uncalled for, and that this 
innovation will demolish the entire structure of Hindu society. Let 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


571 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 571 


me ask, how this is possible. What is the real state of Hindu society ? 
The difference between man and woman, the difference between the 
son and daughter, this is inherent in the very situation. The son has 
to remain all through his life, from his inception to his death, with 
the family in which he has taken birth. The daughter has to go a 
stranger’s family. What are the consequences resulting from this 
inherent situation ? The Hindu law givers, the persons who gave us 
the scriptures, were they so degraded, were they so opposed to the 
fair sex that they did it only with a view to inflict an inequality or 
an injustice ? I respectfully submit that this is a wrong reading of 
the entire scriptures and the Hindu Law. In fact, if the right of 
inheritance to the patrimony is given to the daughter, I shudder to 
think of the consequences. The Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, the Law Minister, 
in his speech remarked, if a Hindu has twelve sons and one daughter, 
and if on his death his property could be divided into twelve shares, 
what heaven will fall if instead of twelve it is divided into thirteen 
shares ? I respectfully ask the Hon. Law Minister to take the opposite 
case, where a person has got one son and twelve daughters. What 
will happen in that case ? 

The Honourable Shri Jagjivan Ram (Minister of Labour): 
Thirteen shares. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Is a family house to be 
divided into thirteen shares ? Sir, think of rural India, do not think 
of urban India, with people living in palaces, but think of rural India 
where a family has got a very small house. If on the death of the 
father, his house is divided into thirteen portions, and the twelve 
sons-in-law are to be accommodated in that house, what will happen ? 
And Sir, under the law as it is proposed to be made, it is open to 
the daughter to marry any person she likes, even if she takes courage 
to enter into marital contract with a non-Hindu she has no bar, and 
that is not a disqualifaction for inheritance. What will be the result 
? The result will be that every house, and every family will be reduced 
to a family of feuds in which there will be quarrels and worse still — 
murders too. Therefore, Sir, I respectfully submit that when you are 
making a law you are not to take into consideration only a concrete 
example of the character to which the attention of the House has 
been drawn by the Hon. Law Minister, but you have to take into 
consideration every imaginable case, and it is on that footing that 
you have to frame the law. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


572 


572 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Why this inferiority complex about the status of the daughter in 
Hindu society ? I protest against its very implication. In fact, the 

12 noon daughter in Hindu society has got a very exalted and 
elevated position. Her marriage into a stranger’s family 
does not cut of her connections with the natural family of the father. 
On every occasion, on occasions of births, deaths, marriages and other 
occasions she has to come and perform certain essential ceremonies, and 
on those occasions the Hindu family has to make presents to the 
daughter. The daughter’s relations with her natural family continues all 
along. If she gives birth to a child, her brothers have to give her presents. 
Sir, I may further venture to assert that on the occasion of every 
marriage in the sister’s family, the marriage of a male or female child, 
the brothers have to make presents. Presents are so essential on every 
occasion. That being so how can it be said, Sir, that the daughter does 
not get anything from the property ? My submission is that the whole 
mental outlook with which this question is approached is diagonally 
wrong, if you consider it from the criterion of Hindu civilisation and 
Hindu ideals and ideas. Of course, if your criterion is not indigenous, 
if it is not Hindu, not Indian, but anti-Indian and anti-Hindu then of 
course, you must take the opposite view. 

Now let us consider what is the result of giving a share to the 
daughter in the family patrimony. You can see the Muslim family. The 
inevitable result of giving this share in the patrimony would be that 
marriages between cousins will be absolutely common, and sooner or later 
marriages even within prohibited degrees will come into existence, 
whether you like it or not. This is what the inevitable consequence would 
be. If you trace the history of the daughter’s share in patrimony, in so 
many countries, in Egypt, in Greece, in Rome or under Islamic law, you 
will come to the conclusion, and the only conclusion, that if a share is 
to be given, then, you must necessarily widen the scope of the right to 
contract a marriage with first cousins. So far as the Hindu point of view 
is concerned, that would be a calamity which no Hindu family can 
tolerate. 

I now proceed to the other point. Do you think, that by providing 
in this piece of legislation that a daughter has an equal share with 
the son, you will be carrying out what you intend to do, that is to 
say, you will be conferring any rights to property on the daughter ? 
I respectfully submit, Sir, that it is not. On the other hand, you will 
be letting loose and creating scope for so many evils. Under the law 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


573 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 573 


as it is incorporated in the Hindu Code, it will be open for any father 
to make a gift inter vivos in favour of any of his sons, or to dispose 
of the entire property by a testament. Is there any bar to this, I ask, 
If there is no bar, then, unless and until the society is prepared to give 
an equal share to the daughter, the only result of this legislation would 
be testamentary disposition or gift inter vivos of the entire property by 
the father to the sons. As a lawyer, I have some experience of courts; 
there are other friends here who have full experience of courts. Is it 
not a fact that in every ten cases of testament and codicil, nine cases 
go to the court and give rise to very prolonged litigation? Not only 
questions regarding the disposing capacity, but questions about the 
testator being a free agent in executing the will and codicil are raised; 
complicated questions about the construction and the interpretation of 
the different clauses of a complicated document like a testament are 
raised : not in one court, but right up to the highest court, the Privy 
Council. If that is the situation, may I ask how you will be able to 
safeguard the interests of the daughter. My respectful submission is that 
you will not be safeguarding the interests of the daughter by making 
this disastorus piece of law, but you will be doing her a positive harm 
which it will be difficult for you to undo. The very psychological approach 
of a Hindu family will change. As soon as it is provided in the law 
that a daughter has a share in the patrimony, the brother will think 
himself absolutely relieved of the duty of maintaining his sister and 
providing for the marriage expenses. What is the condition of the 
Hindu families today ? What is the percentage of the families that 
have got immovable properties ? My submission is, it cannot be more 
than forty per cent. What will become of the rest of the 60 per cent, 
of the families, I shudder to think. What will be the result in the 
case of these 60 per cent, of the families governed by the Mitakshara 
law., who have no property at all ? Because by law the sister is made 
equivalent to the brother, the brother who feels a burden 
and responsibility to bring up the sister up to the time of her 
marriage and conduct the marriage, to give her dowry, to give her 
everything, that sincere brother will feel relieved of his responsibility. 
That would be the result, and the only result, of this disastrous 
provision, without any corresponding benefit to the daughter. There- 
fore, my respectful submission is, not on the ground that the daughter 
is not equal to the son, nor because of any prejudice against the fair 
sex, but in the interests of the daughter herself, that this provision 
should not be enacted. Of course the daughter has got other means 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


574 


574 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to safeguard her interests. They can get valuable rights in the property 
of their husband, in the property of their father-in-law. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras: General) : We have 
already given that. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : If that is already given than, 
there is absolutely no necessity to give her a share in the patrimony. 
Even as I understand the law, a right of a limited character has been 
given; you can certainly widen that and give the daughter a right equal 
to that of her husband in her father-in-law’s property. That is a very 
good suggestion which we can consider. 

Now, Sir, I come to the other important change in this revolution- 
ary piece of legislation : I mean the disruption of the joint family 
status. A very important feature is that under section 86 of this Bill, 
no court of law will hereafter be entitled to take cognisance of the 
right by birth. I shudder to think of the evil consequences flowing 
from this provision. It is said that Bengal, and Assam are already 
governed by the Dayabhaga system of law which does not recognise 
the joint family status, under which every family member occupies 
a position of equality. Does it mean that this system should be 
extended to the whole of India ? If five crores of people are governed 
by this system, and twenty crores by the other system, is there any 
justification of law for extending the law of the five crores to the 
other twenty crores ? I say this is absolutely wrong. My submission 
is that the right of acquisition by birth is a valuable right of a Hindu 
son. It is a right which provides against the prodigality and spend- 
thrift character of the father. It is this valuable right that has saved 
the properties of so many thousands of Hindu families. It is this right 
that is being done away with by this disastrous piece of legislation, 
in section 86. Not only this; section 87 provides that every joint family 
will have a compulsory disruption on the coming into effect of this 
unique piece of legislation. Why should there be a compulsory 
partition ? My submission is that these provisions are not of a simple 
character; they are of a revolutionary and radical character and there 
is absolutely no reason why changes of this enormous character 
should come into existence. 

Then I come to the very important provision, incorporated in the 
Bill about what is known as dissolution of marriage. The clause that 
deals with this is clause 30. It lays down the grounds upon which 
dissolution can take place. The other clause relevant is clause 33 which 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


575 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 575 


lays down the grounds upon which judicial separation can be claimed 
by a party to a marriage. Then, there are provisions for the declaration 
of a marriage as void or viodable. These are absolutely novel provisions 
so far the Hindu Law and Hindu society is concerned. In fact these 
provisions of law and the other provisions of law incorporated in this 
Bill have created a paradise for lawyers. For declaring a marriage void 
the matter can be taken to a court of law. For getting a marriage 
dissolved the parties can go to a court of law. For seeking a judicial 
separation they can go to a court of law. What are the lessons learnt 
from the cases of dissolution of marriage in so many European countries. 
It is indeed surprising and astounding that the experience of western 
countries and the experience of America and England where in every 
six marriages there is a case of one marriage dissolution, has not given 
any lesson to us. We have not had this position in our society at any 
stage of our society and why should we introduce compulsorily the resort 
to a court of law. Clause 34 provides that every dissolution of marriage 
can only be through the medium of District Courts and it also provides 
that every case of dissolution must automatically go to High Court for 
confirmation under clause 44. I ask whether it is not opening a door 
for lawyers to prosper. Should any piece of legislation set the ball rolling 
for more litigation in the society ? My submission, therefore, is that the 
provisions for judicial separation and for dissolution of marriage as 
incorporated in clauses 30 and 33 are not only opposed to accepted ideals 
of Hindu Society, they are diagonally opposed to our civilization and 
culture. They are directly contradictory to the sacramental marriage 
because it is not a contractual relationship that can be brought to an 
end by the whim and caprice of any of the parties but it is sacred bond 
of union which has its root in the past and which will have its effect 
in the future. That is the conception of Hindu marriage. These provisions 
of judicial separation or dissolution of marriage are diagonally 
opposed to what is our conception of marriage and still when the 
western countries which have been habituated to this sort of marriage 
relations — divorce and everything — when they are feeling tired of it, 
when the sanest of their thinkers are thinking of this system as ruinous 
to society, it is indeed a wonder that we are trying to imitate it. My 
submission therefore is that you should be very careful., What are the 
grounds of judicial separation ? A case of adultery. The law says that 
the marital relations can be brought to an end by judicial separation 
or by dissolution of marriage. The germs are there before the couple and 
I would respectfully draw the attention of the House whether it is not 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


576 


576 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a fact that if there is a quarrel — naturally there is bound to be quarrel 
in families so many times — if these provisions exist in the bill, they 
will give an incentive to the couple at any time of quarrel or even 
family scuffle to seek the remedy of the court and Sir, it is very cheap 
because the charge of adultery can be brought by a woman against 
her husband or a husband against a woman very easily and there 
are interested persons everywhere to disrupt the families. Result 
would be for very flimsy reasons there will be cases of divorce. It 
therefore will be ruinous to Hindu society. Our society has survived 
the onslaught of so many centuries and has successfully stood in the 
world as the ideal form of institution notwithstanding the onslaughts 
because of the inherent system of pativratabhakti. These provisions 
do not even help those communities which are by custom taking resort 
to divorce. They create a great obstacle and compel them to go to 
court. It is opposed to our culture and civilization and our accepted 
ideals of ideal marriage life. One argument has been repeated often 
viz., there is nothing radical or revolutionary about this measure, and 
the provisions regarding marriage and divorce are of a permissive 
and enabling character. If that is so, why not scrap all these 
provisions from clause 5 to 51 and make one clause in the Bill that 
every Hindu shall be competent to marry any person he likes because 
that will be only an enabling provision. He can very well, at his own 
risk, marry his own sister. Therefore it is no use providing such a 
comprehensive bill with so many sections. Why not scrap them and 
provide one general section and it will be a model of simplicity as 
also a model of the civilization and the stage through which we are 
passing. My submission therefore is these provisions from a Hindu 
oriental point of view are simply repulsive and could not be incor- 
porated and cannot be tolerated in a bill of this nature. 

I come to the next point. Under the provisions of this bill, clause 
91 is the relevant clause — every property that comes to a female either 
by inheritance from father or from father-in-law or from any other source 
will be her absolute property and the rules of devolution of 
female property are provided in clauses 106 to 109. These provisions 
are also not conducive to the attainment of peace in family life, and 
are of a disastrous character. Here again every provision is opposed 
to the accepted conception of Hindu ideal and you will find that 
the property which a female inherits and which according to clause 91 
will be the absolute property of the female will descend in the order 
also prescribed under clauses 106 to 109. That is, the first persons 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


577 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 577 


to inherit will be the husband and children equally. If there is no husband 
or children, then who are the persons under the Bill who will be entitled 
to inherit the property. There are mother, father and husband’s relations. 
May I ask humbly and respectfully every honourable Member of this 
house whether there is any father or mother in this land of Hindus who 
will relish property from his or her daughter? 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: Why not ? What is the harm ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : Perhaps my honourable friend 
comes not from India but from an outside country. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: I come from South of India. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : In India no father or mother 
will ever think of receiving anything from the daughter. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathii: That may be so in the Punjab. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : It is so in the whole of 
Northern India. I cannot speak with authority about South India. But 
so far as Northern India is concerned the very idea is repulsive. Of course 
there is an exception to this rule among those who count money and 
property over every thing else. To them dharma is no matter of their 
concern. But I am not talking of those exceptions : I am talking of the 
ordinary father or mother in Northern India. Their souls will revolt at 
the thought of accepting anything from their daughter. In kanya dan 
when a father and mother sitting together give their daughter to the 
bridegroom as also dowry and ornaments, after that in our part of the 
country, the mother or father will not even take water in the house of 
the daughter. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: It is not so bad in our part of 
the country. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: That might be a custom 
or usage prevalent in your part of the country but in my part of the 
country, an overwhelming majority will be opposed to the idea. They 
cannot even imagine receiving any inheritance from the daughter. 
Therefore the entire fabric of the rules of devolution is based on anti- 
Hindu ideals. If Mr. Bharathi takes the trouble to go into the rural 
parts in my part of the country he will be surprised to find, let alone 
the father or mother, even the inhabitants of a village will not drink 
water in another village into which the daughter of their village is 
married. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


578 


578 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi: I am told that they do not even 
pass through such a village. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava: Under the rules of devolution 
after the father and mother who are the persons entitled to inherit the 
property of the female ? If it provides that that will go to the husband’s 
relations, it is repulsive and it will create family feuds. Why should 
property go to the husband’s relations, if it has come to the daughter 
from the father ? That is why our law-givers have made several categories 
of stridhana which will accrue to different categories of people. You are 
not competent to understand the higher motives of our law-givers who 
made those salient provisions and you want to sacrifice their ideals at 
the alter of simplicity. According to our accepted notions of stridhan, 
if the property has come from the side of the father it is the father’s 
relations that are entitled to it. Why should not a provision of this 
character be incorporated in sections 106 to 109. That would be more 
acceptable to Hindu ideology . 

I now come to the other provisions of the Bill. On the day the Code 
comes into force, the joint tenancy will be deemed to have been converted 
into tenancy- in-common. The Bill makes a provision in clause 115 that 
it is open to every heir to go to a court of law and claim partition of 
the family property. Is this provision conducive to the preservation and 
maintenance of peace in the family ? After the death of the father, the 
daughter, the son, the widow of a pre-deceased son, etc., will rush to 
a court of law and claim partition as required by section 115. This will 
be like the Islamic law, entirely repugnant to Hindu ideology and cannot 
be tolerated in a Bill of this kind. 

It is claimed that this Code will resolve conflicts of opinion, that it 
is an exhaustive piece of legislation providing remedy for every malady 
in Hindu dharma. Are there not any omissions in the Bill and until they 
are filled in, will it not shatter the Hindu society ? 

Under clauses 88 and 89, you abrogate the doctrine of Pious 
Obligation. Under clause 89 you provide that the family members will 
be entitled to pay the duties existing on the joint family. What provision 
have you made when the father dies ? Who is to bear the funeral 
expenses or make provision for shradhas, or the other charitable objects 
connected with such occasions. Once this Code is brought on the Statute 
Book will there not be fight and feud between the different heirs ? On 
the death of a father every son and daughter will be so absorbed in 
assimilating the wealth of the father that they will forget their duty to 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


579 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 579 


perform the shradhas, which are essential for any self-respecting family. 
There is absolutely no provision in this regard in this Bill. 

Does the Code provide for the Hindu joint family ? In Hindu Law 
there is a distinction between co-parcenary property and joint family 
property. What is the number of families in India carrying on business? 
Is there any provision within the four corners of the Bill for that ? How 
will succession take place in joint family business ? 

You claim exhaustiveness for this Code. Have you made any provision 
for an adopted son? Under clauses 52 to 54 every Hindu male on attaining 
the age of 18 is entitled to adopt a son with the consent of his wife. 
After adoption if the father gets his own son what will be the son’s rights 
in the patrimony ? Does your Code present any solution of this problem ? 
Our Hindu law-givers or smritikaras make ample provision for different 
parts of the country. What is the position of a son born after adoption 
of a son by the father ? 

In Dayabhaga he gets one-half: under Mitakshara he gets one-third; 
in the Bombay Presidency he gets one-fourth. Have you made any 
provision here ? If not, will it not create confusion and confusion of a 
worse character ? Have you made provision for partition of the joint 
family property and so many other things which are an essential, and 
complicated, branch of Hindu Law ? My respectful submission therefore 
is that this will create problems and questions which it will be very 
difficult to answer. 

Then the question arises what will be the rights and duties of a 
son who has no share in the joint family property. Under the present 
circumstances, a son by birth has got rights in the property and that 
is a shield behind which he can stand for his maintenance, education 
and other things. You may point out to me the provisions of clauses 
126 and 128 of your Bill which lay down that it will be the duty of 
every husband to maintain his wife, and the wife may claim 
separate maintenance from him on certain grounds as those of 
illness like leprosy etc. There again is the door for litigation and a 
paradise for lawyers. And in clause 128, you will say, you have provided 
for the maintenance of children and aged parents. But by providing for 
maintenance under clauses 126 and 128, are you effectively safeguarding 
their rights ? My submission is you are not. You are placing them in 
a worse position than what they occupy under the present Hindu Law. 
Under the present Hindu Law a son has an inherent right to maintenance 
out of the family property, and if the father or manager or karta of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


580 


580 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the family is so undutiful as not to look to his interests he has his remedy 
in a court of law. He can even claim partition. Every student of Hindu 
Law knows that while a minor has very restricted rights to claim 
partition in Hindu Law, if the father or the manager or karta of the 
family abuses his power to the detriment and prejudice of the minor, 
he has the legal remedy open to him and he can proceed in a court of 
law to enforce his right to partition. That is a valuable right and you 
are taking away that valuable right. 

Similarly you say that in clause 126 you have provided for the 
maintenance of the wife and in clause 128 you have provided for the 
maintenance of children and aged parents. If a husband happens to be 
penniless, if he cannot earn, if he has got nothing to support himself, 
how can he support his wife ? Therefore I submit that this pseudo right 
conceded to the wife is only a sham and a paper right. In the present 
Hindu Law every wife, every female has a valuable right of residence 
and of maintenance and she can enforce the right through a court of 

law if the manager or the karta abuses the right. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi: Even if her husband is pen- 
niless ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : I am talking of joint family 
property. The matter will be different if you decide by a piece of 
legislation that every piece of property is to disappear and there should 
be socialisation and nationalisation of every property. But, keeping intact 
the institution of joint family you are depriving the minors, the widows 
and the females of their valuable rights which exist under the present 
Hindu law. In the name of equality which is sham and paper equality 

you are perpetrating a wrong which it will be very difficult to remedy. 

My submission therefore is that judging from every point of view this 
piece of legislation is not only opposed to the accepted principles of Hindu 
Law but is liable to create such confussion in Hindu Society which it 
will be very difficult to overcome or remedy. 

Sir, before I conclude I have to sum up what I stated on the 2nd 
of April and now. I said that there is absolutely no necessity and 
no desirability of the codification of Hindu Law. It is neither necessary 
nor desirable. It is not wanted by judicial opinion in the country. 
There is no conflict of authority of such a series character as to warrant 
the interference of a Legislature. There is no public demand for a 
measure of this character. The quntum of evidence upon which the 
Rau Committee relied was analysed by me in my speech on the 2nd 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


581 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 581 


of April and I pointed out that the overwhelming weight of opinion 
in the evidence recorded by the Rao Committee was opposed to every 
innovation and change that is incorporated in the Rao Committee Bill 
which has been further aggravated in the present Hindu Code Bill 
as it has emerged out of the Select Committee. On every point, on 
the question of divorce, on the question of sacramental cum civil 
marriage, making sacramental marriage liable to be converted into 
civil marriage at one’s sweet will under clause 21, there was 
opposition, and opposition from every quarter. From every quarter 
the overwhelming weight of opinion was against the ending of the 
joint family status. Therefore, on every crucial point, the overhelming 
opinion was against the Rao Committee Bill. Even now in the opinions 
that are pouring in from the various quarters in the country, from 
judicial quarters, from bar associations, from other citizens, there is 
a unanimity of opinion that a measure of this subversive type is not 
at all required under the present circumstances. Therefore I had 
submitted, and I repeat it today, that codification of the Hindu Law 
is neither desirable nor necessary. 

I have pointed out that the marriage provisions contained in the 
Bill are a misnomer for marriage. It is in fact introducing the 
principles of Islamic and Christian marriages into the Hindu Code 
under the garb of sacramental marriage. It will be a sham. It will 
be shameful for any Hindu to go into a marriage of this character 
which is liable to be changed at one’s sweet will into a civil marriage. 
This cannot be tolerated. 

Shri S. Nagappa : This Bill does not prevent sacramental 

marriages. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : I have already met your 
argument, an argument that is often repeated on the floor of this 
House and outside, that this is an enabling measure, a permissive 
measure. If that is so, scrap off everything and have one omnibus 
clause in the Bill that everybody is competent to marry anybody. That 
will meet the requirements. Why do you make a fetish of the 
sacramental marriage ? The sacramental marriage of the character 
you have provided in the Bill is nothing but a mockery, an insult 
to the time-honoured institution of sacramental marriage. It is only 
a misnomer to deceive the people, to convince them that there is no 
departure from the eastablished practice. It is a hoax that is sought 
to be perpetrated on the Hindu society. No self-respecting Hindu can 
possibly tolerate this state of affairs. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


582 


582 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Better do away with these provisions commencing from clause 5 to 
52. They are wholly opposed to Hindu ideology, to Hindu culture and 
to Hindu civilization. That is my submission in respect of the marriage 
provisions. As regards the divorce clauses I had already made my 
submission. About adoption, I had said and I repeat it today that the 
very conception of adoption is a creation of Hindu law, and if you cannot 
in this modern age, on account of what you call your advanced views, 
subscribe to that ideal of adoption, then do away with adoption altogether 
but don’t provide for a hotch-potch adoption of the nature you have done. 
According to the provisions of the Bill, every person, every Hindu, can 
be adopted as a son. There is no restriction of Gotra, there is no 
restriction of caste, there is no restriction of the status, and it is left 
to the person concerned to adopt any person. Those, who are well 
conversant with the codes of Hindu law, very well know how the adoption 
of a stranger in the family has been the source of litigation. There are 
well-established, customs and usages having behind them the sanctity 
and authority of judicial pronouncements whereby only a member of a 
family of the same Gotra can be adopted. All those usages, all those 
well-established customs are very easily given the go-by; without even 
thinking of the disastrous consequences this step is being taken. I 
shudder to think of the very terrible consequences that are bound to 
follow from a provision of this character. Better do away with the 
institution of adoption altogether rather than provide for adoption of this 
kind. In fact, I may be permitted to remark — and I do so with full 
responsibility — that the sponsors of this Bill had an inherent abhorrence, 
an inherent hatred against everything related to Hindu culture, and that 
is why we find provisions of this character being included without 
appreciating or finding out what were the motives of the Hindu law- 
givers in providing for adoption. The sole purpose of adoption under the 
Hindu Law is that a person may have a son to administer to his spiritual 
needs, to offer oblations on his death. That is the sole purpose of the 
conception of adoption but by making a provision that any Tom, Dick 
and Harry can be adopted you are cutting at the very root of that 
conception. Do not therefore, make such a provision. Better do away with 
adoption. It doesn’t exist in so many societies. Where is the necessity 
to perpetuate it if you are so averse to it ? But then do not make a 
mockery of the conception of adoption. 

Sir, I shall submit that every provision in this Bill has got a stigma 
which is anti-Hindu and therefore cannot be acceptable to any Hindu. 
To me this Bill is an insidious effort on the part of its sponsors to 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


583 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 583 


take the Hindus out of their Indian moorings and to launch them on 
foreign waters of Arabia and Jerusalem. Where is the necessity for this 
Hindu Code ? Why don’t you extend the provisions of the Indian 
Succession Act of 1925 by a stroke of the pen to the entire Hindu 
community? By this very convenient and simplified method — and we are 
very much enamoured of simple legislation — it will be very easy to 
provide for the entire Hindu society. 

Before I conclude, I think it is my duty, and an honest duty, to sound 
a note of warning. You very well know that the Hindu law is a law 
not piloted from outside. It is not an imposition from above, it is not 
the creation of a sovereign power, it is not the result of a ukase of any 
king or of any legislature. That is the greatest merit about it. It is a 
spontaneous development from centuries past. The texts of the Smritis 
and The Nibhandhaka have not created the laws; they have only 
explained and elucidated the accepted principles of Hindu Law, but those 
principles as readable from the texts have never been the governing force 
of the Hindu society. The governing force of the Hindu society has been 
a consistently developing usage and custom governing the different 
sections of the society. That development was spontaneous. In fact, 
looking at it from a realistic point of view, the Hindu society is a working 
legislature in continuous session not of the few selected persons as this 
House is but a legislature of the entire community, that modifies and 
moulds its law according to its requirements. That is the supreme beauty 
of Hindu Law. And that you are distorting, that you are deforming by 
this piece of legisaltion by taking from it vitality, elasticity, mobility, 
spontaniety and adaptability to the everchanging circumstances of the 
society. Sir, I, as an humble Member of this House, have a duty to say 
that you must be very careful before you tamper with it. It is a law 
that has come into existence as a result of centuries of development and 
before you tamper with its time-honoured institutions, customs and 
usages, you should keep one thing in mind. The India of ours does not 
reside in urban towns like Allahabad and Delhi. The real India lives 
in the five lakhs of villages. The life of the villagers is so intimately 
interwoven with the texture of their society that whatever modifications 
you might make by this piece of legislation, they will resist to the limit 
of their might before you take away from them the time-honoured 
usage and customs to which they have been submitting as a matter of 
course for centuries. Without doing any benefit to the Hindu Society, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-ll MK AMIT 21-10-2013>5-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


584 


584 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


you will be opening the door for a few disgruntled persons who want 
to take advantage of this innovated piece of legislation. 

Dr. Mono Mohan Das (West Bengal); Is he not casting aspersions 
on some of the members of this House ? He has repeated the same thing 
so many times. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : I have not referred to any 
Members of this House. My hon. friend should have the patience and 
the tolerance to hear the opposite views. My submission is that you 
cannot put a brake to this spontaneous growth and development of Hindu 
law by this piece of legislation and if you pass it, you will be spoiling 
the beauty of Hindu law rather than adding to it. This piece of legislation 
is so disastrous in its character and so destructive in its nature that 
it is difficult to imagine the bringing of a constructive approach to bear 
upon it. The Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of the House suggested 
the other day that we should meet in a formal or informal committee 
to devise a compromise upon which the orthodox and unorthodox sections 
can agree. I join issue with him. But I feel that the Bill has been 
conceived with a mental outlook and psychology which is wholly 
repugnant and unacceptable to Hindu ideology. Consequently, in spite 
of our sincere efforts to arrive at a constructive approach of this measure, 
it will be very difficult to do so. The safest course for the Government 
to adopt is to withhold this measure and wait for a more opportune time 
for a legislature elected on adult franchise with a mandate from the 
electorate to change the entire structure of the Hindu society. Until and 
unless there is such a mandate, I submit, and I question and question 
with vehemence the propriety of this legislature to deal with a measure 
of this vital importance to the Hindu society. 

With these words, Sir, I resume my seat. 

Shri Loknath Misra (Orissa : General) : On a point of order. 
Although I do not desire to oppose the consideration of this Bill, I 
think its consideration is totally barred and bolted by the very 
Constitution which we have recently passed. Of course, it may be 
argued that it has not yet come into force. But we are quite sure 
that we are not going to pass this Bill this time and by the time 
the Bill is passed the Constitution must have come into force. If you 
will permit me, I will detail my reasons for saying that this Bill is 
against the Constitution. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


585 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 585 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have heard the point of order sufficiently. The 
new Constitution has not yet been implemented. It has not come into force. 
I do not propose to give any ruling on the question as to whether it will 
stand in the way of this Bill being passed into law if it comes into force. 
Under the present Constitution, this House is thoroughly competent to get 
on with this Bill. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras : General) : In view of the 
importance of this measure and the fact that the number of people who 
want to speak is large, would the Chair consider the desirability of using 
its discretion and imposing a time-limit ? 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Some Honourable Members : Yes, yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao (Madras : General): This point was raised by 
Mr. Sidhva and disposed of by you. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Mr. Sidhva raised another point. He wanted to 
know if this House would continue the discussion tomorrow and what length 
of time has been allotted. It is an official Bill and it is, for Government 
to allot the number of days, I replied. The position is that the Speaker can 
only say whether debate on a particular Bill has been sufficient or not. So 
far as this Bill is concerned, hon. Members are fully aware that no time- 
limit can be imposed. {Hear, hear). 

Hon. Member will kindly wait and see. The general discussion on this 
Bill was begun so early as 24th February 1949. It continued on the 25th, 
26th, 28th, 1st March, 1st April and 2nd April. One hon. Member took six 
hours and eight minutes. We spent in all 6 days, 9 hours and 20 minutes. 
All the same, only 14 hon. Members have spoken so far. The last speaker 
who has just concluded, Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava, started at 3- 
15 p.m. on 2-4-49 and went on till 5 that day — one and a three-quarter 
hours. Today he went on from 11-50 to 12-57. At this rate, we will have 
to sit nearly a year if all hon. Members are to have a chance to speak. 
Many of the points which have been made in the speeches are all very 
enlightening. I say nothing against the speeches. But, I have received a large 
number of requests from hon. Members for opportunities to speak. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal: General): We are all in 
so much darkness. We want light from every side. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Light from every side is coming, but if we proceed 
at this rate, light from many sides would not come. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


586 


586 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Therefore, I would request hon. Members to limit their speeches, as 
far as possible, to half an hour. On all Resolutions fifteen minutes are 
placed at the disposal of hon. Members and they are able to put their 
cases perfectly well within that time. I have given twice as much time. 
But I do not insist upon it. It is simply my suggestion to the House. 
Otherwise, if a closure is applied tomorrow, possibly by that time a number 
of Members may have spoken and sometimes wittingly or unwittingly if the 
House is in favour of closure, it has to be accepted. I am giving a warning 
in advance. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Minister of State for Transport 
and Railways) : I only want to say that I hope to finish before the time- 
limit fixed by you. I hope you will permit me to proceed in the afternoon. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It ought not to be said ahead. I am leaving it 
to hon. Members to decide, so that all Members may have equal opportunities. 
Normally, half an hour is the time-limit I suggest. If the House agrees. 

Some Honourable Members : Agreed. 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order, Mr. Sahu wants to say something. 

Shri Lakshminarayan Sahu (Orissa : General) : Sir, I would like to 
know if priority for speaking will be given to those Members who are willing 
to restrict their speches to only five, seven or ten minutes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Therefore, if I have to accept that suggestion, 
I hope hon. Members will also indicate in their letters to me how many 
minutes they are likely to take and I will ring the bell as soon as that minute 
is over. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Before you adjourn, I want to say just 
one thing. You said just now that it will be perfectly open to Members to 
move closure. But according to all parliamentary procedure, it is open to 
the Speaker to say whether there has been sufficient debate or not and 
whether the closure is justified or not. that is a well established practice 
and you also reiterated that you follow that. In view of that statement, do 
you say beforehand, even today, that you will have to accept closure 
tomorrow? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


587 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 587 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Chair has no right to make up its mind 
in advance. It is now 1 o’clock and the House stands adjourned till 2-30 
p.m. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past two of the Clock. 


The Assembly re-assembled at Half Past Two of the Clock, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) in the Chair. 

HINDU CODE — Contd. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, I rise to offer my whole- 
hearted support to the Hindu Code as it has emerged from the Select 
Committee. Sir, I have been watching the progress of this lawmaking from 
its earliest beginnings. I had the privilege of tendering evidence before the 
Rau Committee and since it has emerged from that Committee it has 
undergone many changes and, in my view, steady improvement. 

Sir, I feel that this Hindu Code is merely a continuation, in the social 
sphere, of the great Constitution we have completed the other day in our 
capacity as a constitution-making body. Sir, what are the basic factors of 
that Constitution ? It is based on the unification, on the integration and 
on the strengthening of India as one political entity. Similarly this Bill is 
based on the principles of unification, integration and strengthening of the 
Hindu community. Sir, unless the Hindu community is unified, integrated 
and strengthened, I do not see how the great Constitution we have made 
can be successfully worked. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Unified by divorce ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : The idea that politically you 
can be well-advanced, that in the field of economics you can preach socialism, 
but yet be a believer in social stagnation is wholly incompatible and 
unrealistic. India has to move on all fronts, or not at all and I think the 
change and reform in the social sphere is as indispensable as our progress 
in the political and economic spheres. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Democracy in marriage also ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : My hon. friends may well 
ask why we should not compile a code for the whole country rather 
than a unified code for the Hindu community alone. Well, Sir, while 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


588 


588 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


we were making the Constitution there were many who were asking . why 
we continued to have provinces, why we were building on the Government 
of India Act and why we were continuing to have Rajpramukhs ? Sir, our 
argument in reply was that while we wanted change and reform we wanted 
to build, as far as possible, on the existing foundations, that we wanted 
a judicious combination of conservation of the existing forces and the forces 
that make for change and reform. This Bill is based on the same principle. 
It seeks to conserve as much of the Hindu law as is consistent with modern 
needs and ideas and it seeks to change wherever such change is necessary. 
I think that is the only way the whole country as well as the Hindu society 
can progress without internal disruptions and violent revolutions. Sir, our 
policy is one of peaceful and voluntary change and this Bill is a notable 
attempt in that process of peaceful change in the social sphere. 

Sir, I don’s want to go into the clauses of the Bill. The time is not yet 
ripe for it and when we take up clause by clause it will be time to scrutinise 
particular provisions. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : That stage will not come. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Well, let us see. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Not unless there are elaborate lathi 
charges outside. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : There were people who were 
prophesying that the Constitution would never be passed ; but we have 
passed it. In the same way, we are going to put this Bill on the Statute 
Book. 

Sir, I am not saying that certain clauses, or even parts are not susceptible 
of slight changes or adjustments. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Slight! 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : But I shall confine myself to 
the broad principles contained in the Bill and, leave details to a future 
occasion. 

Sir, this Bill has got four aspects, namely, codification, unification, 
rationalisation and reform. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri (Assam: General) - And falsification too. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Well, I will leave that part to 
you. So far as the parts dealing with adoption, with minority, with 
guardianship and with maintenance are concerned, they are simply 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


589 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 589 


codification of existing Hindu law. &n Honourable Member: Question). You 
may question it, but I think Sir B. N. Rau is a far greater legal authority 
than the hon. Member. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : That is absolutely no argument. He 
may be or not. I can understand an argument — but this sort of talk I cannot 
stand. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : But what is the meaning in arguing 
that such and such a man is far above anybody else here ? Is that any 
argument ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no meaning in all hon. Members talking 
simultaneously. Each hon. Member will have his turn and I am prepared 
to sit here as long as the House wants me to. 

So far as the hon. Member’s reference to Sir B. N. Rau is concerned, 
he probably meant that he was a Judge of the Calcutta High Court and 
it is not unparliamentary to say that the opinion of a particular person is 
highly valuable. Even as an individual the hon. Member perhaps meant that 
he knows him much better than any other Member of the House. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, I merely stated that Sir 
B. N. Rau is a better legal authority than the questioner. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri : On a point of order, Sir, Hindu Law 
is absolutely and intimately connected with Hindu religion. Can anyone 
tolerate the idea of a non-Hindu being an authority on Hindu Law and 
principles ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can well appreciate differences of opinion among 
hon. Members. But there is no room for excitement. Let there be patience 
first and all hon. Members will certainly contribute to the debate in a 
harmonious atmosphere. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : The hon. Member who just now 
interrupted seems to say that Shri B. N. Rau is not a Hindu ; it is an 
insinuation which should not be allowed. Shri B. N. Rau is not here and 
it is your duty, Sir, to protect him. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not in a position to say to what religion 
any particular person belongs. I do not know it personally. But I expect 
hon. Members to keep within limits, and because they have got certain 
privileges, they should not defame others. They should keep within limits, 
and if an hon. Member makes an aspersion, it will be wrong. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


590 


590 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, I do not mind interruptions; 
but if those who are opposed to this Bill think that they have the monopoly 
of such tactics, they are mistaken. Sir, I assert with all the emphasis I can 
that Shri B. N. Rau is as good a Hindu as any in this House. And so far 
as I am concerned, I may say that my ancestors have come from very 
orthodox Hindus, and up to this moment we have not eaten even a little 
bit of fish, and I may claim to be more orthodox than. . . . 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar : General) : Is eating or not eating 
fish a test of orthodoxy? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : In my part of the country eating 
fish is considered to be the most heterodox fashion. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : And in my part of the country eating 
iddlies and rasom is considered most objectionable. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let hon. Members come to more lasting things 
like marriages and divorce, than iddlies and fish. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : Let us not reduce the House to a fish market. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I again say that so far as 
adoption, guardianship, minority etc. are concerned, they are merely 
codification of existing law, as can be found in the judgments of British 
courts. Sir, whatever Manu might have written, whatever Yagnavalkya might 
have written, the present Hindu law is the law as interpreted in the British 
Courts for the last one hundred and fifty years, and against this interpretation, 
even Manu and Yagnavalkiya are utterly helpless. So the Hindu law now 
is the law as interpreted and as laid down by the British judges in this 
country. 

An Honourable Member : British judges ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : British or Britishized judges. 
Therefore, Sir, I think we are at least as competent to change that law as 
the British Judges who have changed the ancient law into the present Hindu 
law as it is. 

Sir, I come now to the next aspect of the Hindu Code — the unification 
portion of it. I am surprised that any Hindu looking to the future 
should say that so far as the law is concerned, no unification is necessary, 
that each part can have a regional law, that in Bengal we can have 
the Dayabhaga law, that in Malabar they can have the Marumakkattayam 
law and other parts the Mitakshara law and so on, that everything 
should be as it was in the ancient days. I cannot 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


591 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 591 


understand people when they say that in politics and in economics we shall 
be in the year 1950 A.D. but so far as the law is concerned we shall be 
in 1950 B.C. Sir, to say so is wholly a disintegrating and disastrous 
proposition. If Hindus have to be one community, if they have to have vitality 
they must all come under one law, whether it be Dayabhaga or Mitakshra. 
I can understand some people saying, “Let us have Mitakshara” or “Let 
Bengal come under Mitakshara”. I can understand other people saying, let 
them all come under the Dayabhaga law. But to say that Hindus should 
be dissected into various regional groups, each having its own law, so that 
if a Bengali goes to Malabar, the courts would have to interpret three types 
of Hindu law, that I think, Sir, is pronouncing the doom of Hindu society. 
Sir, the enemies of Hindu society cannot ask for anything better than that 
Hindus should be administered by a dozen regional laws. Sir, by this Bill 
we are at last bringing Hindu society under one unified Hindu law, let it 
be any law, but it should be one unified Hindu law for the entire Hindu 
community, Sir, in this Bill .... 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Sir, on a point of order, the hon. 
Member is speaking communalism in this House. He is talking of unifying 
all the Hindus, probably against the Muslims and others. He wants one law 
for the Hindus ; so he is preaching communalism. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This point of order only enlivens the debate, but 
it is not really any point of order. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, the day this Bill is put 
on the Statute Book, the whole process of assimilation will begin and it will 
not be long before the rest of the Indians in this country will begin to conform 
to that law, and if necessary, we shall give them minor changes so that 
the whole country will come under one civil code. Sir, this process is not 
a disintegrating process but a cementing process. The process will go on 
and before long. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : It is going on outside. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras : General) : It is going on inside. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Inspired by you. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I have been in this House too 
long to be worried by these interruptions. 

Now, the question is whether we should prefer the Dayabhaga law 
or the Mitakshara law. My friend Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai said that 
Mitakshara law is followed by twenty crores of people and Dayabhaga 
is followed by five crores, and asked why should we choose the law 
of the five crores rather than the law of the twenty crores. I do feel 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


592 


592 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


that comparatively Mitakshra law was intended to serve the needs of ancient 
rural communities whose main property was agricultural land. It was on 
the basis of that conception of society that the right of birth and the right 
of survivorship were evolved. But we are fast evolving out of that primitive 
community into a modern community in which property goes from the 
immovable to the movable property. You have immovable properties 
diminishing and movable properties increasing. Even immovable property 
is being converted into movable property, in the form of shares, cash savings 
deposits and government securities and other things. Therefore, we should 
adopt that system which is in tune with these changes from the tangible 
immovable property to intangible and notional property. Where property is 
largely intangible, this right of birth is really impracticable. You cannot 
enforce it. It will always be open to the father to dispose of securities or 
shares or movable property. It is not possible for a son to inherit a right 
in shares. It is possible for him to inherit a share in agricultural land, but 
it is not possible for him to inherit a right in cash securities or other movable 
property. That is why this Bill has given preference to the Dayabhaga system 
of law rather than the Mitakshra system of law : not because it had any 
disrespect to the twenty crores who are under the Mitakshara law, nor 
because it had any special preference to the Dayabhaga system of law. Today, 
the right of inheritance by birth and right of survivorship have become 
archaic and impractical institutions. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Primitive. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Either we drop them deliberately 
through legislation or they will be discontinued in an irregular and disorderly 
fashion. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Follow Bengal in other respects also. 

Some Honourable Members : Order, order. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : On a point of order, Sir, what right 
has a Member to call ‘ order, order I find Shrimati Durgabai calling ‘order, 
order’. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal : General): Is this a point of 
order ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am extremely glad to find that hon. Members 
are sharing the right of the Speaker along with me. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : (rose). 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


593 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 593 


The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I am afraid I shall not be able 
to give way to my Hon. friend from Assam. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : All right, I shall keep quiet. If you 
want to suffer from the tyranny of women, you suffer. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, much has been said about 
the so-called sacred institution of joint family. In the mediaeval and ancient 
times, this so-called joint family might have served a very useful purpose. 
It is not my business to deny that. But, today, joint family exists only in 
controversy. I know the peasants ; I have been in the rural areas probably 
much longer than many of you. I have worked for ten years continuously 
in the rural areas. I know, Sir, the first thing, when a peasant’s son marries, 
the peasant does is, to set up a new house, give the son his share in the 
ancestral land, one acre or half an acre or one-quarter of an acre, and 
establishes the son as a separate family. Unless this is done, the peasant 
knows that his family will be disintegrated. In the case of certain very rich 
people, the so-called joint family may continue with a double system of 
account keeping for certain purposes, to cheat the Income-tax and for other 
purposes. Ordinarily, even today, in the middle class families, what 
happens? One son lives in the village; another son is in Delhi in service 
in the Government of India; another son is in Madras in some other service; 
another son does business. What is the meaning of maintaining a joint family 
and ancestral property ? It is better that they are allowed to partition. Then, 
if they want voluntarily to come back and live together, let them become 
a co-operative society, let them become any kind of legal personality suited 
to modern conditions. To continue the joint family owing to ancestral worship, 
without regard to the existing circumstances, I think it is sheer coservatism 
run mad. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar : General) : A Daniel come to judgement. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : My hon. friend from Bihar is 
a supreme example of Daniel as he has proved in the constitution making, 
and I am sure he will prove himself so here. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad : You are also. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I am not giving way. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let there be no talk across the table. I am 
exceedingly sorry ; I have been a little indulgent. I find an acrimonious 
controversy is carried on. So long as there is good humour there is 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


594 


594 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


no harm. However, the hon. Member must be allowed to go on. He may 
lose the trend of his thought. Otherwise also it is inconvenient to go on 
being harassed. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Mr. Santhanam is in a very good mood. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Because my case is simple and 
straightforward and I need not get a bad temper or raise all kinds of fantastic 
bogeys. 

Let me now come to the next aspect, that is, rationalisation. One point 
which has evoked the greatest amount of opposition is the daughter’s right 
to the father’s property. If the old property had remained intact and if 
property consisted only of agricultural lands, then I can sympathise with 
those who say that to bring in a foreigner, an outsider into the family may 
mean great deal of inconvenience. I have already stated that property is 
moving from immovable property to movable. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh (C. P. and Berar : General): How can it ? All landed 
property cannot be dissolved. The Hindu Code Bill will not evaporate lands. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : So far as the peasant community 
is concerned, they automatically divide on marriage. If a son-in-law is 
willing to come and live in the village, I do not see why he should not be 
allowed. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : Hereafter, the rule will be divide and rule. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : If the sons can divide, the 
daughter also can divide. In the future property will consist of cash securities 
and other things. Therefore, there is no reason why the daughter should 
not have the same right as the son. As a matter of adjustment, I am prepared 
to throw out one or two ideas. In estimating the share of the married 
daughters in a family, I think it would not be unfair to set off any amounts 
which may have been spent for their marriage. In many of the middle class 
families, the amount spent for the marriages is often equal to if not greater 
than the share which the daughter may get. I think that would be a fair 
set off. Similarly, if there is only one dwelling house or if there is only a 
small extent of agricultural land, I think it will not be unfair to say that 
so far as the daughter’s share is concerned, she must take her share in 
the form of cash or other movable property rather than insist on a partition 
of the house or the immovable property. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


595 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 595 


Ch. Ranbir Singh (East Punjab : General): Wherefrom to bring that 
cash ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : If you have a creditor, where 
will you find the cash ? Is it not possible ? It may be paid in easy annuities 
or in some such manner. In a harmonious family, adjustment will be easy; 
in an unharmonious family, courts can find ways and means of adjusting 
the burden without inequity to any party. Subject to these adjustments, I 
do not see any rational justification why the daughter should be treated 
exactly on the same basis as a son. I do not think there will be any kind 
of hardship. All kinds of bogeys have been raised. After all, the daughter 
becomes a daughter-in-law. If the daughter gets a share, similarly the 
daughter in the other house gets a share and therefore in the long run, 
except for an adjustment of legal rights through the establishment of self 
respect and social equality between man and woman, the property 
arrangements will remain much the same; because at present the daughter 
does not take away from the father’s house; she gets more in her father- 
in-law’s house. Hereafter, under the Bill, she will take a little from the 
father’s house, much less from the father-in-law’s house. In the long run, 
there will not be much difference in the distribution of property. Only the 
process will be more satisfactory, and more self-respecting to all the parties 
concerned. The daughter will feel that she is as good as a brother; that 
is all. I think that that is a feeling which we ought to encourage in this 
country. We have removed all social inequalities in policies; we have given 
the women the same equal franchise as men. Why in point of inheritance 
and succession alone should we have any kind of stigma based on sex ? 
I think the sooner we voluntarily give it up, the greater will be the strength 
of the country. Otherwise, some day or other, on account of the adult 
franchise, there will be such a vast volume of feeling among the women 
all over the country that would compel us to make the change. Then, it 
would be a disgrace to the men of India. It is better you do it now in advance 
of adult franchise so that we can go to the probably five or six crores of 
women who will be voters and say, “look here, we have done the right thing 
before you wanted it; we have given you the votes; we have given you 
property rights; you are equal to men; there be no more sex conflicts.” 

The last point I have to deal with is the question of reform. It 
3 p.m. is in the field of marriage there is any real attempt at reform. 

It is partly permissive and partly compulsory. The one 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


596 


596 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


compulsion is monogamy. I want all my friends and Members of this House 
to stand up and say whether they approve this reform or not. They have 
been very prudently silent on this subject and in spite of speaking for three 
hours, I don’t see why people avoid this subject. Do they want to establish 
monogamy or not ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Monogamy is already established. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Some people actually enjoy the 
luxury of two or more wives, others enjoy mentally the possibility of more 
wives! 

Shri H, V. Kamath : What about polyandry ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Therefore I say this that this 
is one thing in which the old Aryan tradition had made a profound mistake. 
It is time that we who consider ourselves to be the glorious descendants 
of the great Aryans now confess that it was a mistake and correct it rather 
voluntarily and unanimously. This polygamy must go. But complete and 
absolute monogamy will also become a legal fiction unless you provide 
reasonable facilities for divorce in very hard cases. Unless we provide such 
an outlet, it will bring evil. 

Smt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Do you agree for the women being 
prosecuted for adultery ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I agree to women being subjected 
to same penalties for the same crimes but probably my hon. friend from 
Assam has a soft corner for that subject. Monogamy and divorce provisions 
go together. They must be taken as one co-ordinated law and in this respect 
this Bill does propose a reform which is not sanctioned by the Shastras but 
this is a reform. . . . 

Pandit Govind Malaviya (U. P. : General): Do I understand that the 
hon. member will oppose monogamy also if divorce is not sanctioned ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I will support monogamy in 
any case but I will support it in a rational form rather than in an irrational 
form. If my friend wants monogamy and at the same time that wherever 
a husband is impotent or a criminal, there should be no divorce or vice versa, 
then I think he wants monogamy in an irrational form. I want it in a rational 
form. That is the difference between us. 

I will just touch one other aspect. One other great merit of this 
Bill it takes away all legal sanction from the caste system. We 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


597 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 597 


abolished untouchability in the Constitution. Now we take the social reform 
further and take away all legal sanction for caste. Here in this Bill whether 
it is for marriage or for any other purpose, all Hindus from the so called 
Untouchables upto the so called Acharya Brahmins — all of them are 
one. 

Some Honourable Members : Without a caste, who is a Hindu ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : My friend asks “Without a caste, 
who is a Hindu ?” With the caste, I think, Hindu is a monster according 
to me. (Hear, hear). In this country we want to establish a Hindu Community 
without caste. Either we cease to be Hindus altogether or we establish 
Hinduism without caste. There is no alternative left for us. 

Shri Lakshminarayan Sahu : Mohammadans also can be called Hindus. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : On the day the Muslims accept 
the Gita and Vedanta, I am prepared to embrace them as Hindus. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao : Even Gita refers to caste. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let there be less of this cross talk. The hon. 
Member may go on. Each one is trying to persuade the other. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : In spite of interruptions I am 
going to convince some of my friends. My friend Mr. Tirumala Rao says 
that I am swearing by the Gita. What I am saying is they form the 
minimum article of faith for all the Hindus. Therefore, if after this Bill, 
there are no distinctions between Hindus, Muslims and Christians, then it 
is better for the whole country. We are not proud of keeping alive 
distinctions which have no meaning or which are irrational. If Muslims 
also remove all such distinctions which are irrational; if Christians remove 
all distinctions which are irrational, we shall before long meet on a plane 
in which we are all one — whatever we may call ourselves. Meanwhile our 
object both in the Constitution and in this Bill is to see that the majority 
community in this country are strong, united and have shed all prejudices 
and practices which have divided it into sects and will become an 
invincible foundation on which the glory and strength of future India 
can be built. I am sure that without this Bill and without the changes the 
Bill advocates, the Hindu community will be a weak, torn and unprogressive 
community and if the majority of the people continue in that condition 
we cannot make much of the political and other economic opportunities 
which the Constitution and God have given us. Therefore I have said 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


598 


598 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


this is really complementary to the Constitution which we have enacted and 
it is in the supreme fitness of things that the same body which enacted 
the Constitution will also be enacting this Hindu Code into Law. I hope 
it will be put on the Statute Book and our descendants will say that these 
people not only enacted the Constitution but also reformed the Hindu law. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Destroyed the Constitution ! 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : I believe our ancestors are 
watching and are blessing us for this. 

Shri Loknath Misra : On a point of information. My friend has just 
now sworn by the Vedanta and the Bhagvad Gita. Is he prepared to reject 
any provision that will go against the tenets of these ? 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : If they are based on wrong 
premises, I am bound to reject them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is unnecessary to carry on this argument. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Sir, I do not want to tire the 
House. I have dealt with the main points which came to my mind. I wish 
to appeal to those who by ancient prejudice have come to feel that it is 
their duty to oppose the Bill to reconsider their attitude, to have another 
vision — the vision of a Hindu community without caste, without distinctions, 
all pulling as one man. If we could convert the present disintegrated, weak 
and for a thousand years servile Hindu community into a very strong, healthy 
and great community, we would have done a work which our sons and 
grandsons will be proud of. 

Shri H. V. Pataskar (Bombay : General): Sir, we are considering a Bill 
which is going to revolutionise the structure of the Hindu society. That 
society comprises more than about 25 crores of people at the present time. 
It is therefore not unnatural that even the common man has begun to take 
interest in what is happening and it is best in the interests-of all sides, 
to take into account the fact that when we are revolutionising by this Bill 
the whole structure of Hindu society, it is not desirable that we should ignore 
the feelings that have been roused in the common man with respect to the 
provisions contained in the Bill. 

The common man is at the present moment ill-equipped with education. 
He is worried with the problem of feeding himself and his dependents. 
He is faced with scarcity of clothing, for want of funds if for nothing 
else, and he generally finds life so difficult. Even then he has begun 
to take interest in this legislation because he thinks that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


599 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 599 


this Bill is going to affect the structure of his Hindu society, which is the 
growth and product of several centuries past. Therefore it is that we must 
first educate him before we undertake the serious task of changing the whole 
structure of the society to which he belongs. I will make it first clear that 
I am not opposed to many of the provisions of the Bill but the time selected 
for the purpose, to my mind, is most inopportune. I propose to take only 
20 minutes and if I am allowed to make my remarks without interruptions 
I will be able to finish it within that time, because I am aware that there 
are many members of this house who are interested either on one side or 
the other and who want to take part in the debate., 

The common man, so far as I have been able to understand his reactions 
to the Bill, thinks that at present the attention of the Government should 
be concentrated on the problems which affect him in the matter of his food, 
clothing, inflation and several other things. When he is worried about his 
day to day needs and what he requires for his sustenance he naturally asks 
why are the Government interested in what form his marriage should be, 
whether he should have one wife or more, when he cannot even sustain 
one. All these things may be necessary and I am not opposed to reform. 
It has been admitted and our leaders are also saying it that we are passing 
through very critical times. We know the difficulties of the people, There 
is scarcity of food, clothing and the other necessities of life. Compared to 
the common man we are living here a comfortable life. He naturally 

thinks that what the leaders should concentrate upon is more the solution 
of his day to day problems than the problems relating to marriage, 
inheritance, etc. These things have been there for centuries past and it would 
not matter if they go on in the same way for some more months or even 
years. 

If our sisters who are enthusiastic about the Bill or our other friends 
who are clamouring for the immediate codification and amendment of 
the Hindu Law, if they approach the common man in the rural areas, 
they will find that he is so much worried about so many other things 
that he is surprised why at this moment you should rush a measure 
of this sort through in this house. He naturally thinks that this should 
be stayed for the time being. There is quite a lot of discontent in 

the country. On account of the partition there is the problem of the 
refugees who have to be settled and sheltered. At this moment is it 

necessary to interest ourselves so intently on this question, as 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


600 


600 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to what form our marriages should be ? The time chosen for rushing the 
Bill through is not very opportune and it is likely to add to the difficulties 
of the situation rather than do otherwise. 

What are the subjects dealt with under this Code ? Marriage, Inheritance 
and Adoption. So far as marriage is concerned there is even now the Civil 
Marriage Act, under which those that do not want to marry in the orthodox 
way can marry. Many people are as a matter of fact doing it. Therefore 
this measure does not look so urgent as made out. 

An Honourable Member : Under that Act you have to say that you 
do not belong to any religion. 

Shri H. V. Pataskar : That is gone my dear friend : It is dead and 
gone, long past. Under the Civil Marriage Act, any two Hindus belonging 
to any caste or community, without making a declaration that they do not 
belong to any religion, can get married and there is nothing to prevent them 
from doing so. 

There is much agitation with respect to the question of inheritance. We 
have laid down the equality of the sexes as a principle in our Constitution 
and in these days it is not possible for anyone to go back upon it. The 
objection raised is not with regard to the equality of the sexes. A father 
who has a son and a daughter loves them both equally and there cannot 
be any difference. But so far as inheritance is concerned it has to be looked 
at from a different point of view. For that you have to look at the development 
of the present structure of our society. This structure has been evolved 
through a process of evolution during the last many centuries. Hinduism 
is not a religion in the sense in which Christianity is a religion, Zorastrianism 
is a religion or Islam is a religion . . . 

An Honourable Member : What is religion then ? 

Shri H, V. Pataskar : Christianity is the religion of those who 
believe in Christ and follow his teachings in the Bible. The Zorastrians 
are the followers of Zoraster and Islam is the religion of those who 
believe in Mohammad the Prophet and the Koran as their sacred book. 

But what is Hinduism ? Hinduism includes not only the followers of 

the Vedas or the followers of Rama and Krishna or Shiva or of the 
innumerable gods in various shapes and forms but it also includes 

those who worship nature and those who do not believe in any God 
whatsoever and those who do not believe in the oneness of God also. 

Their places of worship, methods of worship and objects of worship 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


601 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 601 


are all varied. Hinduism is a growth which has absorbed all the different 
currents and streams of social and religious beliefs and practices prevailing 
over several centuries. It is an all embracing faith consistent with the ideal 
of ^udcMir^ciHdH. Hinduism at present is a growth which has contrived 
to combine in it all these various streams of life. At present Hinduism may 
be a cast-iron system, but it has not always been so. Our religion is based 
not on the tenets of one particular man or of one particular book, but it 
is based on what is dharma, and UB : means UFUB 3TTT 1% UB : or BTBTJB 
H^B : Dharma is that which sustains society. That is the ideal on 

which our Hindu society is built, namely that which is necessary for the 
sustenance and advancement of society. Of course I do admit that the present 
state of Hindu society is not a very happy one. But it has not been all along 
so. Therefore I take you to this point because it will give you an idea as 
to why there is objection to this Bill. That which sustains society is religion 
and sustenance of the society is our ideal. Our society may appear stagnant 
at present, but it is not, has not been really so. Hinduism has undergone 
vast changes in the course of its evolution. I am not afraid of changes. It 
has undergone several changes in the past. At one time Buddhism was 
flourishing in this land and engulfed not only Bharat Varsha but it spread 
to far off countries beyond Bharat Varsha. But today there are very few 
Buddhists to be found here. What has happened to them ? They have been 
absorbed in Hinduism, they have undergone a metamorphosis, and we of 
the present generation are their descendants. That shows that we are not 
a stagnant race and that we have adapted ourselves to the changing needs 
of society. I for one be changed. That is not the real nature of Hinduism. 
And I am not one of those who say that what we now call Hindu Law should 
not be changed. Our Law has in fact undergone changes even during the 
period of the British domination. 

The previous speaker, the Hon. Mr. Santhanam, rightly referred to 
the fact that judicial interpretations by courts which were not conversant 
with the original tenets of various laws regarding inheritance, adoption 
and marriage have not only changed the course of our social and economic 
life but have created many anomalies also. It has certainly become 
desirable to remove those anomalies and bring our Law in conformity 
with the changing needs of society. The world is changing fast and 
we cannot but be affected by what is happening elsewhere. We do 
not wish to say that we will keep ourselves away from the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


602 


602 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


rest of the world. That is not the idea. But the codification of the Law is 
one thing and amendment of it is another. This Bill seeks to do two things. 
We want to codify the law and amend its provisions. So far as codification 
is concerned, I understand it means that we want to remove the anomalies. 
At the present moment we have got so many systems of law prevalent. There 
is Dayabhaga in certain parts, there is Mitakshara in certain other parts, 
and the Bombay school has its own distinctive features. And there is what 
is called Marumakkattayam in certain parts of South India. But the areas 
where they are prevalent have also become well-defined, and there is a 
certain amount of stability. Therefore, if we proceed first with the task of 
codifying the law as it stands at present in these well-defined areas, that 
itself will not only bring about uniformity but it will also lead to a process 
of amendment, at a later stage. Mere codification of the law as it stands 
will also not evoke much controversy, because that is the existing law. 
Irrespective of the question that it has been modified by the courts consisting 
of British judges, there is a certain stability about it. Therefore, if we only 
confine ourselves to codification I think, much of the opposition that we see 
at the present moment will not be there. Not only that. If we do the 
codification only, we will secure the good will of the people and I believe 
that it will facilitate the amendment of the Hindu Code for certain other 
matters and by gradual stages subsequently. But the amendment of the 
existing law in the way it is tried to be done is another matter. Codification 
and amendment of the law have been hanging fire for the last so many 
years. In my view if we had proceeded with the codification only as a first 
step, the law would have been codified long ago. Ever since the Rau 

Committee was appointed, evidence was taken and so many Reports and 
so many Bills were formulated. But they tried to do two things simultaneously, 
namely, codification as well as amendment. Naturally, both have remained 
unfulfilled. If they had confined themselves to codification only, it would 
have been done long back and the stage would now have been reached for 
amendment. That is my view of the matter. 

The present Bill deals, as I said, with three distinct matters, namely, 
marriage, inheritance and succession. Let us see what the basic idea 

of our society is. With the impact of modem ideas, modern education 
and modern methods of life the question of equality of sexes has 

naturally been agitating the minds of people, particularly of the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


603 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 603 


educated women of the country. We have also accepted that equality in our 
Constitution. So, superficially looked at, it strikes one as to why there should 
be any difference between a son and a daughter in the matter of inheritance. 
But the question is not such a simple one. A father’s desire for the well- 
being of a son or daughter cannot be different. Naturally his love and 
affection is bound to be equal. No sensible man can think that the son should 
get everything and the daughter nothing. In fact that has not happened. 
Reference was made that even in the middle-class families, — leave aside the 
rich, they are very few in number — the father spends much more on the 
marriage of the daughter than what his son could ever hope of getting, in 
many cases even at the cost of the education of his sons. I say ‘in many 
cases’. That is my reading of the matter. Why then is there opposition in 
regard to inheritance ? Even the Sanatanist loves his daughter as much 
as his son. We cannot say that Sanatanists make a difference in this respect. 
The opposition is due to an important factor for considering which we must 
look to the whole structure of our Hindu society. 

A reference was made by my hon. friend Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai 
Bhargava in this respect. I would like to elaborate that point a little 
in as short a time as I can. The whole structure of our Hindu society is 
evolved through centuries and centuries of time. In the structure of our 
society the basic unit is the family. And on the continuity of that family 
as a unit rested naturally the stability of our society. It is not based on 
an individual as unit, but more or less the basis of the whole structure is 
the family as a unit. And the continuity of the family was naturally the 
main object with which all our laws and customs have been evolved from 
time to time. The pivot therefore was the continuity of the family 
which was the unit of the structure. Daughters naturally by marriage 
pass into a different family while the sons remain in the family to continue 
it. To foster the continuity and to prevent its being broken up, the joint 
family system was evolved. Why was the joint family system a peculiar 
feature of Hindu society ? Because Hindu society is based on the continuity 
of the family. That is why the joint family system is a peculiar institution 
of Hindu Law not known to other systems of law which are more or less 
based on individuals. Till only a generation or two back the joint family 
system worked well. It has maintained the continuity and stability of our 
social structure for centuries past. That is why there is objection to the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


604 


604 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


throwing open of inheritance to the daughter. That objection is not for 
political or social reasons but because if you open the inheritance to a 
daughter the result is that the whole social structure based on the joint 
family system will be broken. 

The trend in the modern world is towards individualism. The joint family 
system is cracking in many places. I would go to the length of saying that 
the joint family system would not continue for all time under modern 
conditions. But as it is there, the question is whether we shall gradually 
replace it by the individual as the basis of our society or whether we shall 
break it up by law as is proposed to be done by this measure. If we want 
to break up the Hindu society suddenly, then I am afraid we shall be rocking 
and shaking the foundations of that society which may result in consequences 
unforeseen and unpredictable. The danger involved is not the mere opening 
of inheritance to daughters but the fact that by that opening up of inheritance 
the whole basis of society is involved. Hence the opposition. If only we try 
by an evolutionary process to help in the process of disintegration of the 
family which has already started owing to various economic and social causes, 
the same results as are aimed at will be achieved but not suddenly and 
abruptly. There is a clause in the Bill which says clearly that from the date 
of the commencement of the Code the whole joint family system as such 
will disappear. You are trying to do it suddenly and to my mind that is 
sure to rock the very foundations of the society which has been based for 
centuries past on the joint family as a unit of society. I would appeal to 
my enthusiastic reformer friends that while I am one with them, that this 
system no doubt has to be changed, and that as the world stands today 
no one will be able to resist it for too long, while that is so the question 
is whether we shall do it gradually, whether we shall carry the people with 
us and go as far as they come with us, or as far as we can drag them 
with us, or on the other hand whether we shall suddenly, by a stroke of 
the pen and by legislation, say that all this joint family system is destroyed. 
Even in these days when owing to abnormal circumstances people are 
worried by so many problems, this question is attracting their attention and 
therefore any abrupt action is likely to result in a state of affairs which 
is desirable neither to the reformers nor to the others. I agree we can’t remain 
stagnant. The Hindu society has undergone so many changes in the past 
but by a different process altogether. If we try to force the events which 
must happen gradually, I am sure the result is not going to be very happy. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


605 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 605 


Sir, I am surprised at one thing. Here we are trying to preserve adoption. 
I don’t know for what purpose. Adoption is a thing which is peculiar to Hindu 
law. In other societies also children are adopted but not for the purpose 
of continuing the family, only to satisfy the natural craving in any human 
being to have children and to rear them. I am told that in America and 
England also people do adopt children but there the object of adoption is 
different. The adoption as envisaged in the present system of Hindu law 
is peculiar and it is so because the Hindu structure of the joint family is 
based on the continuity of that joint family. But after the break up of the 
joint family in the way you are trying to do by this legislation, what is the 
necessity for making a provision for adoption? Look at it from a different 
view. Why was adoption a peculiar feature of Hindu society ? Because the 
main feature of the Hindu society was the basis of the joint family and 
its continuity required adoption. With the breaking up of the joint family 
and the coming of individualism, I don’t see why we should waste our time 
on trying to preserve adoption. I am certainly against adoption. Even in 
the case of adoptions that now take place, 99 cases out of 100 result in 
litigation in courts because the whole idea has undergone a change. The 
widow adopts a child thinking that the boy adopted might be useful to her 
in managing her property and affairs free of charge. The boy thinks that 
by adoption he will get something from the person who adopts him for 
nothing. So, at present adoption takes place purely from a motive of self- 
interest; adoption as conceived in the olden days is disappearing. As a lawyer 
of some standing and experience, I have found that in 99 out of 100 cases 
of adoption the result has been litigation because the original idea underlying 
adoption has undergone a change. But now with the coming into force of 
the provisions of this Bill the whole joint family system will disappear, the 
individualistic society as in other parts of the world will come and it is 
therefore not necessary to make any provision regarding adoption. It would 
be confusing to do so. If we are consistent and logical in what we are doing, 
we should do away with adoption altogether. 

I have now to refer to marriage and divorce. A point was raised 
by the Hon. member Mr. Santhanam who asked everyone whether they 
were against or in favour of monogamy. I would say that monogamy 
is absolutely necessary in these days. I don’t think there is any 
member in this house who is opposed to it. But is the Hindu 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


606 


606 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Code Bill necessary for that purpose ? We have got a measure in the Bombay 
Province by which, so far as that Province is concerned, there is monogamy 
and as a natural corollary to it divorce in certain cases is allowed. We have 
not gone further than that measure in these matters. If the only object is 
to ordain monogamy then I say there can be no objection to it, for, apart 
from ideological reasons there are practical reasons also in its favour. Nobody 
now wants to have more than one wife. There are very few excepting a 
few millionaires and multimillionaires who can afford to have that luxury; 
others can’t have it. It is not even a mental luxury as suggested by the 
hon. Mr. Santhanam for the simple reason that one cannot manage without 
anxiety even with one wife and her children. What mental luxury can a 
man derive by the idea of being able to marry another wife under these 
circumstances ? As a matter of fact, it is quite simple proposition and I 
think both sides would agree that monogamy must be the rule. But let us 
not try to confuse the real issue regarding divorce. As soon as you have 
monogamy the result is that supposing one of the mates is a leper you have 
to make arrangements to see that the other is relieved from that liability 
or else you will be denying him the conjugal right. In some respects divorce 
is a corollary of monogamy. Even Manu, the great law giver, has provided 
for such cases. 

xrf^r fJ.dl'O'U'H 

But the main point so far I am concerned is that whether you lay down 
monogamy by law or not it is going to be the rule with at least 9,999 out 
of 10,000 people. So that question need not agitate our minds at all. Sir, 
apart from all these considerations, there is one last point. A uniform 
Civil Code must be our endeavour according to article 44 of the Constitution 
which we have already passed. We have incorporated a Directive Principle 
in our Constitution that the State shall endeavour to secure a uniform 
Civil Code throughout the territory of India. I would like you seriously 
to consider whether by enacting a measure like this only for the Hindus 
we are advancing the cause of our progress towards that ideal. I should 
think that we are going backward rather than forward. My hon. friend 
Mr. Santhanam seemed to think that after the passing of that article 44, 
we are trying to progress towards that ideal by this measure intended to 
weld Hindus into one. It may or it may not be so. What is to be welded 
in the interests of the security of our nation is not the welding of Hindus 
alone but all the citizens of this country. All the inhabitants of India 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


607 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 607 


should be welded into one. Marriage, inheritance etc. form part of civil codes 
of all the countries world over. They must do so in India also. That Code 
should apply to all citizens whether they be Hindus, Christians or Parsis 
or Muslims. From that point of view, we are going exactly in the opposite 
direction. I tell you why. The shibboleth of no interference in religious or 
semi-religious matters was the creation of a foreign government. It was 
imposed upon us in their interests and not in our interets. What is there 
today to prevent us from including all these things in a uniform Civil Code ? 
The present Hindu Code was conceived under different circumstances, and 
at a time when there was no ideal of having a uniform Civil Code. But 
since then, things have changed enormously and especially after Pakistan, 
it should be our endeavour to bring closer all the different elements in the 
country, be they Hindus, Christians, Muslims or Parsis. I do not want that 
anything should be done for Hindus alone in such matters. We have already 
decided upon joint elections for welding all the people of our country into 
one. One uniform Civil Code will further bring all the people together. That 
is the process which we must follow and which demands the attention and 
interest of all of us. We must give up this idea that we cannot interfere 
in the laws of inheritance and other social matters of persons belonging to 
other religions. That idea must go. At the present moment, instead of building 
one well-knit society, we want to stick to the old thing which was conceived 
at a time when the aim was to keep us apart. Now the idea is different. 
The security and well-being of our people demands the enactment of a 
uniform Civil Code. I do not care whether I offend the susceptibilities of 
some orthodox friends when I say this, but I am quite frank and open. If 
things are to be done, they must be done in the right way. We cannot partly 
stick to the old things and partly bring in new things. In this connection, 
I can mention that a, uniform Civil Code is in operation in Goa. The Law 
minister himself probably knows that. The laws of inheritance etc. are 
applicable to Christians, Hindus, Muslims and everybody alike in that part 
of India under the Portuguese. If that is so, why should we be afraid ? Our 
fear is the result of what we have inherited from the past — this shibboleth, 
I said, of noninterference in religious or semi-religious matters. But 
that was done by the British for their own purposes, because they wanted 
to keep us apart. Now our ideal is to unite all our people in the nation. 
What we ought to do is instead of proceeding with a Bill of this nature, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


608 


608 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


our Law Minister should, immediately after the 26th of January 1950, bring 
forward a uniform Civil Code applicable to all people throughout India. I 
know my enthusiastic sister Members thought when I rose to speak that 
I was an opponent of this Bill. Let me hasten to add that I am entirely 
for equality and all those things. But this is not the way in which we should 
do it, by destroying one thing and creating difficulties in another. For the 
sake of a uniform Civil Code, we can go and tell our Hindu friends that 
the joint Hindu family must go, that it is necessary in the interests of the 
nation. But what we are doing is in the opposite direction. I am afraid it 
will lead to very undesirable and unforeseen consequences. I will just cite 
an example. In Ahemadnagar City in Bombay province, a young Hindu widow 
wanted to marry a Muslim. I do not know whether it was a love affair or 
what it was. But she wanted to marry a Muslim. As you know, those days 
we were passing through critical times. There was a lot of trouble. There 
were riots and some lives were lost. So this Muslim gentleman got afraid 
not only for the sake of his own safety but the safety of his community. 
He said I do not want to marry or do anything of the kind. She could not 
marry without conversion to Islam as the Muslim gentleman had already 
wife and children. She could marry only if she converted herself into a 
Muslim. In the Province of Bombay we have also enacted a measure which 
prevents a Hindu from marrying more than one wife at a time but does 
not prevent Muslims from doing so. By the present Bill also you are giving 
the exclusive right to a Muslim to have as many wives as he likes or at 
any rate up to four. Now what happens is, if a man, — a very wealthy man — 
wants to marry another wife, he can get himself converted into a Muslim 
and he can have as many wives as he likes. Considered from all points of 
view, the interests of our country demand that hereafter at any rate we 
should strive to achieve a uniform Civil Code for all people. That is what 
is happening all over the world. As I pointed out before, such a code exists 
even in a Portuguese territory in India viz. Goa. The present Hindu Code 
is an artificially engineered device of the former rulers, when they 
tried to keep us apart. We must try to get out of that rut. We must endeavour 
to form a well-knit, uniform society. We want to form a single State, not 
based on religious tenets, whether they be Hindu or Muslim or any 
other, but a truly secular State. For this a uniform Civil Code is absolutely 
necessary. I therefore suggest that this Bill should not be proceeded 
with. It will serve no purpose. Therefore, I appeal to my hon. friend 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


609 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 609 


the Law Minister to withdraw this Bill, bring forward a uniform Civil Code 
regarding the matters covered by this Bill applicable to all citizens alike 
whether they are Hindus, Christians, Muslims, Parsis, Jews or others. 

* Shri Ram Sahai (Madhya Bharat): English translation of the Hindi 
speech.) Sir, while welcoming this Bill at the time it was being referred to 
the Select Committee, I had submitted that the Members of the Select 
Committee should consider some of its features which are at variance with 
the modern culture and civilization which we profess these days. But I note 
they have paid no particular attention to that. Only yesterday we have come 
to know that once more, a Committee is going to be set up in this connection. 
For this reason alone, I stand here to take a little time of the House. I 
am not opposed to this Bill. I seek only to bring in certain amendments 
which may accommodate to some extent the views of those who are opposed 
to it and that is the only consideration which has guided me to stand here 
to take a few minutes of the House. 

The hon. Mr. Santhanam, I have to submit, had observed that through 
this Bill we were going to discard all caste distinctions and thus marching 
towards integration. I agree that such an idea and a Bill of this type is 
worthy of our welcome and, as such, must be welcomed. In my opinion 
nobody need object if it becomes possible to have inter-caste marriges, 
adoption and develop other family relations with one another. But, in this 
regard, I feel a little difficulty which I intend to place before the House. 
This is over the succession issue. The custom of inheritance, no doubt, 
prevails and is practised at many places while in some a similar custom 
is being introduced in the Hindu Society. But considering its general 
set-up, it seems to me and I am of the opinion that ultimately this won’t 
prove to be a good thing. My opinion is not based on any desire to withhold 
daughters’ rights or deny equal rights to women and for the matter of that 
to treat them on a different footing. I emphatically disclaim any such 
motive. I doubt only if the idea can be made a workable one in a suitable 
way in he general set-up of our society in which we are living at present 
and which has been followed by us for so long. For instance, I want to 
say one word in connection with the right of inheritance. Herein share on 
equal basis has been conceded to daughters. I have no objection even if 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 496-98. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


610 


610 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


they are given a greater share. I want only to place before the house a 
few things in connection with some possible difficulties which may arise in 
future whenever such a problem comes up. At present girls enjoy a status 
in the Hindu Society which none else enjoys. Consciously or unconsciously 
we have tampered with the social regulations for the worse and now have 
to bring up this Bill as a repenting and a compensating measure. This is 
certainly our misfortune. Despite this I will assert that there is much scope 
left for reformation. To me no Hindu father can ever desire to mete out 
a prejudiced treatment to his daughter, rather he wishes to give away more 
and more to her. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar : General): It is correct to a large 
extent. 

Shri Ram Sahai: He wishes to marry her in the house of a man placed 
better than himself. Not to speak of the father only, I am in a position to 
assert that even no Hindu brother can desire not to marry his sister in 
a more fortunate family. There may be found an exception in thousands 
or lacs of cases. But I think that such an instance is almost non-existent. 
I fail to understand why then the issue of parity between sons and daughters 
in the matter of inheritance is made to confront us. I say so as we have 
before us the quarrels among the brothers over the division of property in 
the middle-class of our people. The daughter is given her share in the other 
family. But should she think of having a share in his father’s property also; 
in my opinion it is certain to lead to disruption in our social structure. Out 
of this consideration I have come before the House to make these observations. 
In my opinion such a course is bound to impair the affection between a 
brother and sister to some extent. When disruption is possible among the 
brothers with a common family-link over the division of property, surely 
more serious quarrels will arise with daughter living in a different family. 
When such quarrels can arise among brothers who have a common bond 
of love in between themselves, there shall be none in the house where the 
daughter goes who can maintain that affectionate regard. There shall be, 
on the contrary, persons who will incite and thus pave way for litigation. 
I don’t at all follow why we should take recourse to a thing having full 
consciousness of its being pregnant with possibilities of disruption of our 
social structure. 

Likewise I would like to say something as regards the the Hindu 
joint family. We have recognised to set up co-operative societies 
and invite people’s co-operation to spread this idea in the country. Why 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


611 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 611 


then we are anxious to do away with the joint family system which is based 
on principle of co-operation. Keeping these two things in view there should 
be some such provision which can meet them both. In my opinion the reason 
for restlessness prevailing in some sections of the public and the provision 
that makes this measure controversial is mainly the issue of succession. If 
somehow we can meet the point of succession we can then proceed with its 
proper consideration and pass this Code unanimously. Taking no more time 
of the House, I will submit only that the Members who are likely to be 
appointed to the Committee should conduct their deliberations keeping this 
difficulty in view, not because a daughter should get no share in her father’s 
property but to see that it does not disrupt our social system any way. 

There is another point of controversy that strikes me. I may be wrong 
but so far as I have pondered, it seeems to me that taking an individual 
case of a son and a daughter, whereas a son is entitled to a share in the 
property of his parents only according to this Bill, a daughter enjoys a share 
in her father-in-law’s property as well. I do not see any reason for this 
disparity. I fail to understand why such a provision has been made therein. 
The Hon. the Minister of Law may kindly throw some light on this aspect 
while replying to the Debate as to what consideration has led for the inclusion 
of such a thing. 

Taking no more time of the House, I will submit only this much. 

* Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (U. P. : General): Sir, I have been 
very attentively listening to the debate. I have very great respect for the 
views expressed by my elders, particularly Pandit Thakur das Bhargava and 
Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra. I have been looking for support for their 
contention that the Hindu Code Bill interferes with our culture and 
civilisation and if it is placed on the Statute Book the whole fabric of our 
society will go down and there would be undue and improper interference 
with our religious institutions and our cultural background. To my misfortune 
I have not been able to find anything of that sort. There is nothing with 
regard to this Code which interferes with our religion in any matter 
whatsoever. Whether the Code is good or bad is another question. But the 
proposed Bill has nothing whatever to do with Hindu religion and as such 
if it is passed the Hindu religion remains as good or as bad as it is without 
it. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 498-502. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


612 


612 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The second is the question of culture. The question is whether a house 
belongs to A or B, it may belong to Ramkumar and Krishnakumar, and 
4PM ^ you just include Vimalkumari also, that is not going to affect 

Hindu culture. I want my friends before interrupting me, to 
understand the basis of culture. No culture is culture unless it has any 
function with a view to the development and evolution of society. If culture 
is merely static, then it cannot last, and if Hindu culture had been static, 
it would never have been stable, and it would not have lasted so long. Culture 
must have some function connected with evolution, it must have something 
to do with a society as it is evolving. Let us understand this before crying 
that culture is in danger. Culture and religion and the present Hindu society 
or Hindu law and even the Hindu religion are not the same as they were 
in the Vedic times. Do you want us to believe that the Greeks came here 
and the Romans came here, their penetrations were there and yet we 
remained blindly static ? Had we no heart, no mind and no receptivity 
whatsoever ? Because of the receptivity and ability to evolve, the greatness 
has been preserved; if we had not this receptivity, we would not have existed 
so long. That is my reply. So I say, let us take a rational course, take an 
intelligent view of the thing, a scientific view of the thing. Hindu law as 
it was in the Smriti was only a codification of the customs and usages 
prevailing before the Smriti writers came. There are lots of Smritis and 
they differ on various points and on the same point different writers have 
different views. And the Privy Council has said that even if they differ from 
each other, their commentary is to be accepted, not because it is based on 
the Smriti, not because it is based on truth, not because it has come down 
from the Vedas, but because if it is recorded in the Smriti, it must have 
been the usage or custom of the time before the Smriti. According to the 
view of Hindu law, a custom overrides the written law, the written text 
of law. Now, taking this view, I ask you seriously whether this is any question 
of religion, whether it is a question of culture, whether Hindu society will 
fall down by including Vimala along with Ramkumar and Krishnakumar? 
Therefore, do not bring in religion in this question. Do not bring in culture, 
do not bring in other things and say that Hindu society will fall down. I 
say Hindu society has never been so weak, Hindu culture has never been 
so weak, nor Hindu religion, that it will fall down, if this Act or that Act 
is passed. It is too strong for that. 

And then again, it is not our claim alone that we have come from 
God. There have been six great civilisations and every great civilisation 
claims that it has come from God. The Muslims say it, the Christians 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


613 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 613 


say it, the Japanese said “I am the son of God”. The Chinese Emperor wrote 
in 1559 to George III a letter that the Chinese potentate comes from God 
and his territory shall have nothing to do with English commerce or be 
tainted by foreigners. But forty-nine years later there was a war by the 
Englishman upon China and the former accepted the opium dealer. Where 
had the land of the son of God gone then ? Where was that son of God 
when there was the cannon mouth of the Englishman ? Even the Englishman 
claims such things, that it is the whiteman’s burden that he has been sent 
to Africa and India to civilize other human beings; that he has been destined 
to do so. But such claims are false, as false as it is for us to claim that 
ours is the only monopoly of truth. I am a Hindu and I am a Brahmin, 
and I am proud of being a Hindu and Brahmin, but I do not like to claim 
that the truth is my own monopoly, that the truth came to my ancestors 
and not to anybody else. If God gave the truth only to my ancestors and 
to nobody else, then it was unjust, and for the matter of that also foolish 
to have created other people on this earth. So my only request is — and I 
make it with all the humility and respect of a Hindu child for the elders — 
please do not bring in religion, do not count upon culture. Do not say Hindu 
society will come down. But please accept it on the basis of an intelligent 
view, a common-sense view, a scientific view, of law as prevailing in the 
modern world. The law of every country is the outcome and result of the 
economic and social conditions of the country as well as the expression of 
its intellectual capacity for dealing with those conditions. 

Now I come to the next point. We have been for a long time separated 
from the world as such. As I said there were six civilisations and the Chinese 
Potentate, the Japanese Emperor, the English King, the Czar of Russia, 
Babar of India all of them claimed that they came from God, all 
because. . . . 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : To what particular clause of the Hindu 
Code is my Hon. friend referring ? 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : I am referring to your remarks. 
Well, as I was saying, they all said they were supreme and they were 
the most mighty, and that was because they could not understand other 
people and they had no knowledge of them. Therefore they said, theirs 
was the best religion. But now with the aeroplanes, through the ships, 
through literature and the printing press and publication, you have 
come into contact with all the people of the world. You know other 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


614 


614 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

people and you understand them. You are influenced by them. Look at the 
desk of your child and there you will find the works of Bernard Shaw and 
Shakespeare. You do not find ganga lehri there. But you don’t think the 
child is not a Hindu because he has only Bernard Shaw and Shakespeare 
and Pearl Buck on his table. So every thought and action affect and influence 
all the countries of the world. You cannot have any law whatsoever which 
is divorced from the influence of others, it has to be dynamic and then it 
will help the people to a great future. Divorced from that, separated from 
that, they are weak. So let us have the law on the scientific basis. In times 
past there might have been prejudices and there might have been different 
customs, and there might have been any other thing. But today religion 
is a matter of scientific study. You cannot say that everything you believe 
is religion. Nobody is going to accept it. Religion is that which takes man 
from human stage, from the comprehensive human life to the region of 
Godhood and in raising humanity from humanity to Divinity, there are 
certain accepted principles from which you cannot escape. So in this 
twentieth century, neither is everything religion nor is everything culture 
nor everything the basis of society. There are certain well accepted principles, 
accepted by the world at large, by the jurists, by the religious teachers and 
all the great men of the world as the basis of society, as the basis of culture 
and as the basis religion. Everything that you speak and believe is neither 
religion, nor culture nor the basis of society. 

My friend asked me to what I was referring. In Mulla’s Hindu Law the 
first page deals with castes. It says there are four castes in Hindu Society. 
The second paragraph deals with whether Kayasthas are Sudras. The third 
paragraph deals with the question whether Marathas are Sudras or Rajputs. 
I put it to you in all humility : Is there anything of culture or religion in 
it ? Religion takes from the universal love to the Divine bliss and culture 
means light and sweetness. The division of a people into castes is no culture 
and much less has it anything to do with religion. 

An Honourable Member : Only agriculture. 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : Agriculture will give you food; your 
view is a thing that will bring you down. 

Now, I shall put to you the sources of Hindu Law. I think my 
hon. friend is a lawyer and he will appreciate it. The sources of Hindu 
Law are, the Shrutis, the Smritis, customs having the force of law, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


615 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 615 


commentaries, and then the judicial decisions of the Privy Council and the 
High Courts. So far as the Shrutis are concerned, nothing is known about 
them. I have quoted Jayaswal who is the greatest authority on ancient polity 
and he is of the view that what is stated in the Smritis is only a codification 
of the custom and usage prevailing when the Smritis came into existance. 
The Smritis, as I said, differ on the same point. The commentators are 
accepted; but they are accepted as authority not because they tell you what 
the law was, but because they tell you something that must have been in 
existence. According to the principles of Hindu Law, custom and usage 
override the written text of the law, and they are to be accepted. Then comes 
the case law of the Privy Council and of the High Courts. How was this 
case law made ? Up to 1868, the condition was this. The Hindu Law was 
administered by English judges with the assistance of Hindu Pundits. The 
institution of Pundits as official referees of the courts was abolished in the 
year 1868. Your case law is the result of the English man’s decision with 
the help of the Pundits. Now, I tell you, when the country is ruled by an 
aggressor, when the country is ruled by an invader, no self-respecting man 
much less a learned man, will sit beside him. Therefore, whatever class of 
Pundits were called, they were demoralised creatures; they were not 
representative of Hindus. Do you mean to say that you do not want to change 
the Hindu Law because Hindu Law is something sacred ? What is that Hindu 
Law ? Decisions of Englishmen given with the help of or at the suggestion 
of demoralised creatures. That is your Hindu Law. What is the sacredness 
behind it ? That is my point. You judge this present law on its own merits; 
judge the present code according to principles of jurisprudence. In accordance 
with principles a law is judged as necessary and good. 

Coming to this Code, the first thing that it deals with is marriage 
and divorce. If you go through the different small Acts passed during 
the last two or three years, you will find that this is a mere codification 
and nothing new. You can have the sacramental marriage; you can 
have the civil marriage. You find Hindus marrying in different castes, 
even beyond the Hindu fold and they remain Hindu all right; you 
do not say they are outcastes. Therefore, what is prevailing, what is 
a fact already, you take as the law. I do not think you are changing 
anything. With regard to judicial separation and dissolution of marriage, 
look at the grounds : either party to the marriage was impotent, the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


616 


616 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

husband is keeping a woman or a concubine, the other party has ceased 
to be a Hindu, either party is incurably of unsound mind, either party is 
suffering from a virulent and incurable form of leprosy. Now, I put you a 
simple question. Is there anything in any law, in any text of Hindu Shrutis 
or Smritis which bar these conditions ? I have been looking into the Manu 
Smriti and I have found nothing repugnant to this. If my hon. friends find 
anything, they may bring an amendment. I am not against the Smritis and 
I am only proud of them. I have gone through the texts; I have not been 
able to find anything in them repugnant to this. If these conditions are in 
accord with notions of social justice as it is prevalent, I see no reason why 
you should not accept them. Are you an enemy of women? Are you an enemy 
of your mother and daughter ? Our mother is a respected being and our 
daughter is part of our life and blood. Is that not so ? Why then do you 
raise the cry that this is something which will bring down Hindustan and 
that the Hindu society will be crushed to pieces. There is nothing in religion, 
there is nothing in culture, there is nothing on the basis of Hindu society 
that is against these conditions and repugnant to them. 

Take the case of adoption. My own feeling is that at this stage of evolution 
of our society, it is unnecessary and it has no meaning. There is a text 
in Manu on which this adoption is based : that a son-less father has no 
region in Heaven. The basis of that text was this. At that time, the Aryans 
were facing the aboriginal tribes or some people who were non- Aryans. 
Therefore, they naturally wanted their number to grow. They put it this 
way. A Hindu has three ‘Rinas”: Rina to God, Rina to the Rishis and Rina 
to the Pitras, that is the race. That is, to carry on the thread of the race. 

To carry on the thread of the Race was necessary at the time Manu 

wrote the Smritis. It is not necessary today. Today the cry is not that we 
have not got children; on the other hand, the cry is that we have not 

got food and cloth. The fewer we are, the more of these things we will 

have. Therefore, at this stage, I do not see any reason for adoption. As to 
going to Heavens, the meaning behind the oblations and all these 
things was to keep up a spirit of charity in our society. Human society 
has grown so well and so organised that there is enough scope for charity 
and social service and generosity in this world rather than giving 
something to our ancestors who have gone beyond this world. It is 
better to work in this wide world. That is an institution which has no 
meaning. The meaning that it had has no application in the present 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


617 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 617 


day society. So far as secular purposes are concerned, that if a son is adopted 
he will serve the old man or old woman, I think it is of no use. Today, 
there are so many sick homes, hospitals and other homes. If you have got 
no property, it is useless to adopt a child and nobody is going to serve you 
simply because you have adopted him. If you have got property, there are 
enough institutions to help you in old age. My contention is that this 
institution of adoption in the present state of our society has no meaning 
whatsoever. 

Regarding minors and guardians, I don’t think it has made any departure 
from the Hindu Law as it is. Regarding law of Succession, I am sorry I 
have not been able to see much about Succession and I cant’t say with 
confidence whether the present system of Succession is right or wrong. One 
thing I will say viz., there is nothing wrong in principle to make a daughter 
co-heir with the son because under section 3 of the Women’s Property Act, 
1937, the mother gets a share along with the son. What objection there is 
on earth to a daughter inheriting along with the brother ? If mother can 
inherit along with son, there is no reason why the daughter should not inherit 
with the brother. Pandit Bhargava raised the objection that the sons-in-law 
will come and create trouble in the house. If two brothers do not create 
trouble why should the son-in-law create troubles. Go to Cannaught place 
and you will find that the fate of the husband is to take the coat of the 
wife behind and pay the bill; and so how can a husband create trouble when 
the wife.does not want it. 

An Honourable Member : That is in Northern India. 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : That is the evolution of man. The 
evolution of humanity is like that. Where are your moustaches ? It is an 
ordinary biological principle that the female cells were developed and 
separated later and woman was better evolved. She is fairer, more tender 
and more beautiful. It is the way of progress to go to finer and more beautiful 
life. If you are otherwise inclined, I think you are less than human. 

Then I come to the joint Hindu Family. I have looked into authorities 
on this point and all great authorities agree that Hindu Custom came 
into existence when the state of Society was pastural. For that it was 
necessary to have Joint Hindu Family system. At present there are 
a number of laws by which we have done away with the Joint Hindu 
Family property conception. This was made at a time when there was 
not much trade and commerce. A farmer looks to the cow not as 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


618 


618 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


something worth 100/- but as something — a living thing associated with him 
in life — something sacred. So he takes the cow as it is and would not like 
to get the money from the son if the son goes away from the family because 
the cow is something sacred — that is how we regard the cow as Mother cow. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Is there any father cow ? 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : Times have now changed and 
therefore that question of Joint Hindu Family does not hold good and is 
not to be regarded as so essential and therefore sacred as it was when Aryan 
society was first established in India and these customs came into existence. 

The second point is that this is not applicable to agricultural lands. So 
far as agricultural lands are concerned, new acts are coming into existence 
and succession in those would go on the same basis. 

With these words, I commend this Bill for the acceptance of this House. 

*Shri B. M. Gupte (Bombay : General): Sir, I rise to accord qualified 
support to the measure before this house. This does not mean that I am 
opposed to many of the reforms that are proposed here. On the contrary 
I am prepared to say that they are in the right direction subject to certain 
modifications and adjustments. Adjustments are necessary. I will give only 
one example. The abolition of customary divorce is bound to entail much 
hardship to rural population of Bombay province because among the 
population there the practice of divorce is widely prevalent. In Bombay we 
have a Divorce Act but even that Act makes an exception of Customary 
divorce. I therefore say that certain adjustments are necessary. The 
provisions with regard to divorce, marriage and maintenance and minority — 
these may be proceeded with and made into law. I have no objection 
about them but I can’t lend my support to the enactment of the 
provisions embodied in parts 5, 6 and 7. They make fundamental 
changes. In fact they unsettle the entire law of inheritance of the Hindu 
Community, therefore the question arises whether this is the time quite 
opportune for such general unsettlement. We are in the midst of a political 
and economic situation which is characterised by unrest, turmoil, 
misery and disruption and therefore the question is whether we should 
complicate the situation still further by introducing revolutionary 
changes which affect the entire social structure of the country. Our 
Prime Minister often insists, and rightly insists, that in this emergency 
first things should come first and this is not the time for things which 

*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 502-504. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


619 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 619 


bring disruption. If we apply this test to this measure, what would be the 
result ? I ask, are these so pressing, that we must face the risk of intensifying 
the complexity of the situation which is already difficult enough ? The answer 
is obvious. The Hindu Law has been in existence for years and if there is 
to be a revision of it or its codification there is no urgency at the present 
juncture. This is not the opportune time for such a general unsettlement 
of the existing law. 

It is our well known experience that social legislation which is in advance 
of public opinion defeats itself. In this I include not only the vocal urban 
section of the population but also the teeming millions in the villages. We 
have to see whether this legislation is in advance of public opinion. We have 
the experience of the Sarda Act. In spite of its strict provisions the law 
became a dead letter in its enforcement. In this case it will not become 
a mere dead letter. The enactment of the provisions laid down in parts V, 
VI and VII will bring about far more mischievous results than being a mere 
dead letter. 

In the villages there are the goondas who because of their detailed 
knowledge of the law try to exploit the ignorance of the villagers and dupe 
them into protracted litigation. This evil is already rampant. The law of 
succession or survivorship, owing to long usage and familiarity is already 
known to the villagers. The result will be that we shall be affording one 
more source for the village goondas to exploit the ignorance of the villagers. 
I therefore want to emphasise that though I am not opposed to reform, this 
is not the time to introduce a measure like this. 

Whatever decision we may take here or in the provincial capitals in the 
present condition of illiteracy of the masses, it is difficult to carry such 
legislations to the villager. We have already the experience of the Grow More 
Food Campaign. In my province the Government is offering numberous 
concessions and facilities but the villager does not know them at all. What 
will be the result of this law ? The village goonda will be able to exploit 
the ignorance of the villager in this matter. 

In one respect the situation in the villages will be worse than that 
in the urban area. According to the present constitutional position this 
law will not affect agricultural land. It will mean that there will be 
two sets of heirs for the property of the deceased argriculturist. His 
agricultural land will go to one set of heirs, while the rest of his 
property will go to another set of heirs. This is bound to make confusion 
worse confounded. We are enacting this legislation with a view to secure 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4\V14-12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


620 


620 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


uniformity but instead of uniformity and simplicity there will be complexity 
and confusion. To avoid such confusion it would be better that we wait till 
the new constitution is ushered in. Let us not be in a hurry. Personally 
I feel that this measure can be introduced and pursued after one or two 
general elections have taken place. Those general elections are bound to 
quicken the political consciousness of the villager and bring him into more 
effective contract with the working of the legislature. He will then be in 
a better position to influence legislation which vitally affects his interests. 
Therefore I submit that till such time comes, till there is some quickening 
of political consciousness among people, let us not thrust the legislation upon 
them. 

I finally appeal to our enthusiastic friends who are the ardent champions 
of this legislation that by our over-enthusiasm let us not defeat our own 
object. 

* Shri A. Karunakara Menon (Madras: General) : Sir, I rise to support 
this Bill, so far as it goes, with all my heart. It will no doubt go a great 
way to consolidate the Hindu society. The Hindu law as it exists today is 
only a conglomeration of several systems of law. We have declared in our 
Constitution that it shall be our aim to frame a uniform civil code applying 
to the whole territory of India. This Hindu Code will go a great way to 
assist in the evolution of this uniform code of law. I wish some Muslim friends 
introduce a law to codify the Mohammendan law also. The Christians have 
already a codified law. After these three codified laws are brought into 
existence it will be easy to pick out the uniform provisions of these three 
codes and try to accomplish the object that we have aimed at under the 
Constitution. This Bill is also welcome inasmuch as it will extend the rights 
of women. 

But I have some complaints to make. This law is not as progressive as 
it ought to be as the people wish it to be. It is far behind in several respects 
the Marumakhattayam law that exists in my part of the country. We should 
not be dragged down from the position we are in at present. If amendments 
could be introduced in the Bill and if it could be made possible for us also 
to make use of the Bill, none would be more happy than us. 

The provisions of the Bill as they stand at present have been 
conceived at from a patriarchal point of view. The provisions of the 
matriarchal system of law, wherever they are progressive, could be 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 504-506. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


621 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 621 


introduced into this Bill and that point of view has not been taken into 
consideration at all. It might be pointed out that the original Bill as drafted 
in 1947 excluded the Marumakkattayam and the Alia Santhanam law from 
the operation of all the important branches of law covered by it. I will point 
out why this Bill is not sufficiently progressive and why it should be made 
more progressive. 

Marriage under Marumakkattayam law is a purely mundane affair. There 
is no religion in it. There is no sapindaship or sacrament in it. This Hindu 
Code Bill recognises only two kinds of marriage — sacramental marriage and 
civil marriage. Civil marriage is common and we have no objection to it. 
We are prepared to abide by provisions relating to it. 

That the authors of the Code were under a misapprehension that even 
the Marumakkattayam marriages were sacramental marriages is clear from 
a reading of clause 51 of the Bill where they say that even the Malbar 
marriages are sacramental. That is the basis on which they have framed 
that clause. In Malbar marriage has nothing to do with religion. Clause 51 
says: 

“Nothing contained in this Part shall be deemed to affect any right 
conferred by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXII 
of 1932) to obtain the dissolution of a sacramental marriage, whether 
solemnized before or after the commencement of this Code.” 

There is another direction in which we would like to get an amendment 
of this Bill in so far as we are concerned. Our law allows us to marry our 
father’s niece or our maternal uncle’s daughter. In fact many of us consider 
it a privilege to marry our uncle’s daughter or our father’s niece. But this 
is interdicted by the provisions relating to sapindaship and prohibited 
relationship. This encroachment on our right is not likely to be viewed with 
favour by the people of my part of the country. 

In regard to judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, 
there are no provisions at all in our law. Either a marriage exists 
or it is got rid of by means of a divorce. There is no middle course. 
The provision for divorce is very simple. Either of the aggrieved parties 
goes to the nearest court of civil jurisdiction and puts in a petition 
with twelve annas stamp on it praying that “for such and such reasons 
we are not able to pull on together and therefore a divorce may be 
granted”. For a period of six months that petition is kept pending. 
Perhaps the authors of the law wished to see whether a reconciliation 
was possible within this period of six months. After this period of 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


622 


622 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


six months, if nothing took place divorce is automatically granted. This 
provision is simple and from clause 51 of the Bill it is clear that it has 
attracted the attention of the framers of the Bill because this provision for 
divorce is found retained in the Bill. But I do not know why the benefit 
of this provision is not extended to all other Hindus. 

The provision for dissolution of marriage has infuriated some of the 
members of this House. Even though the provision for divorce has been in 
existence in Malabar since 1932, I believe, not even a dozen divorces would 
have actually taken place. This proves the truth of the statement made by 
a learned author — I mean Bertrand Rusel — that “the easiest divorce laws 
by no means produce the greatest number of divorces ; wherever there is 
divorce, adultery is scarce and morality is higher”. 

Coming to adoption, the provisions contained in this Bill are very 
unsatisfactory when compared to what prevail in our part of the country. 

According to this Bill, adoption is a religious matter, but among the 
Marumakkattayam people it is a purely secular matter. Under the Hindu 
Code only a male or his widow could adopt a person, but according to our 
law any person, whether male or female, could adopt a person. Whereas 
only a male could be adopted under Hindu Law, males or females could 
be adopted under our law. Whereas only one person could be adopted under 
Hindu Law, we can adopt one person, two persons or even one whole family, 
at the time of extinction of our family or as heirs to our property. So there 
is a lot of difference between the Hindu Law and the Marumakkattayam 
Law in this respect. The reason why these things have not been taken into 
consideration in framing the Bill is, according to me, that the whole 
perspective has been entirely patriarchal and not matriarchal also. If that 
point of view also had been taken into consideration then many of these 
differences could have been resolved or reduced. 

In regard to joint family property, the substitution of tenancy-in- 
common for joint tenancy is one of the most important features in 
the Bill. I welcome this provision. But this part of the law again has 
been framed from the patriarchal point of view only. Read any clause 
under Part V — I am not going to trouble the House but I only wish 
to bring it to the notice of the Hon. the Law Minister — read any clause 
in part V and you will find that it is inapplicable to the Marumakkattayam 
people, though the Hindu Code Bill is intended to apply to them also. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


623 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 623 


Clauses 86, 87 and 88 will show that none of them could be made applicable 
for the tenancy-in-common being introduced into the joint families that exist 
in Malabar. 

With respect to inheritance, I do not know why mother should not be 
made an heir along with son and daughter. Suppose a man dies — suppose 
I die. My natural love and affection induce me to see my mother who has 
brought me up and who has taken interest in me all through my life, an 
heir to my property. Here what I find is that the mother has been omitted 
in Clause I. 

My second complaint is why the son of a predeceased son or the son of 
a predeceased son’s son ought to be introduced in Class I. He ought to come 
in Class II. It is revolting to us to make them preferential heirs in Class I. 
If you ask anyone in Malabar as to whether he would like his property 
to go to his son’s predeceased son’s son, or his son’s son even, or to his 
sister or sister’s children, he will certainly say that even in preference to 
his brother it should go to his sister and sister’s children. So I say that 
the rank given to sister and her children in Class II of the Seventh Schedule 
ought to be raised than what has been given there. Sister and sister’s children 
come very low; in Schedule VII, they come only after son’s daughter’s son, 
son’s son’s daughter, son’s daughter’s daughter. It is after all these persons 
that we find even brother and sister appearing as heirs. I do not know why 
promotion ought not to be given to brother and sister who were born of 
the same womb. Natural love and affection should certainly induce us to 
give brother and sister a higher rank than what has been given to them 
under the provisions relating to inheriance. 

[At this stage Mr. Deputy Speaker vacated the Chair, which was then 
occupied by Shrimati G. Durgabai (one of the Panel of Chairmen)]. 

Looking at the question from all these points of view, it will be seen that 
the whole Bill has been locked at only from the law that is prevailing in 
the other parts of the country than Malabar — which no doubt is certainly 
followed by the largest number of people — but the matriarchal system of 
law has not at all been taken into consideration in framing this Bill. 
Therefore I feel that this Bill is not sufficiently progressive either with 
respect to the rights of women, which we all desire so much to be given 
to them, or from the general point of view. 

We are very anxious to be brought within the scope of this Bill. 
We do want uniformity. I am one of those who wish, and the people 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


624 


624 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of my part of the country also want to see, that there is one uniform law 
existing for all the Hindus in the country. But at the same time it should 
not be made so revolting or made impossible for my people to follow the 
law, or even if they do so to do it with a certain amount of reluctance. 
It ought to be made attractive. My submission is that in framing the law 
the matriarchal system of law has also to be taken into consideration. I 
submit that proper amendments might be introduced to attract us also to 
come within the scope of the Bill. If for any reason the two systems are 
so divergent that it is impossible to introduce amendments in the Bill so 
as to attract us also within the scope of the Bill, my appeal to the House 
is that we may be left alone, that we may be allowed to follow our own 
law which stands on a higher footing of love and affection than the Hindu 
Code Bill that has now been introduced in this House. According to me this 
Hindu Code Bill is not a secular measure, it is not a rational measure ; 
religion still pervades throughout the Bill. The Bill ought to be entirely a 
rational one. I would have had no objection if the whole Bill had been framed 
from a natural outlook, an outlook entirely divorced from religion. If a Bill 
like that is introduced, our people would be too glad to follow it. What we 
notice is that the Bill as it is framed now is religious still to a high degree; 
though it has been watered down, it is not yet sufficiently secular. I don’t 
know why in marriage, adoption and inheritance, religion ought to interevene, 
why the provisions relating to them ought not to be made more secular as 
they prevail today in our part of the country. There is no reason why we 
who follow a system which has nothing to do in all these mundane matters 
with religion, should be roped into this Bill in which religion plays a 
prominent part. 

*Mr. Chairman : There are only ten minutes left. I want to know if 
any of the Members will finish his speech in ten minutes. 

Some Honourable Members rose — 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo (Madhya Bharat): Madam, I will finish my 
speech within ten minutes. 

At the outset I want to make it clear that I am wholeheartedly in support 
of the present Hindu Code Bill. It is with a hesitant heart that I am standing 
here because I feel that almost all the Members belonging to the older 
generation were speaking against the Hindu Code Bill. I don’t challange 
their hearts, but so far as the Hindu Code Bill is concerned their hearts 
seem to be older or staler. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 12th December 1949, pp. 506-508. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


625 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 625 


Shri M. Tirumala Rao : May I say that ladies of the older generation 
also are supporting you ? 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : Yes, because they are progressive, because 
they want to progress. In the words of my friend Mr. Krishna Chandra 
Sharma, they are more progressive and going forward whereas the men are 
going backward. Any way, I am concerned with the Hindu Code Bill as it 
stands today. 

Madam, I would not have spoken but for the fact that I can represent 
the views of the younger generation here, and I can confidently say that 
the younger generation in the country stands by the Hindu Code. Much ado 
has been made about the fact that this Bill has not been circulated for public 
opinion in the Indian States. I want to say that there have been many Bills 
which we have passed in this House, but at that time nobody raised his 
little finger and said that those Bills were not circulated for eliciting public 
opinion in the Indian States. 

Some Honourable Members : But this is such a controversial Bill. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : There have been so many controversial Bills. 
The question of Sirohi was most controversial but the States people were 
not consulted on it. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt (Bombay States): Madam, there was 
no Bill connected with Sirohi. 

Mr. Chairman : May I request hon. Members to allow the speaker to 
go on uniterrupted ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Is it not for the elders to correct if the younger 
generation goes astray ? 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : They are definitely in their rigits to control 
and guide the younger generation, but that must be towards progress, it 
should not be a retrogade step. 

An Honourable Member : Our experience extends upto 80 years. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : The experience of 80 years may be 
there ; but the experience of the Father of the Nation, Mahatma 
Gandhi, is also there. There are volumes of books containing the articles 
by him from time to time in favour of the elevation of the Hindu 
women. And so far as the Hindu Code is concerned, I have heard 
from many of the staunch opponents that they won’t mind if the whole 
Code is passed excepting the provision regarding inheritance and the 
sharing with daughters and sisters. It has been opposed mostly by the 
community, to which I also belong, the Marwari community. But I 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


626 


626 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


say that the Marwari youths are for the Hindu Code Bill. If we say that 
the older people are there and their experience is there, Mahatma Gandhi 
in his autobiography has written that it is a most pitiable sight to see the 
Hindu wife .... 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : You can’t exploit Mahatma 
Gandhi’s name. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : Perhaps you might have exploited his name 
much more than what I have done. I have just started my life and I had 
no opportunity of swearing by the Mahatma’s name whereas among people 
who are old and who have got grey hair there might be some who might 
have exploited his name hundreds of times. 

Madam, Mahatma Gandhi writes that so far as the position of Hindu wives 
is concerned, it is most pitiable. He says that if the master is annoyed with 
a servant, the servant may leave his master, if one is annoyed with one’s 
father he can’t demand partition, if a father is annoyed with his son he 
can ask him to get out, but so far as the Hindu wives are concerned they 
cannot go anywhere. If that was the case with Kasturba at the hands of 
the Mahatma, what would be the position of women at the hands of ordinary 
human beings like us ? 

So far as the Constitution is concerned, we have agreed that there is 
equality of sex, but here we are afraid of granting that equality to our women 
folk, to our sisters and daughters. You can adopt a boy from a family simply 
because he also happens to have the same Gotra or the same surname, but 
you are not prepared to tolerate your own daughter or your blood sister 
simply because she happens to be a female. That is the position. 

Much ado has been made about the Bill by saying that it is an insult 
on the Hindu religion. I want to ask this of my friends. The Hindu religion 
is very adjusting and accommodating. It has adopted itself to changing 
circumstances from times immemorial. The very fact that there are 137 or 
138 Smritis is evident to this statement. If there was a fixed law and no 
change suggested or expected in the Hindu law, then why are there 138 
Smritis ? And why we cannot have one more Smriti, codify and have a new 
Hindu law ? We can have in it all the good things of those Smritis together 
with all the good things which the modern times and the scientific 
developments and the social progress demand. What is the harm if we codify 
all these into one law ? The very word Smriti indicates whatever is written 
from memory, the word Shruti indicates whatever is heard and written. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


627 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 627 


It is nowhere stated that they were written by a particular Rishi or a 
particualr Muni. So, I don’t think there should be any hesitation in having 
this Code nor should anybody feel that his conscience will be killed if this 
Hindu Code is enacted. We have always been speaking from the political 
platform about freedom. Political freedom has been achieved. We have 
achieved independence but we have also to see . that the social evolution 
of the country also takes place. If we want the social order to change, I 
say this is the time for it. We have to prove it by our actions, not by words. 
We must see that the whole social order is changed. As regards reform, 
I may say that even the late Raja Ram Mohan Roy had to face opposition, 
many other reformers had to meet with opposition, some of them died an 
unnatural death at the hands of their opponents whom they wanted to help, 
whom they wanted to elevate and to whom they wanted to bring salvation. 
Here we have got our leaders who are certainly with us. After the Prime 
minister’s speech on the opening day of the session, I don’t think there is 
anything for arguing here or for fighting over this issue when he said that 
he was for the greatest common measure of agreement if it could be arrived 
at. If we are prepared to have a compromise with others then I feel this 
will not become a progressive measure, it will lose its charm. But still I 
have more faith in the wisdom of our Prime Minister. I feel he is much 
more wise than I can be or my young friends can be. I have faith in him. 
If he wants compromise, or if the Government wants compromise, let there 
be compromise, but so far as young people are concerned, we do not like 
the compromise. But we certainly have faith in our leaders and we shall 
obey their commands. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : But none of them are here. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : If they are not here, the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar 
is here. He is the sponsor of the Bill and he is doing it on behalf of the 
Government. It is no use cursing this Government. After all, if we go into 
the history of this Bill, we will see that it was brought by our predecessor 
Government .... (Interruption). 

Madam, I would like to speak for about ten minutes more, because there 
have been interruptions. If you so desire, I may continue tomorrow. I will 
not take more than ten minutes. 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member is requested to close his speech, 
because he has assured me that he will take only ten minutes. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : But you will appreciate my difficulty, Madam. 
I have been interrupted so much. I would like to speak for ten minutes 
more tomorrow, if you do not mind. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


628 


628 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Chairman : May I know whether the hon. Member can finish his 
speech within three minutes more. I will give him minutes three now. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : I know, Madam, I have given an assurance. 
If you wish, I may sit down just now. But I thank you for giving me three 
minutes more. 

Now, I was saying that Dr. Ambedkar is here. He will certainly convey 
our views. He is in charge of the Bill. It is no use cursing and blaming 
the present Government. After all, if we see the history of this Bill, this 
Bill was brought by our predecessor Government — a foreign government. At 
that time, we did not have the guts to fight it. Whenever social measures 
were brought forward by the foreign government .... 

An Honourable Member : Don’t worry about history. 

Shri Sita Ram S. Jajoo : I have to look into the history certainly, but 
let me proceed with my speech just now. When the British Government 
brought certain measures which affected the Hindu law, we accepted them 
at that time, because they did not touch the purses of the moneyed people — 
the capitalists. Here we feel the pinch, because it touches our pockets. We 
male members of this House are in a huge majority. I do not wish that 
the tyranny of the majority may be imposed on the minority, the female 
members of this House. The ladies in the country in general are illiterate; 
so we should not exploit them. A big tirade of propaganda is being carried 
on that this Bill aims only at one thing and that thing is divorce. All ladies 
are persuaded or dissuaded or influenced or canvassed by telling them that 
their husbands are going to divorce them after the Hindu Code is passed. 
This kind of misinterpretation of the provisions of the Hindu Code is going 
on. I want to tell all these people that there will hardly be a single man 
who would like to divorce unnecessarily ; similarly, there would hardly be 
a single Hindu wife who would like to divorce unnecessarily. There is enough 
good reason and sense in the courts, and the judiciary will definitely look 
into the whole case and see that justice is meted out. This is all I have 
to say. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Tuesday, the 13th December, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


629 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 629 


HINDU CODE — contd. 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of Hindu law. 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar (Madras : General): Sir, before dealing 
with the different aspects of the Bill as it emerged from the Select 
Committee, I should like with your leave to make a few general observations. 
I may at once say that I do not belong to the school which is against any 
legislative interference or change in matters of Hindu Law. Law by its very 
nature cannot be static; it must keep pace with the progresive tendencies 
of the age, if it is to be an instrument and measure of social progress. Our 
ancients were quite alive to this function of law in society. The Smritis as 
well as the great commentaries on the Smritis, bear eloquent testimony to 
this function of law in society and the need for changes from time to time. 
The commentaries which are treated as authoritative interpretations of law 
in different parts of the country merely give concrete expression to the social 
tendencies at work at a given time, but in the modern age with duly 
constituted Legislatures functioning, no jurist counsel can effect a change 
in the law by a mere process of interpretation. This function to some extent 
but within a limited sphere has been discharged by the Courts, the highest 
tribunals in India and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, during 
the last one hundred years or so. It is not, however, the normal function 
of Courts to effect a change in the law but only to interpret the law though 
in the process of interpretation it may effect imperceptible changes by 
distinguishing or extracting principles from previous decisions or from Hindu 
law texts. 

But by its very nature, judicial function is restricted in its operation. 
It cannot be gainsaid that there is also a danger in the Judge consciously 
or unconsciously assuming the role of a legislator. A particular Judge 
or a Bench might approach the consideration of a question from a 
conservative or orthodox point of view, another Judge might utilise his 
judicial function for any pet theme of social reform. The judgments 
of the highest tribunals in this country as well as those of the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council during its long association with India, 
bear witness to the above statement. At the same time, there is no 
gainsaying the fact that the decisions of Courts to a large extent have 
prepared the ground for legislative intervention. While this need for 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 510-19. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


630 


630 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


legislative intervention is apparent, this Assembly in undertaking any 
legislation of this kind cannot altogether ignore certain rooted conceptions 
in regard to marriage, family law and rights of succession. Change is 
inevitable and is part of the organic law of society, but change does not 
mean striking at the roots or foundations of society. 

Bearing all these aspects of law reform in mind, I should like this House 
to approach the consideration of this Bill. There is no subject in which every 
man and woman in this country is interested more than the Bill now under 
consideration by the House. That makes it all the more incumbent upon 
each one of us, however highly circumstanced or lowly circumstanced, to 
tolerate difference of views and to bring to bear a cool and dispassionate 
judgment in the larger interests of the wellbeing of the people of this country. 
In that sense and to that extent this cannot be treated purely as a Party 
measure or as a matter of confidence. 

First, with your leave, Sir, I shall take the Chapter relating to marriage 
and divorce. While dealing with this Chapter, it is well to remember that 
already great inroads have been made into the marriage law by the various 
Acts of the Indian Legislature. The latest of such Acts was the Hindu 
Marriage (Disabilities Removal) Act of 1946 (Act XXVIII of 1946) by which 
it has been enacted that a marriage shall not be invalid by reason only 
of the fact that the parties thereto belong to the same Gotra or Pravara 
or belong to different castes or subdivisions of castes. The Madras Legislature 
has recently made monogamy compulsory and some of the Provincial 
Legislatures have already made provisions for divorce. A change has also 
been made in regard to the law relating to the age of consent to marriage. 
If we approach the consideration of the Bill from this point of view, the 
changes effected in the Bill are by no means so revolutionary as they may 
seem as first sight. The substantial changes in the provisions of the original 
Bill as pointed out by some Members of the Select Committee relate to the 
incorporation of certain provisions relating to restitution of conjugal rights, 
judicial separation, alimony, custody of children, jurisdiction and procedure 
of Courts. 

While on the provisions of the Bill, I should like to mention one 
important point. The distinction sought to be made between sacramental 
marriage and civil marriage is more apparent than real. It is difficult 
to follow the provisions of the Bill in this respect, because I find that 
in regard to divorce, in regard to restitution of conjugal rights, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


631 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 631 


in regard to right of maintenance and obligations of the marriage the 
provisions are exactly the same both in regard to what is termed “Civil 
Marriage” under the provisions of the Bill and what is termed “Sacramental 
Marriage”. The Bill introduces a distinction between what is called “prohibited 
degrees” and other kinds of disqualifications in regard to sacramental 
marriage. In regard to sacramental marriage, provision is made that sapinda 
relationship as defined in the Bill will be a ground for disqualification, 
whereas in the case of what is called a “Civil Marriage” it is only prohibited 
degrees that are made a ground for the marriage not being effective. At 
the same time, I am unable to follow the metamorphosis provided for in 
the Bill that even if the parties go through a sacramental marriage, it is 
open to either of the spouses to convert it into what is called a “civil marriage” 
under the provisions of the Bill. If really this distinction serves any purpose 
at all is a point which may be considered by the Hon. the Law Minister 
before the final passing of the Bill. 

There is no distinction in regard to the rights of offspring, rights of 
inheritance, the obligations between the spouses and in every other matter. 
The position is exactly the same in regard to a civil marriage as in regard 
to a sacramental. Possibly, the idea is to satisfy the sentiments of some 
parties by making some provision for what is called “sacramental marriage” 
“. If that is the real object, then you ought not to make a provision for 
an easy change of sacramental marriage into a civil marriage at a later 
stage. Either have the one or the other. If, for example, you want to draw 
a distinction between sacramental marriage and civil marriage, have it; let 
it be quite clear and definite : Normally, certain ceremonies are indispensable 
for sacramental marriage. Certain formalities need not be gone through in 
the case of what is called “ civil marriage ”. From the point of view of a 
pure lawyer, I fail to see any real distinction between a civil marriage and 
a sacramental marriage under the provisions of this Bill. I do not go to 
any root ideas of the Bill, but I merely place it for the consideration of the 
Hon. the Law Minister. 

Then again with regard to prohibited degress of relationship, modern 
eugenics is against the idea of people related to one another marrying. 
At any rate, there is a large body of opinion in favour of this doctrine. 
Under those circumstances, are we advancing or are we retarding progress 
so far as this provision is concerned ? At least so far as this part 
is concerned, I think our ancients anticipated modern ideas in 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


632 


632 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

prohibiting certain people from marrying. I ask you : why take 

retrograde step in the name of progress and in the name of advanced 
ideas and civilisation ? I certainly realise that there need not be any 
prohibition in regard to distant sapinda or people who have the same 
pravara or the same gotra. But that stands on a different footing 
12 noon altogether. Where there is near relationship, why relax the 
rule ? I have been recently reading in newspapers and periodicals 
a good deal of discussion as to the advisability of near relations marrying 
one another. This is one aspect which I know the Hon. the Law Minister, 
as a student of science and of history, will certainly consider. This is opposed 
to the religious sentiments of the people. If scientific ideas, if religious 
considerations, if sentiments of the people have all to be taken into 
consideration, then there is no point in relaxing that rule. It is not, of course, 
consistent with the well being of the society. If in the interests of the future 
generation, if in the interests of the well being of our people, if in the 
interests of the progress of the race, you must promote marriages between 
near relations, by all means do so. Let us take a bold stand ; let us take 
a clear stand ; let us take a determined stand in regard that matter. I do 
not want any shilly-shallying in regard to what may be regarded as a 
question of fundamental principle. Either adopt the ancient principle or adopt 
a more rational or modern principle according to your ideas. But personally, 
I would very much prefer the old rule being retained. Let me be quite clear. 
In regard to particular communities where, for example, certain customs 
have been prevalent in some parts of India, you have already provided for 
it in another clause. But the general rule should be to prohibit marriage 
between sapindas. In this respect, the move is not in the right direction. 

With regard to the law of divorce, in trying to bring about a uniformity 
of law there is no point, as Sir Tek Chand has pointed out in his 
memo, in imposing special restrictions upon communities and classes 
of people among whom restrictions do not obtain at present. I know 
that in parts of South India divorce by mutual consent in the presence 
of the village headman or the Panchayat is still prevalent as in other 
parts of North India. After all, it looks as if divorce is to be the 
essence of the law of marriage according to a certain school. But must 
you think of divorce before you think of the marriage ? If that is 
the running idea and if you want to give encouragement or at any 
rate provide an easy divorce, why provide for law courts, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


633 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 633 

divorce courts, an appeal court with three judges sitting, etc. when the 
communities affected have got hardly enough to eat ? I should think that 
is not a move in the right direction. In so far as any divorce is permitted 
according to the custom of the community in particular castes, it should 
continue ; but in the interests of uniformity you need not make the divorce 
more expensive. It would certainly benefit my profession and I am not at 
all against it. But I know my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar very well and I 
have no doubt he will consider all the aspects of the question before coming 
to a conclusion on this particular question. 

In regard to judicial separation, I recall to mind a very interesting debate 
in the House of Lords some years ago in which Lord Birkenhead took part. 
Very eminent lawyers and some of the greatest jurists of the day took part 
in the debate. There was a certain section of the people who took a strong 
view to the effect that judicial separation is another name for legalising 
concubinage. I would rather prefer a clean case of divorce to this judicial 
separation continuing. If it is a question of providing maintenance, if it is 
a question of seeing that the obligations are discharged that the wife is 
not starved or that you do not discharge your marital obligation, while 
continuing to be man and wife, provision is made in the Bill in regard to 
that. 

Why all these complicated provisions of the English law in regard to 
alimony, in regard to judicial separation, in regard to divorce and restitution 
of conjugal rights ? Is it necessary to have so many detailed and complicated 
provisions is a point which is worth consideration. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (West Bengal : General): They are 
necessary in the interests of the progress of the country. 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : I am not giving one view or the 
other in regard to that. You may have your decided views on that matter. 
But I have no decided views on the subject. 

Therefore, I think we have to take the modern trends of thought into 
consideration and not merely go upon antiquated ideas prevailing in England. 
Even in England within the recent years there has been a great change 
of opinion in regard to marriage law, although every aspect of it has not 
found a place in the Statute Book of England. Therefore, instead of merely 
copying the English precedent let us see if it is possible to make any changes. 

So far as the general principle of it is concerned, I do not think 
that the Bill is drastic at all in regard to divorce or other matter. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14~12 MK Chandan 21-10-13>DK>6-12-2013 


634 


634 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Whatever difficulties and complexities have arisen are due to a genuine 
attempt to harmonise the two opposing views — on the one hand the ancient 
idea that marriage cannot be easily severed and on the other the modern 
ideas which demand separation under certain circumstances. The problem 
now is how to bring about a synthesis between the two opposing views. Let 
us approach the consideration of this problem with a certain amount of 
coolness and with an attempt to understand one another. We cannot stop 
the current, whatever might be our views. I belong to a very conservative 
and very orthodox family. I am one of those who believe still in Shradhas. 
I attach considerable importance to my family home and I believe, to some 
extent, in the ancient view of life. But I cannot at the same time ignore 
the present day tendency. My sons may not be just like myself and my 
grandsons much less like myself. Under those circumstances, though my life 
is rooted in the past, to a very great extent I am in a position to appreciate 
modern tendency. Therefore, taking all these factors into consideration let 
us approach the consideration of this measure. If really you believe in 
sacramental marriage, this method of converting sacramental marriage easily 
into a civil marriage, somehow does not appeal to me. That is my view. 
Either have sacramental marriage or do not have it at all. Have particular 
grounds of divorce for sacramental marriage and particular grounds of 
divorce for civil marriage. Somehow I cannot reconcile myself to the idea 
of mixing up the two. 

Now, I shall take up the chapter on adoption. The chapter on adoption 
does not call for any detailed consideration. While the main principle in 
regard to the law of adoption laid down by the judicial decisions bearing 
upon the subject have been kept in view, necessary changes have been 
effected as a consequence of changes in the law as to marriage between 
persons belonging to different castes. There is no point in conceding the 
rights of inheritance to the offspring of such marriages and retaining 
ancient rules as to the eligibility of a boy for adoption based upon the 
law of marriage as a condition precedent for the validity of adoption in 
particular castes and particular circumstances. The simple rule as to 
giving and receiving has accordingly been adopted for a valid adoption in 
the Bill. The property rights have been regulated with a view to avoid 
litigation between adoptive mother and the boy to be adopted. A provision 
has been inserted for preventing the divesting of estates which will 
have the effect of putting an end to interminable litigation which has been 
the special feature of law relating to adoption beginning from Bhuban 
Moyee’s case. The law has also been simplified in regard to the need 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


635 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 635 


for any authority to adopt as a condition for the validity of adoption 
following the main principles of Mayukha Law. On the whole, it may 
be claimed that there is everything in the chapter on adoption to 
commend it for the favourable considration of this House. The need for 
an express authority from the husband for the validity of adoption, the 
restriction of the scope and the terms of the authority conferred by the 
husband, the free consent of the nearest sapindas who are most 
interested in disputing the adoption and being a substitute for the 
authority of the husband and the relative claims of the senior and junior 
widow, the limits that ought to be placed upon the exercise of the power 
to adopt have been fruitful source of litigation in British Indian Courts. 
The Bill, I have no doubt, has considerably simplified the law as to 
adoption and the rights of the adopted son. On the whole, I should think 
there can be marriage between different communities — it has become part 
of the chapter on adoption, because when once you agree to the principle 
that there can be marriage between different communities — it has become 
part of the law — all these restrictions which have been obtaining in 
regard to the eligibility of the boy to be adopted must necessarily go. 
When gotra has disappeared, how can sagotra be a qualification for 
adoption ? Therefore, in the interests of simplicity and of logic, we have 
necessarily to see that giving and taking are enough ; we have to 
reconcile ourselves to this situation. Having taken the first step, you 
cannot stop at the second step. The Legislature here has already taken 
the first step. Therefore, there is no use fighting shy of the next step. 
Under those circumstances, I would commend for the favourable consid- 
eration of the House the Chapter on Adoption. 

I am just coming to the other parts of the Bill where I differ from 

the Members of the Select Committee. In dealing with the institution 

of joint family, the problems of Indian agriculture and its future and 
the position of many trading facilities belonging to communities which 
have trade or business as their principal avocation must necessarily 
form an important factor. Anyone who is in touch with conditions 
of village life in India knows that particular families have long been 
in possession of particular lands from generation to generation, that 
being the main reason assigned for conceding occupancy rights to 
tenancy families who have been cultivating the land for a long time. 
Here I must say that I radically differ from my respected friend, 
Mr. Santhanam, in regard to what he said about village life in India. 

It is not correct to say that the joint family is breaking up. I also 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


636 


636 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


claim to be in touch with village life in India. I am a villager myself, 
though I have spent about forty years in the City of Madras. Hardly 
has there been any year in these forty years in which I did not spend 
at least a month in a village. I spend a good part of Christmas and 
the summer vacation in the villages and with the people of the villages. 
Therefore, I claim to know something of village life in India, at least 
village life in Madras, though I know very little of village life in other 
parts of India excepting through the medium of books and village 
manuals. Therefore, I wholly disagree with the statement that so far 
at any rate the villages of India are concerned, the joint family life 
is breaking up. At the same time, I certainly agree with my friend, 
Mr. Santhanam, in this, viz., that so far as what may be called collateral 
branches are concerned, after the first generation, there is a tendency 
for the joint family to break up. In the first generation there is no 
breaking up, certainly not during the life-time of the father. If there 
is any breaking up, it generally is after the children of the father pass 
away and children’s children come into their own. Therefore, you must 
take the existing state of things into consideration instead of proceeding 
merely on theory. I myself have been a member of a joint family till 
recently and I still believe in the ideals of a joint family life. I certainly 
think that in certain aspects of life in regard to education for example, 
the joint family system has done a good turn. Many a poor brother 
has starved himself in order to educate his brothers ; many an uncle 
has starved himself in order to educate his nephews. A sort of 
qualified Socialism has existed in the joint family life. At the 
same time, I agree that no institution can last for a long time. No 
institution must be allowed to come in the way of social progress. But 
the question is, has the time come for this question to be taken into 
consideration? I do not subscribe to the view that the joint family 
system is breaking down so far as the villages are concerned and 
in any scheme of reform we must remember that India is a land of 
villages. The rural people are still following the joint family system 
to a large extent. The recent inroads made into the joint family system 
by conceding rights to the widows and daughters-in-law have not 
materially effected the position. Even in regard to non-agricultural 
property, communities which have trade as their principal avocation 
are still carrying on trade or business as a family adventure or business. 
It is so in my part of the country. I have had a good deal to do with 
the Natukottai Chettiars for the last forty years, and it is only within 
the last five or ten years that they are starting companies not with 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


637 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 637 


the idea of breaking up joint families but to see that they get out of 
income-tax regulations. Therefore, it is not correct to say that joint 
family life is breaking up either among the Vaishyas or among the 
Natukottai Chettiars or among the Marwaris. Now, sitting in this 
Legislative Assembly or Parliament, there is no use our thinking that 
we are in possession of all the facts regarding every nook and corner 
of India and legislating on that basis. The only thing we have to 
consider is, is it so out of tune with modern conditions and is it going 
to stand in the way of further progress ? You have also to note certain 
changes which have already been made in the joint family law. The 
rigours of joint family law have been considerably relaxed in recent 
years. It is now settled law that any member of a joint family may 
by a unilateral declaration sever himself from the rest of the family 
without reference to any court of law. The manifestation of will or 
intention on the part of any member of the joint family is enough for 
severance, even so many still continue as members of a joint family 
because still they like the institution of the joint family. Any member 
of a joint family may alienate his share of the family property. In the 
case of father and son, the entire property is liable for the debts of 
the father. The son is responsible for the debt of the father. He cannot 
escape his responsibility by saying that the debts were incurred by the 
father for immoral purposes. I am certain that that sort of litigation 
is fast dying down. There is no question of escape now by saying that 
the debt was incurred by the father for immoral purposes. Then again, 
the law as to self-acquisition has been considerably simplified. Decisions 
of the Privy Council have made it quite clear that if a person acquires 
property, he can keep it for himself. Therefore, the plea that I would 
make to my friend, the Hon. Law Minister is that this institution still 
obtains. It may break up in the course of the next fifteen, thirty or 
fifty years. With the change in the law of marriage and other things, 
it may break up. But my whole point is, without reference to the will 
of the people, without reference to their consent, without taking into 
account the general consciousness of the people, why undertake this 
legislation ? You may think that I am a kind of ancient fellow who 
does not understand these things. I do want that this country should 
move with the times, but my plea is you should first ascertain the will 
of the people. It may be argued. “All right, so far as agricultural 
property is concerned, we will not touch it, but we will make a change 
in regard to non-agricultural property”. It is not easy to make a 
distinction in matters of this kind between one kind of property and 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


638 


638 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


another land or property. Once you change the law in regard to non- 
agricultural property, a change in the law in regard to agricultural 
property must necessarily follow. Though in the matter of distribution 
of legislative power between the Union and the States for taxation 
purposes, a distinction is maintained between agricultural and non- 
agricultural property, it is an accident only that certain power is given 
to the provinces and certain power is given to the Centre, and it cannot 
be denied that Hindu law of succession is single and entire. Succession 
is not a truncated affairs. Succession cannot be split up. Therefore, 
when you consider the question, you should consider it in all these 
aspects both in regard to agricultural property and in regard to non- 
agricultural property and you should address yourself to the question 
whether in the larger interests of society, the time has come for a 
revolutionary change in the family system. I request my hon. Friend, 
the Law Minister to consider the question why certain chapters of the 
Bill should not be postponed. 

Sir, I just want to deal with another aspect of the question namely 
the rights of succession of sons and daughters in regard to succession 
proper. I have got a special claim to speak on that behalf as I am a 
father of both daughters and sons and I repeat that. In fact the majority 
is on the woman side, four daughters and three boys. Therefore, I have 
a special claim to speak on this subject Hear, hear). Apart from what 
little I know as a lawyer, I have a special claim to speak as a father 
of daughters and of sons. Now, I want you to look at the general set 
up of the Hindu family in dealing with this problem. If three sons find 
it difficult, you say, to live together and to own property in common 
how can you expect the daughters married to different people, may be 
people belonging to different castes or communities to carry on joint 
cultivation in villages ? Under those circumstances, is it in the larger 
interests of the country, that this property of the father as well as 
of the son be divided up equally between sons and daughters without 
any question of difference ? If it is a question of justice, if it is a 
question of equality, if it is a question of theoretical equality, I have 
nothing to say against it, but law is not logical — it does not mean 
that it is always illogical — but it has to take into account the 
social strata of society, the consciousness of the community, its 
effect upon the family life and other factors. Therefore, you have not 
a clean slate to write on. Therefore, let us take what happens in a 
Hindu family, Mr. Santhanam looks with equanimity from Delhi. If 
any marriage takes place in a brother’s house, the sister and the 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


639 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 639 


daughter occupy the most important part. It is regarded as a father’s 
house, the son looks upon the family house as his house. Every one 
of us know what an important place the sister and the daughter 
occupies in the household. (Hear, hear). If the mother and father sit 
together for the Aarathi, it is the daughter, it is the sister that brings 
it and you give the present to the daughters and the sisters on that 
occasion. After all we are all Hindus; you cannot forget that. The very 
first person who receives the present will be the sister or the daughter 
in the household. The second thing is that no marriage can go through 
in any Hindu household unless provision is made for presents being 
made to the daughters and to the sisters. Again even though, women 
who may not care to bear children may not appreciate it — daughters 
of the family are certainly cared for on every occasion such as srimanta 
or on occasions of first confinement and second confinement. A girl 
generally goes to the father’s house or to the brother’s house and it 
is only after getting two or three children that the girl does not go 
to the father’s or brother’s house, and this is Hindu life to-day. It is 
not the life in Delhi, it is not the life in Calcutta, it is not the life 
in Madras that is to be the guiding factor in these matters. It is the 
normal ordinary life in every village, in the whole of India, (Hear, hear). 
Therefore, I would ask you most respectfully the Members of this House, 
though I am addressing Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take these factors into 
consideration. The Bible said “I shall set father against father, son 
against son and brother against brother” or some such thing, but let 
not legislation result in a feud between the members of the family, 
an unnecessary feud between the members of the family. A certain 
amount of bickering, a certain feud is inevitable, so long as property 
is there. 

Sankara said that property is the soul of strife in our country and 
that is inevitable, but let us not give an impetus to it by stating that 
I shall set brother against brother, a sister against the brother, the 
brother against the sister and in that way mould the family life of 
the India at present. The time may come when each daughter may 
arrange for her marriage after they attain their maturity. Many of the 
girls look to their brothers for their marriage. Hardly a week passes 
when a brother or a father does not come and ask for a little help 
in regard to a marriage. It may be that I am old-fashioned to consider 
such requests, but that is Hindu life. I am supposed to be educated 
in English ways of life but what would you think of other people 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


640 


640 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


who are not so educated as myself? You may be more advanced, I may 
be less advanced, but I still claim that I am born of the Indian soil 
and my ideas are rooted in the Indian soil, and therefore, I plead for 
the retention of these great virtues which have characterized our 
Indian life Hear, hear). I do not want to go against the modern trends 
of thought or the modern ideas of progress, but at the same time while 
it is our duty to keep in touch with the currents of national life, with 
the social currents at present working, there is no use our imagining 
that we represent the whole of India. I may tell you, even among 
educated women, all of them do not think alike and even women who 
are in the legislatures do not think alike with some other educated 
ladies who are members of respectable households; they differ in some 
respects. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal : General): Are our households 
not respectable ? 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : They are very respectable. I am 
glad that you have interrupted. I am accustomed and I may tell you 
they are quite as respectable, though they might be a little conserva- 
tive, — as some of those people who are very respectable and who have 
advanced ideas in these matters. I have given my views and I certainly 
refuse to believe I am not a respectable man; I am at least as respectable 
as others, but my ways of life, my way of thinking, my attitude to these 
questions is different from those equally respectable because I am cast 
in a different mould. For example, I have the greatest respect for our 
Prime Minister and on certain questions I yield to him, but at the same 
time, I do not look at questions with the same glasses as my hon. friend, 
my esteemed friend, if I may call the Prime Minister my very esteemed 
friend. It is merely a mode of approach. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Minister of State for Trnsport 
and Railways) : What is your actual proposal ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : He is giving his proposals in an 
excellent way. 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : I do not fight shy of that. The 
question I have been put is in regard to un-married daughters whether 
any kind of special provision may be made either for marriage or 
a special portion may be set apart so far as the marriage of girls is 
concerned. The law may provide that the daughters will take the heritage 
of the mothers and the sons will take the heritage of the fathers. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


641 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 641 


So far as daughters are concerned, I am quite willing to and quite 
anxious that as liberal and as obligatory, a provision be made for the 
girls who are un-married. I have absolutely no difficulty in that matter. 
That is my proposal. It may be worth anything, it may not be worth 
anything, but that is my proposal. 

An Honourable Member : What about the money from the 
mother? 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : There is no use speaking about 
that. You take a census of the people who pay income-tax in this country? 
They are not many. This is a poverty stricken country. So there is no 
use of saying that that the mother has no property. Many are poor. They 
may have no property, but they cannot get away from social obligations. 
Those who have property may divide their property, but that may have 
repercussions upon the people who have no property, or very little 
property, but at the same time who are quite sensitive to the social and 
family obligations. Therefore, in any step that you take, you have to see 
that the social obligations are not retarded. That is the plea I make so 
far as this is concerned. In regard to the institution of joint family 
property, I differ from my friend the hon. Dr. Ambedkar. It is seldom 
I differ from him. And I am often influenced by him, and have 
occasionally influenced him. Therefore, I have no doubt that he will pay 
heed to some of the criticisms which those of my persuasion have offered. 
He may look obstinate, but there is none who yields to reason more than 
my friend Dr. Ambedkar. I know him very well and it has been a great 
asset to me, I mean my close acquaintance with him these three years. 
Well, that is my view, so far the institution of joint family and the rights 
of equal succession of sons and daughters is concerned. 

The next aspect is with regard to Stridhana property, and on that, 
in so far as you remove all restrictions on the power of alienation, 
I am at one with the House, that is with the other Members of the 
House. This has merely led to unnecessary litigation, the reversionary 
filing suits for the declaration that alienations by the widow are invalid, 
going to this court and that court, and all sorts of evidence being let 
in. If only in the interest of unnecessary litigation being avoided, I 
am for the widow being given absolute powers of disposition during 
her life-time. But from that it does not necessarily follow that the 
course of devolution must be the same with regard to every kind of 
Stridhanam property. You call it Stridhanam and then begin to attach 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


642 


642 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


certain consequences in the matter of succession. Once you make it 
absolute property, why not it descend to the heirs? That is the 
question. I am willing to put the question to ninety nine Hindus I 
meet, “Here is a property devolving uopn the widow from her 
husband. It is absolute property, and after her death it is to go to 
her father and mother, in preference to the father and mother of the 
man whose property has devolved upon the widow.” I put that 
question. You may take a referendum in any part of the country and 
I am quite clear what the result of that referendum will be. And 
I challenge any Member to say in this House that the referendum 
will be other than what I feel. Therefore, as a lawyer, if you put 
me the question, can you have two kinds of absolute properties, one 
kind descending in one way and another kind descending in another 
way, and ask me, why not in the interest of uniformity, give the same 
rule of succession for one kind of property and the other kind of 
property? Then I say that you need not sacrifice social sentiments 
at the alter of logicality. Law need not always be logical. Law need 
not necessarily be Logical. Logic is not the essence of law. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Should law be generally 
illogical? 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : My answer to my friend 
Mr. Santhanam is that law need not necessarily be logical. That is so 
because law is the product of social evolution and social adjustment, and 
therefore, how can it always be logical? Society does not move according 
to a particular standard or plan. Unfortunately, society, except in a 
communistic society, does not move in that way. Therefore, under these 
circumstances, you take the average sentiment of the Hindu into 
consideration. There is no use of saying that it is illogical to draw a 
distinction between one kind of stridhana and another. Why should the 
Stridhana be allowed again to go to the husband’s kindred? Why not 
it go to her heirs? In the very Bill that is the provision that is made. 
Therefore, so far as woman’s property is concerned, I think that is a 
point which may receive the consideration of the hon. Law Minister, 
before the Bill becomes law, consistent with the sentiments and the 
general feeling among the people. Until recently the widow did not have 
the power of disposition. The question is whether on the theory that each 
person when he inherits property, he or she must become the stock of 
descent, inherited property of every description must be treated alike. 
That is my plea with regard to woman’s property. Throughout I have 
refrained from resting on logic. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


643 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 643 


And lastly, Sir, I may mention, if I may, a few words with regard 
to distant heirs. I feel that the present provisions are a great improve- 
ment upon the previous Bill. It has drawn upon certain principles of 
Dayabhaga and it has also brought in the other systems. And I think, 
so far as distant heirs are concerned, the Bill as it stands is a great 
improvement upon the original Bill, and if there is any defect here and 
there, they can be removed easily. 

The chapter on guardianship, maintenance, and the other chapters are 
conceived in a very liberal and progressive spirit, and I think they 
deserve the whole-hearted support of the Assembly, though it may be 
that here and there, they may require some modification, but that can 
be easily done at a later stage of these procedings. Therefore, in the 
full confidence that the hon. Law Minister as well as the Prime Minister 
will be responsive to public criticism, while taking into account the 
progressive tendencies of the age, I move for the second reading of the 
Bill and I support the motion moved by the hon. Dr. Ambedkar. 

*Dr. P. K. Sen (Bihar : General) : Sir, I am quite conscious that I 
must be brief, as there is a great pressure upon the time of the House. 
At the same time there are certain aspects which have been raised, even 
by my predecessor, my esteemed friend, Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, 
which do call for some comment. He has followed the order of the Bill, 
as a matter of fact, and taken the law of marriage first of all. I must 
confess that I could not exactly follow him as to whether he gave his 

opinion in favour or against it. As a matter of fact he said in one part 

of his speech, while dealing with that section, that he had no definite 
opinion on the subject. So far as the law of marriage and divorce is 

concerned I do feel that one must be definite. There is no part of law 

which calls for definiteness more than the law of marriage, because, it 
affects not only the parties who solemnise the marriage between 
themselves 

Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar : Sir, I do not know if I had made 
myself clear. What I said was that if we had had a clean state to write 
on, we might do otherwise but having regard to the previous step taken 
by this House and the legislation undertaken, there cannot be any serious 
objection to the portion relating to marriage excepting in regard to one 
or two matters, which I mentioned in the course of my address. 

Dr. P. K. Sen : Except in relation to sacramental marriage. I 
suppose. 


* C. A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 519-27. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14\V14-13 MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 644 

644 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


As I was observing we have to see that in every respect the law of 
marriage should be perfectly definite and explicit and there should be 
no ambiguity at all about it and it is for that reason I take it that the 
Bill contemplates that even when the marriage has taken place according 
to the sacramental form there may be objections raised with regard to 
it. It may be urged that there had been some irregularity, some omission, 
some particular form of ceremony not having been observed. Take, for 
instance, saptapadi. Everybody knows that Saptapadi is an essential 
factor. Not until the seven steps have been taken can the marriage be 
said to be valid. In fact, all manner of irregularities may be urged as 
objections with regard to the marriage. It is for that reason that it has 
been provided in the Bill that even when a marriage has been solemnised 
according to certain sacramental form, it is open to a party (it is only 
permissive) to go and have the marriage registered, so that there may 
be no objection raised later on with regard to its validity. This is, I 
submit, absolutely essential, because it is not only the two parties who 
solemnised the marriage between themselves who are affected but it is 
the next generation and the next generation, indeed, generations unborn, 
that are affected by it. The whole question of legitimacy depends upon 
it. Therefore, I submit that whatever may be the irregularity, there must 
be some method by means of which the legitimacy of children and their 
rights of inheritance may be protected and may not be left in uncertainty. 
There can be no difficulty whatsoever : there is some way of ascertaining 
what the necessary forms are which have to be observed in order to make 
a sacramental marriage valid. That too has been provided for in the Bill 
in the form, viz., that in any particular area it may be found that a 
particular set of ceremonies is regarded as essential to the validity of 
the marriage : in that event those ceremonies will be regarded as 
validating the marriage. Nevertheless, it may so come to pass that some 
of these ceremonies have been performed or it may be that the 
performance of those ceremonies were not exactly in the manner 
prescribed. In that event what is to happen? Is the married couple then 
to remain in the position which would make their children illegitimate 
in the eye of law? It is for this reason only that it has been made optional 
for the parties to have their marriage registered in order to get it 
validated. 


I come to the next question about public opinion and about their 
being a large body of the public not having been sufficiently apprised 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


645 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 645 


of the contents of the Bill. The question has been raised often and often 
here, why hurry why not wait for a year or two or three years? We have 
already waited long enough. Why should we not wait for another period? 
It is not a question of eleven years which the Hindu code has taken, 
nor is it a question of two years which have elapsed since. This has 
been mooted from the last century. 

The House will be pleased to recall Act III of 1872. The Special 
Marriage Act which was first placed before the legislature was in 1868 
by Sir Henry Maine at the instance and on the initiative of Keshub 
Chunder Sen, Bengal’s great social reformer. As a matter of fact, to go 
further back, in the fifties of the last century, the Widow Re-marriage 
Bill was on the legislative anvil. The great Ishwar Chunder Vidyasagar 
was exerting a great influence on the public mind to get their support 
for Hindu widow remarriage. It was at that time that a remarkable 
petition signed by four hundred men was put up before the legislature, 
in which they said that although they were orthodox Hindus, they did 
not believe in restricting themselves to a particular caste, they believed 
in inter-caste marriage, they believed in monogamy, they believed in 
certain ceremonies being essential for the purpose of observing pure 
Hinduism but that they wanted to eschew other ceremonies and that, 
therefore, they wanted the help of the legislature to pass a comprehen- 
sive Bill, not only the Hindu Widow Remarriage Bill but a Hindu 
Marriage Bill, in which provision would be made for inter-caste marriage, 
for adult marriage and for marriage solemnised with certain ceremonies 
only to which they did not take exception, and not every ceremony which 
at that time was considered to be obligatory. This was somewhere about 
1856 and it was a most representative body that put forward this 
petition. Among those notable public men who signed the petition were 
people like Peary Chand Mitter, Radha Nath Sikdar, Abhoy Charan 
Mullik, and Rasik Krishna Mullik. They had nothing whatever to do with 
the Brahmo Samaj : they were orthodox Hindus. Side by side with this 
organisation there were all the activities of the Brahmo Samaj going 
on. The Brahmos had already solemnised inter-caste marriages, because 
they believed that “Right was right: to follow right were wisdom in scorn 
of consequence.” They did not care what the law was. They said that 
they would break down caste notwithstanding the fact that there might 
be difficulties regarding legal validity. Later on they thought that this 
state of affairs should be removed for the sake of posterity, for the 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


646 


646 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


sake of the children and it was therefore, that Sir Henry Maine 
introduced a Bill which ultimately emerged as the Special Marriage Act 
of 1872. That this Act has catered not only for the Brahmo community 
but for a much larger body is testified to by the fact that after the 
passing of the Act several amendments have been sought in order to 
make it applicable to other sections and in order also to obviate certain 
objections to particular sections of the Act. In doing so, these people 
at different times acted as the representatives of the conscience of the 
society — the minority conscience, let us say. But the minority has a 
conscience; and the social conscience of the minority also must be 
respected. In every country we find that it is the minority conscience 
which has always come to the help of law for the purpose of vindicating 
its own view. Well, Sir, today we do not know which section is in the 
minority and which section in the majority. But it goes without saying 
that in a democratic form of government all sections of people must 
necessarily have their consciences vindicated, and their ways of life and 
thought, at least so far as fundamental points are concerned, respected. 
In that view the question that really has to be solved by us is this : 
Is this Bill in any particular respect imposing itself upon the conscience 
of any particular section? (Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Yes) And by that 
will its excellence or otherwise be tested. 

Now, if we come to the first part of the Bill, so far as the question 
relating to marriage, divorce, judicial separation, guardianship, alimony, 
custody of children and so on, is concerned, so far as I can understand, 
it cannot possibly be contended that it is being thrust upon anyone. After 
all, it is only in those cases where you find that divorce has become 
absolutely unavoidable that the provision will be utilised. And there are 
such cases, there can be no question whatsoever about that. There are 
cases where continuance of the marriage bond will really lead to misery 
from the point of view of both parties, will lead to disintegration of the 
family. It is only there that divorce can possibly come on. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri (Assam : General) : May I ask if 
the subsequent marriages become happy? They become worse. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras : General) : It depends 
upon the lady you marry! 

Dr. P. K. Sen : I am not going into that question because in that 
case it would be a matter of statistics as to how many cases have 
really become happy or how many cases have really become happy 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


647 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 647 


or how many cases have turned out unhappy. That is not the test. The 
test is unavoidability. Is there anyone who can possibly say that in no 
circumstances should there be a separation at all? There may be 
circumstances imaginable where there should not be separation. It is for 
us to sit down with good will and mutual understanding, and discuss 
all these points and find out whether it is going to be compulsory upon 
any particular party or not. There is no compulsion at all here. It is 
perfectly optional. If you find that it has become impossible to carry on 
you can go to a court of law. The court of law will go into the matter, 
find out whether all the requisites of a divorce or a dissolution of 
marriage are present and then issue a decree nisi, or whatever it may 
be. But that does not necessarily mean that divorce will go on multiplying 
from day to day. That depends entirely on the temperament of the people. 
And I feel bound to say that because it has taken a particular course 
in America or England or in other foreign countries, in India also it 
should take the same course — that is an impossible conclusion. (Pandit 
Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: It is the same institution). I do not believe at 
all that in India the same result will follow. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Worse. 

An Honourable Member : Is it not time to rise for Lunch? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think the hon. Member is likely to 
conclude soon. 

Dr. P. K. Sen : I am trying my best to conclude soon, but I have 
just begun. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till 
Half Past Two of the Clock. 


The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch 
at Half Past Two of the Clock, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
(Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) in the Chair. 


Dr. P. K. Sen : Sir, when this House rose for mid-day recess, I was 
on the point of the permissive nature of the provisions regarding divorce 
and allied matters. The question that was put to me in the course of 
the debate was why there had been so many divorces in other countries. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P. : General) : On a point of order. I 
find only the hon. Minister of State for Transport and Railways sitting 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


648 


648 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


on the Government Benches. The Bill under discussion neither deals with 
Railways nor with Transport. Will you be kind enough to call the Hon. 
Law Minister, Sir ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am sure the Law Minister will be here soon. 
Till then, the other Minister who is here will take notes. 

Shri Ajit Prasad Jain (U. P. : General) : This is almost a contempt 
of the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have got chits sent to me by no less than 
36 members so far. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao (Madras : General) : Some have not sent our 
names. Our chits are lying here. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : And many have been waiting to catch your 
eye. They have not sent chits. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So the position is that, besides these 36 there 
are others also trying to catch my eye. As the position stands at present, 
Government had fixed only yesterday and today for this Bill. I do not 
know the state of government work. I do not want to stifle discussion, 
but at this rate I do not think we can go on. Therefore, I suggest to 
hon. Members to limit their speeches, as far as possible, to fifteen 
minutes. 

An Honourable Member : Impossible. You suggest to Government 
to extend the time. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar: General) : Such members as 
are hopeful of finishing their speeches within five or ten minutes should 
be given preference. There are many such members, I know. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : But will they keep to their 
assurance? That is the point. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : I give a definite assurance. 

Shri Biswanath Das (Orissa : General) : May I just bring to your 
notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the hon. Speaker had given an 
assurance to this House that he would give full scope for discussion of 
this motion and it will be unfortunate if you allow only ten or fifteen 
minutes for a speaker. It is something absolutely different from an 
ordinary Bill. It concerns the life and the economic and social existence 
of crores of people. Under these circumstances, I would beg of you to 
stick to the assurance given by the hon. Speaker. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : He is the Speaker. He can now 

decide. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


649 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 649 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is unfortunate that the Speaker is not here 
in his seat. I do not want to stifle the discussion, but I am only suggesting 
a time-limit so that all Members who want to take part in the discussion 
may have an opportunity. I leave it to the good sense of the hon. Members 
themselves. Fifteen minutes is not an inviolable limit. One minute above 
or one minute below may not be very bad. But beyond that I am afraid 
even if the government were willing — I do not know whether they are 
willing or not — to extend the discussion by a day, it would be impossible, 
having regard to the number of speakers who want to speak, that 
everyone will have a chance. 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma (U. P. : General) : Then keep it to the 
next session. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is not in my hands. 

Shri S. Nagappa (Madras : General): Why not sit for one or two hours 
longer? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : At present the Members who can finish their 
speeches within fifteen minutes can do so, but in cases where individual 
Members consider that they must have more time, they can have more 
time. 

Shri M. Tirumala Rao : You can consider the merits of a speech, 
and if many arguments are repeated, you can ask the speaker not to 
repeat the arguments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Very well, then, Dr. Sen. 

Shri H. J. Khandekar (C. P. and Berar : General): There are only 
2V2 hours more. Only ten speakers will be able to speak even if each 
speaks for fifteen minutes. What about the others who want to speak 
on the bill? I request you to request government to extend the debate 
by a day or two. This is such an important measure that the eyes of 
the whole nation are focussed upon it. We must have full discussion over 
it and then only pass it, in whatever form it is agreed to. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am sure the proceeding of this House and 
the suggestions made by hon. Members will be communicated to and 
taken notice of by Government. Dr. Sen may continue his speech. 

Dr. P. K. Sen : Sir, I quite realize that brevity is the soul of wit, 
but there are occasions when brevity is the soul of unwisdom, because 
I shall not be able to make things clear at all and therefore, it will not 
benefit anybody at all if the House were to hear a discourse which is 
inconclusive and obscure. I shall therefore, try to touch only on the 
fundamental points and not enter into details at all. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


650 


650 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The question that I was last addressing this House on was, whether 
or not by giving permission for divorce this country will not be plunging 
itself into a large number of divorce cases like other countries. My answer 
to that question was — and is — that the cases for divorce will depend 
entirely upon the quality of the moral values that a country has. A society 
may be so constructed that only in absolutely unavoidable and necessary 
cases would the parties seek a divorce and that there would be inherently 
a dislike, a distaste, a contempt for divorce where there is no occasion 
for it and where evidence is really fabricated for the purpose of 
establishing that there are reasons for divorce. In this country the 
experiment has been tried in Baroda and in some parts of South India, 
where there is and there has been divorce for a long time past, but I 
am told there have been only three cases so far in Baroda and these 
three cases during twenty years. I submit, again, that it is the social 
atmosphere and the moral values prevalent in the particular society that 
determine the number of divorce cases. Therefore, it is not the law that 
makes the society. The law only gives sanction to certain cases where 
it is necessary to give sanction for divorce. In this part of the Bill which 
deals with marriage law there are four characteristics. The first is : inter- 
marriage has been allowed. The second is that there is prescription for 
divorce. There is, thirdly, prescription for monogamy. Now all these are 
present in Act III of 1872 and, therefore, it is not the Hindu code which 
has raised these points for the first time. It was in the fifties of the 
last century, as I have said, that the agitation arose and ever since then 
the agitation has been going on. The crusade against caste was no doubt 
first led by the Brahmo Samaj under Keshub Chunder Sen. The Brahmos 
at that time suffered persecution, ex-communication and ignominy of 
every description. Today we recognise that caste shall go and therefore, 
all these provisions that are laid down here in this Bill relating to 
intercaste marriage need not raise any opposition at all. There is no doubt 
whatsoever that there is a very large body — if not an overwhelming 
body — of public opinion in favour of abolition of caste. Otherwise, what 
are all these provisions that we have laid down in the Constitution? Caste 
shall go. If we take that position then there is nothing objectionable so 
far as those provisions are concerned which relate to intercaste marriage. 

The same consideration applies to monogamy. I do not know 
whether there is any public opinion now in favour of bigamy or 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


651 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 651 


polygamy. There may be individual cases; but that is quite different. The 
whole body of public opinion now, I submit confidently, is in favour of 
monogamy. Therefore, there is nothing objectionable, so far as that is 
concerned in the present Bill, and, as I have said, permission for divorce 
cannot possibly raise any difficulty because, after all a permissive 
provision must necessarily be there for those unfortunate cases where 
divorce is called for. 


Proceeding, Sir, to the next point as to why there should be any change 
at all (that was the point on which I was) it has been said that there 
must be a strict adherence to Shastric law and that there should be no 
departure whatsoever from it. For hours this discussion has been carried 
on the floor of this House. It has been contended that shastric law is 
absolutely final, inviolate and inviolable. You cannot change it. I should 
like to know what Shastric law means. As a matter of fact, in our shastras 
there is always provision for change and there has always been change. 
Otherwise what is the meaning of these numerous Smritis. We have it 
in Manu the well known injunction that there are four sources, four 
norms, of conduct laid down: 


8tfh: Thfb: pdMU: ^ PyilMIriH I 



HUT: TTSiioSH'W cTSWT II 


Which being translated means Shruti, Smriti, the usages established 
by righteous men and the satisfaction of one’s own inner self — these 
furnish the four standards or norms of conduct. These four norms 
of conduct include within them the inner satisfaction of the soul, the 
conscience by which, I take it is meant not individual conscience only, 
but social conscience also. The social conscience of the age in which 
we live has got to be respected and that is one of the standards 
by which our conduct, our Dharma is to be ascertained. That is one 
of the standards by which law must be laid down and it is on this 
principle that all along, the law, the so-called Shastric law, has changed 
and changed and changed. My hon. friend, the Minister of Law said 
in his opening speech that if you go to Parasara Smriti or Narada 
Smriti you find there provision for widow re-marriage, and provision 
for very many other things which may be called revolutionary. How 
did they ever come to it? How did they get beyond the barriers, 
as it was, and break through them and start upon something 
which was revolutionary? It was because according to the highest 
injunctions laid down, there are not only Shruti and Smriti but other 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


652 


652 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


sources also. You have to take the conduct of the righteous and the 
pious, — those who know the way of life that leads unto self-realiza- 
tion — and it is those people who laid down the norms of conduct. You 
have to follow those. They are not Shastric. They are not necessarily 
to be ascribed to any particular Shruti or Smriti, but those are the 
ways of right living that have been laid down definitely for the purpose 
of regulating our conduct — individual as well as social. If that be so, 
if that is the way in which the law must evolve itself, then necessarily 
where we find that there is a strong public opinion, where the 
conscience of society or a particular section of society, the minority 
section, let us say, dictates that a particular way of life should be 
sanctioned by law, law comes forward to the rescue and lays down that 
it shall be so. If that be our standard, then can we possibly at this 
moment say that there shall be no change at all ? Can we possibly 
assert that our law, our Shastric law, has been stationary ? If it is 
inviolable and inviolate, if it is unalterable and inexorable, then there 
will be no progress and it will be a poor compliment to pay to our 
Indian law-givers to say that law has been stationary. On the contrary, 
it is time today to muster up courage and to say that the views of 
no particular section, whether minority or majority should be trampled 
upon, that if there are strong opinion held in regard to a particular 
point then the law must come forward to give permission for that. 

I pass next, Sir, to the other fundamental points. What is the other 
main objection raised with regard to this Bill. It is on the question of 
property — the Mitakashara and the Dayabhaga. Is it possible at this 
moment, let us ask ourselves seriously, to raise this question? The joint 
family system had its virtues; it had its glories in the past. Nobody can 
deny that. But I have been under the impression that of late it is the 
tyranny of the joint family system which has appeared most obnoxious 
to a very large number of people. They feel that the earning people in 
the family are sucked dry by the indolent ones. There are people who 
do not want to go forth and earn at all because there is a family behind 
them, and they think, “What is the use of our taking any trouble for 
earning when there is the family to support us?” And those members 
of the family who by the sweat of their brow earn something, it is their 
income that is sucked dry by others who are indolent and who are also 
in every way extravagant. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh (C. P. and Berar : General): Have they ever 
complained, Sir? 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


653 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 653 


Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Yes, they do. Complaints are 
inherent in the situation. 

Dr. P. K. Sen : If their complaint could be heard, then of course it 
will be a different matter, but if they were people in the family, then 
there would be no opportunity whatsoever, to make a complaint. The 
only way in which they can possibly complain is now laid down namely, 
by expression of intention to separate. Now, what is the actual position ? 
Howsoever strong the family integrity may be, any individual member 
can come forward and say, I intend to separate, and that expression of 
intention will instantaneously effect separation in the eye of the law. 
Where is the integrity of the family then ? What then has the mitakshara 
family to do ? According to judicial decisions now, it has come down to 
this that the slightest intention to effect separation and the expression 
of that intention will effect that separation. In that case I do submit 
that it is too late in the day to say that the joint family is a huge 
institution which remains intact. It is tumbling down and there can be 
no doubt whatsoever that with the effort of man it cannot possibly be 
protected any longer. People want individual liberty now. Everybody who 
earns wants to earn and also go his own way. He does not want to be 
fettered by other members of the family. It is individual freedom which 
is now their aim and object. This cry has been raised from the earliest 
times. “The individual withers and the State is more and more.” That 
is a complaint which has been heard for some time past. Today also we 
feel that in our society the rule of the majority, the rule of society, is 
predominant, but nobody wants this predominance any longer. The 
individual now wants to go off at a tangent. He says, I do not want 
to be governed by the family. I want to earn my freedom and I want 
to go my own way. I appeal to every individual Member of this House 
to ask himself if that is not the spirit of the modern times, and if that 
is the spirit, then where are we ? Where is the advantage in trying to 
bolster up an edifice that could not possibly exist any more. Therefore, 
this great difference which is being drawn between Mitakshara and 
Dayabhaga is practically gone. It may be that when we sit round a table 
in perfect amity and goodwill, in perfect understanding of each other, 
we may be able to iron out all these differences and we may be able 
to arrive at a very satisfactory solution without hurting the instincts 
of any particular section, and I do hope that that will be so. I do not 
want to go into details, but I just want to point out that this is the 
line upon which our discussions may proceed in future. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


654 


654 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Then, Sir, take the other details. Practically in the matter of 
inheritance or in the matter of succession, there is nothing upon which 
controversy rages except on the daughter’s share. All the other things 
are more or less now things of the past. Legislation has taken place, 
numerous judicial decisions have been passed whereby rights have been 
given to all other members of the family, those that claimed them. The 
only thing upon which controversy centres now is about the daughter’s 
share. It may be half the share that the son gets, it may be an equal 
share with the son, it may be any other share that may be decided upon 
by everybody sitting round a table. I am perfectly confident that with 
goodwill and mutual understanding, something satisfactory may be 
evolved in this line. It is not that every individual member of the Select 
Committee is bound down by its decisions. We are all free to exercise 
our own views. I frankly admit that there are certain things which I 
do not like. There may be other members who say that there are certain 
aspects of the Bill which do not commend themselves to them. Therefore, 
all these differences have to a certain extent to be ironed out by mutual 
discussion, but apart from that, the fundamental question is whether 
the daughter has to get any share at all. Now when it is said that the 
daughter cannot get a share at all, then I do think — and I have no 
hesitation whatsoever in expressing my views freely and frankly, — I do 
think that it is the the same old prejudice against the female members 
of the family that dictates this objection. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : Quite right. That is the real 
point. 

Dr. P. K. Sen : We may hold our women members in high esteem. 
No doubt it is often said that the ladies of every family are angels 
of grace, that they are ministering angels. That is perfectly true, but 
do we do all that is needed, all that is called for, towards them? Do 
we do all that is wanted from the men-folk to the women folk in 
our families ? Let us be perfectly sincere and frank about these things. 
There is a great deal that has to be done for our women-folk. Women 
today want their place in society. Continuing to do their duty by the 
family and continuing to be ministering angels of the family, they 
have also some other work to do. They have to take an interest in 
public affairs. They have to take an interest in social organisations. 
Their presence is indispensably necessary in many organisations which 
are being set up today. Therefore, we cannot possibly have a framework 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


655 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 655 


of society in which such women could not possibly exist. They must 
always be the ministering angles of the men-folk, that is to say, looking 
after their physical comforts and welfare, and do nothing so far as 
their higher aims and aspirations are concerned. But they have a 
function to fulfill in society. In the society of independent India, women 
have a very large place to fill in every organisation, in every movement. 
That being so, we must set them free and there is nothing that is 
wanted more than economic freedom. (Hear, hear). There are many 
cases in which lives are blasted because they have got to be dependent 
upon some male member of the family for their very existence. 
Therefore, the question of their economic freedom has a place in the 
affairs of today. 

Let us not be absolutely oblivious of that fact. If we want to give 
0 economic freedom, then there is no reason whatsoever why 

we should turn away and say : “Oh a daughter, she cannot 
have a share, she will remain a ministering angel of the family” by which 
it is meant that she will always be a dependent there ; and if she is 
a widow, she will be only looking after the comforts of other people and 
will not be able to do any other service to the family or to the society 
or to the nation at large. Well, Sir, I do not propose to go further, because 
it will take a very long time and I know that I shall then be trespassing 
upon the time of others. But a good deal has been said, a great deal 
of discussion has taken place upon the fundamentals. When I contemplate 
all these discussions that have taken place, I am firmly convinced that 
if after this debate, we can sit around a table and we can bring ourselves 
to consider all these details in a spirit of perfect goodwill and under- 
standing, we shall be able to attain a solution. The minor points that 
trouble us are many, it may be, but their solution is not so difficult. 
It is the fundamentals upon which we have to concentrate our attention 
and when we do so, I think our path is clear. 

*Shrimati Kamala Chaudhari (U. P. General): (English translation 
of the Hindi speech) Sir, before I say a few words in connection 
with the Hindu Code Bill, I should like to congratulate the hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar for bringing forth this Bill. My own feeling is that this 
Bill has been brought up before this House in conformity with the 
spirit of time. This is absolutely in accord with the march of the time 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 535-40. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


656 


656 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and present-day demand. Although it is being opposed on religious, 
cultural and many other grounds and various kinds of things are heard 
against it in the course of hostile propaganda, yet my personal feeling 
is that this Bill will prove a sort of panacea for our women community 
and the progress of our Indian Society, and this will go a long way to 
benefit our women-folk who are even today being degraded to the lowest 
ebb. Moreover, our future women-folk shall also remain indebted to the 
hon. Minister and this House if this Bill is passed in this Assembly. 

Those who oppose this Bill have expressed the opinion that this will 
prove harmful to our religion as well as culture. This thing does not 
appeal to me at all. This is another thing that the brain and heart of 
our countrymen have been framed in such a way that anything said in 
the name of religion highly appeals to the sentiments of the people. On 
the altar of this very religion — in what manner did we accentuate our 
communal feelings ? In the name of this very religion, we have seen 
the murder of Mahatma Gandhi — the father of the Nation. 

So, in this way, I see that this Bill is also opposed by raising a hue 
and cry in the name of religion and Indian culture, and those of the 
persons and our sisters, who cannot even as yet understand what is law, 
how this Assembly has been constituted, who cannot even understand 
the right of franchise which has been granted to them in our Constitution, 
are being told like this, and it is acclaimed that a great majority of women 
in the country are opposed to this Bill. But so far as my humble intellect 
can conceive, this Bill does not appear to contain any such thing which 
might be against our religion and culture. 

In one of the parts of this Bill, a provision has been made prohibiting 
the right of polygamy which is at present exercised by the religious 
minded Hindus. This is not permitted and a ban has thus been imposed 
upon it. With all the humility, I would submit that I apprehend that 
this Bill might be opposed by a majority of our brethren for the reason 
that some such ban is being imposed upon them that in the life time 
of their wives, they shall not be permitted to contract many marriages. 
But I do not find in it anything against the religion, because it so 
looks to me after going through our scriptures and ancient literature 
that never during any time, even in the olden days, the institution 
of polygamy was looked upon favourably. After scanning through the 
ancient literature, we do come across such instances where the ruling 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


657 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 657 


prince was allowed to marry more than one wife. We find the rulers 
disregarding the customs, traditions, usages and the lofty ideals — ideals 
regarded as sublime — on which stood the structure of our society, but 
I would like to cite before you an example set forth by one who is 
considered as an incarnation of God and who has placed an ideal before 
us. After looking through the great epic written by Valmiki — the epic 
which has safeguarded our Indian culture and which has sustained our 
culture for the last so many centuries — it appears that when King 
Ramchandra sat for the performance of Ashvamedha Yagna and when 
the priests and elderly persons told him that the Yagna (oblation) 
cannot be perfected in the absence of a wife, even at that moment he 
performed the ceremony by installing a gold idol of Sita and did not 
have recourse to a second marriage. This ideal lies before us and if 
we scan through our classical epic, we shall have glimpes of this at 
every place. During the times when Lord Rama lived in the forests 
and when Shurpnakha implored him for marriage, Lakshman had told 
her that Ramchandra was a prince of Ayodhya and was likely to become 
the ruler of that kingdom and that be was even in a position to marry; 
but the latter was already a married man and could not thus re-marry. 
Even at that time the utterances which our Poet Laureate had 
attributed to Lord Rama establishes the same very ideal that the 
institution of polygamy was not looked upon favourably during those 
days. I do not understand how the restriction placed thereon in this 

Bill is opposed to religious doctrines. On the contrary I think that if 

such actions were to be encouraged then they would surely cause the 
destruction of the high ideals of our Indian culture and society. I 

believe this to be an ideal for every Hindu who professes himself to 

be a follower of Hindu religion and a supporter of Indian culture. It 
is a great injustice done to woman that the husband is allowed to enter 
into matrimony once, twice, thrice or even four times in the very 
life time of the legally wedded wife. For a woman this custom is 
horribly painful and demands utmost sympathy. It is another thing 
that since centuries restrictions have been imposed on our women folk 
and the women of this country have more or less been confined within 
the four walls of the house. Restrictions have been imposed on their 
social, mental and economic rights. Their tears dry up in their eyes 
only and are not even allowed to trickle down. But our poets, writers 
and authors have given a very vivid description of this colossal 
suffering and tribulations that the women have to endure. For a woman 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


658 


658 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


no other suffering is more tormenting than the distress of having 
a co-wife. 

Now when the age of renaissance began and the eminent persons 
of our country began to realize their abject misery then, as a result 
of their kind efforts, the condition of the women folk was carefully 
considered over and hence from time to time such revolutionary Bills 
were passed in this House. At that time our country was in turmoil 
and then Mahatma Gandhi forced an entry into the social structure 
of our society. He elevated the women folk to such an extent that they 
could stand on their own legs. Today a keen desire for securing her 
due rights has awakened in her heart. The woman of the future will 
not tolerate this sort of oppression and tyranny lying down as she has 
been doing till today. She will never tolerate this sort of neglect and 
disrespect. Therefore, I think this time to be most favourable. The Bill 
that is before us should be passed in this House with great applause. 

This Bill is being opposed on many grounds. I have had opportunities 
to hear such thing here. Obscene and dirty things are said against 
the women community, they are being stigmatised. Thus a propaganda 
is made here by giving publicity to such scandalous slurs against the 
women folk. The people here have come to believe that the right to 
divorce provided in the Bill would result in the destruction of the 
structure of our society and our culture would go to dogs. I do not 
understand how people give rise to such apprehensions and how they 
resort to such talks. But as far as I have studied this Bill I have not 
come across anything concerning the dissolution of marriages that can 
be called an innovation, or anything that has not been allowed and 
permitted by our sacred texts and holy scriptures. All the conditions 
that have been laid down for the dissolution of marriages, or in what 
manner the marriages can be dissolved, or for what seasons divorce 
can be granted. I think all these conditions do exist in our Shastras. 
I myself believe in Hindu religion and culture. I am a Hindu woman. 
Wherein lies the glory and importance of the woman I know that 
also. For centuries our sages and preceptors, poets and writers have 
sung songs about the greatness of the Indian woman and have 
mentioned her in the most glorious terms. I know that all this greatness 
has not been attributed to female form only, they have sung songs 
about her noble spirit of renunciation instead. I think that this high 
ideal is very good for us. Not from today but from ages the Indian 
woman has been maintaining these ideals and the glorious history of 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


659 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 659 


her renunciation and ideals will for ever go down in annals of Indian 
culture and the history of mankind. 

But in every society it has been found impossible for each and every 
individual, may be male or female, to live up to the highest of the ideals. 
Mahatma Gandhi has been acclaimed a superman by the whole world. 
He placed before us his ideals and though being his followers we 
ourselves could not live upto them. Similar is the composition of the 
society as also of the world. If this whole world and our Indian society 
in particular were to maintain the high standard of ideals then, I think, 
this very world would become a paradise. 

Whenever some high ideal is set before the people then in order to 
create a proper atmosphere for it a number of things have got to be 
done. Take the case of the Hindu marriage system for instance. At 
the time of marriage the priests interpret this alliance to be so 
indissoluble, so everlasting that it would hold good for future births 
and re-births also. I don’t believe this. Because while on one side 
according to Hindu ideals we are led to believe that this marriage 
alliance between a Hindu male and female lasts till eternity, on the 
other hand in our holy scriptures it has been laid down that according 
to the philosophy of Karma, this alliance would have continued 
eternally even if in previous births, the husband may have been a 
human being or a demon or an animal, but I do not believe in such 
a thing. What I believe is that marriage is just a compromise for the 
life time. If our married couples were to hanker upon the legal 
possibilities regarding the dissolution of marriages then I think that 
our life would become quite useless. The result of such a state of affairs 
would be that the people will never be able to raise and maintain happy 
families. If such state of affairs do exist anywhere, then under such 
circumstances, there can neither be the evolution of our religion nor 
the cultural development of our country can take place. If under any 
circumstances the separation be deemed essential then I think the legal 
right must lie with the woman. Many defects have cropped up in our 
present day society. I think instances are not only known to me but 
all the gentlemen present here must be in the know of them. A husband 
can marry a second time even when the age of his wife may not 
be much. On the other hand a woman whose age may only be 16, 
17 or 18 years cannot re-marry ; she has not been authorized to 
get her marriage dissolved. What such a state of affairs results in ? 
I do not want to go in details. I very humbly beg to submit only 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


660 


660 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


so much that such things result in grave disasters. Legally that woman 
cannot re-marry. Her legal husband has no relations with her. May she 
lie in the abyss of the society and suffer extreme distress and tribulations, 
yet the society does not allow her to enter into an honourable remarriage 
whereby she may be able to support and sustain her children, set up 
a family and pass the rest of the life in comfort and ease. Under such 
circumstances I wish that the woman should have this right. I do not 

wish that this right should so commonly be used that it may create 

retalliation and every man or woman may begin to think that they can 

have separation if and when they like. As far as I think this Bill does 

not provide so much facilities as the people profess. The most outstanding 
speciality that I can see in this Bill is that in 80 per cent, of our 
community I have seen that a panchayat is called and separation is 
effected within a minute’s time. At places and in certain communities 
even the panchayat does not assemble to give its decision. Males and 
females are quite free and leaving each other, they can re-marry 
whomsoever they like. The utmost punishment the community can 
impose upon them is that they are somewhat chastised or ex-commu- 
nicated and after giving a community feast, they are again taken back 
in the folds of the community. The passing of this Bill will highly benefit 
those communities wherein separation and divorce are considered to be 
very insignificant things. This Bill will impose restrictions on them also 
and the greatest benefit that we would have of this Bill is that our 
backward communities which have no cultural background will become 
cultured and their moral standard will be raised. This is the most 
outstanding speciality that I have come across in this Bill. 

The strongest opposition that is being made against this Bill is I 
think about the question of the property, for the reason that this Hindu 
Code Bill seeks to provide the daughter also a share in the father’s 
property equal to that of the son. A number of different things are 
being said about this measure. Some hon. Members hold the view 
that by adopting such a measure the innate affection and natural love 
between the brother and sister will cease to exist, our heredity and 
our entire family system will be disrupted. I cannot understand this 
thing because as we see today, if a person has two or four sons then 
it is not at all essential that these brothers fight among themselves 
or kick up disputes. But at the same time we do sometimes hear 
of such incidents and many instances are before us that such disputes 
are kicked up and they become deadly enemies. So I think that if 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


661 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 661 


it be taken for granted for brother and sister also, that after inheriting 
the property they will also kick up similar disputes then, as such 
disputes generally take place between brothers also so they do not 
matter much, Moreover at that time, do the persons who profess the 
culture to be in danger ever try to proclaim that this inheritance of 
property kicks up disputes and quarrels among the brothers so it should 
better go ? Are such disputes in accordance with our culture ? The 
glory of our religion lies in natural affection, mutual love and in being 
on good terms with others. This is our culture according to our religion. 
I see many such instances where the solitary sister has got a deep 
affection for her brother. Loves are of different kinds, but the love that 
a sister has for her brother, I think, is so unassuming innate and pure 
that no other kind of love can stand up to it. Such an affection she 
bears for her brother. Our existing law provided that the property that 
was owned by the mother, the stridhana, and the ornaments that the 
mother possessed were inherited by the daughter. But everywhere it 
has been seen that the sister has shared the ornaments with her 
brothers and nobody has ever seen them quarrelling over the division. 
If the high ideals of our women folk hold good then a sister will always 
be prepared to sacrifice her all for her brother. There will be very few 
cases where such disputes will take place. If for the time being it may 
be taken for granted that such state of affairs will come to pass, still 
then I will say that this is a grave injustice. I am able to recall the 
case of our big talukadars where the brothers live extravagantly on 
the property left by the father. For themselves, they spend such heavy 
sums on the occasion of Tij and other festivals as might have served 
the sister for a lifetime. If, however, a widowed sister happens to come 
and live in that very home, her place is in the kitchen and her lot 
is none better than that of a cook. In the home where, today brothers 
enjoy life on the strength of the father’s property, the father’s wealth, 
in that very home I have seen with my own eyes the sister pining 
for milk for her young children. She too has the desire that her children 
should have good things to eat and good clothes to wear and that they 
should receive good education in the same way as her brother’s sons. 
But the law has sealed her mouth. She is tongue-tied and dare not 
give vent to her feelings. I would like, very respectfully, to ask those 
people, who are opposing it today, whether this is in accordance with 
the Hindu law and, if so, which school of our philosophy sanctions this 
injustice shown to woman. Hence, I think that the provision relating 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


662 


662 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


to the daughter having a share in her father’s property is very much 
in consonance with the times and compatible with our faith and culture 
and I hope it will be considered in a very generous spirit. 

In opposing this provision, several people have also averred that the 
idea that a woman should also have a share in her father’s property 
took birth in the minds of those persons who are imbued with a foreign 
culture and who have not read Indian literature. I shall not be taking 
much of your time and should like to tell you briefly that this sentiment 
finds ample expression in our folk-songs which have existed for the 
last hundreds of years. This sentiment did not get into our folk-songs 
at the time of our mothers and sisters but has been there since the 
times of our grand and great-grand-mothers when there was not even 
a trace of foreign culture anywhere and when it had not set any kind 
of seal on our culture. The songs that are sung at the time of marriage 
in our Province contain this sentiment and I think that such songs 
are sung at marriages in all Provinces. I do not here want to recite 
the actual lines of those songs but would briefly like to state that such 
songs are sung amongst us at the time of marriage, at any rate in 
our Province with which I am familiar. I have also studied the folk- 
lore of some other Provinces where too a similar line of thought exists. 
We find a very wholesome sentiment forming the burden of these songs. 
The girl gives expression to her desire to have one-half share in her 
father’s ‘dominion’. The brother offers her various kinds of temptations, 
saying he would give her a plate full of ornaments, that he would give 
her horses and elephants and also enumerates the various articles he 
would be giving her by way of dowry. The girl replies that if she is 
destined to acquire all that wealth, it could also become available to 
her when she goes over to the house of her father-in-law and her 
husband but that she would rather have her one-half share here, that 
she has been brought up in this home and that she would like to have 
a share in the orchard and the tank here. Thus there is absolutely 
no foundation for the allegation that this sentiment is the product of 
foreign literature, or foreign education, or foreign culture or that it 
is a creation of the minds of those persons who have received their 
education from foreign sources. Our ancient literature abounds in that 
sentiment and our folk-songs would offer various such examples as 
reflect that feeling. 

Nature has made a boy and a girl equal in the eyes of their parents. 
Then why is it that a boy should have a share in his father’s property 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


663 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 663 


but a girl should have none ? I feel that is also a kind of injustice. 
This is another matter that in view of the present set-up of our society 
some people might, per chance, be entertaining doubts and anticipating 
difficulties with regard to the practical application of this Bill, because 
the position occupied by a “son-in-law” in our society is rather peculiar. 
All his life he is called Jamai tabu or pahuna (the Guest) and never 
becomes a member of that family. I feel that if the daughter is conceded 
this right, the result would be that the son of another family who comes 
in as the son-in-law could also live as a member of the daughter’s 
family as if he were a third son to the father who already has two, 
and this should encourage mutual love and affection. The argument 
that this would strain relations between brothers and sisters or break 
them for good cannot appeal to me. I do not think that if this law 
is passed it would mean the disintegration of all our social, cultural 
and religious traditions. I am unable to appreciate that argument. With 
these words I express the hope that those people who have passed our 
new Constitution, who are out to make a radical change in our social 
and political set-up and who have conceded in that Constitution the 
equal rights of the women, will reflect coolheadedly over the present 
position of our women. Let them hearken to the call of the times. We 
should concede this right straightaway, Scholars, men of letters and 
historians have held the view, that if a society which steps forth into 
the field of progress, does not promptly carry out all those changes, 
which are urgently called for, it is likely to be left centuries behind 
in that field. On the other hand, if properly appreciating the call 
and the needs of the times, it promptly gives effect to the urgently 
needed changes it marches forth to a speedy progress. I hope this 
Bill is going to be passed by the present Assembly because here 
we have present, in a preponderating strength, persons who are 
called the followers of Mahatma Gandhi. Mahatma Gandhi was the 
great man who had a sound grasp of the problems and the handicaps 
facing the Indian women. Along with the political, revolution he 
also stirred up a powerful revolution against our old social conventions 
and was soon able to root out and destroy them. I feel that the 
followers of Mahatma Gandhi will give their thorough consideration 
to this Bill and pass it after having considered it generously and 
sympathetically in the light of our faith and culture. In the end, 
once again, I wish to assure the hon. Minister, on behalf of the 
women, that all those women of this country, who have been 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


664 


664 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


able to comprehend this measure, are going to welcome it heartily and 
that even the women of the generations to come will feel grateful to 
him for having got it passed. 

* Shri Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga (Bihar : General) : Sir, 
it has become very difficult for those of us who are opposed to the motion 
moved on behalf of Government to take part in this debate after what 
our Prime Minister has said in this House about the measure before us 
on the opening day of this session. I was not present in the House when 
he made the statement, but if the press report be true, he has made 
the passage of the Bill an issue of confidence in his Government. I am 
strongly opposed to the measure. (Interruption). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. Nothing will go on if these 
interruptions are made. The interruptions will only increase the time 
taken by the Members. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Apparently the hon. Member is 
making a very good speech. 

Shri Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga : But I am equally strong 
in my view that in the present state of our country the Government 
of our Prime Minister is the best Government that we can have. 
Howsoever imperfect it may be, a better alternative to the present 
Government is not available. That, I think, is the view of the most of 
the people who do not belong to any political party. Thus, the stand taken 
up by our Prime Minister assumes the shape of “Undue influence”, if 
not “coercion”, for men of my way of thinking. I would therefore earnestly 
request the Prime Minister to reconsider the matter and unload the 
question of confidence in his Government from the consideration of the 
measure. 

I would like the House and Government to postpone further consid- 
eration of the bill till the wishes of the electorate are ascertained in 
the next general elections for reasons stated by the hon. Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad, in the note which he sent in the capacity of the President of 
the Indian National Congress to our Prime Minister last year. 

Hon. Members of this House know that there is a great divergence 
of opinion with regard to this important measure of, if I may say so, 
revolutionary character. It affects the personal law of the vast mul- 
titude of people. It affects their social and economic life as well as the 
forms and customs that have grown with the various schools of the 
Hindu law during so many centuries. In the name of uniformity and 
codification it threatens to arbitrarily disrupt the fundamental social 

*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 541-43. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


665 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 665 


and economic structure of the Hindu community embracing all except 
the Muslims, Christians, Parsis and the Jews. I fully agree with the 
observations of you, Sir, and Sri Ram Narain Singh contained in your 
notes of dissent on the Report of the Select Committee on this Bill. The 
members of the present legislature have no mandate from the electorate 
even with respect to the major issues involved in the Bill. After all, the 
next elections are not far off and nothing will be lost if the matter is 
deferred till then. 

I am definitely of opinion that such vital changes as are proposed in 
the measure should not be made in this manner. If one cares to look 
into the views expressed before the Hindu Law Committee, he will not 
fail to notice that the opposition to the Bill is very strong. I belong to 
that class of people which considers the Smriti and the school of 
interpretation, he follows, as sacrosanct; and the class to which I belong 
constitutes a large proportion of the total population of the country. We 
consider marriage, succession and the like as a part of our religious duty 
and obligation. To us these are much more than mere secular or social 
phenomena. 

It is true that the social structure has gradually changed and is 
changing under the stress of circumstances. But such changes have 
taken place by the process of evolution and not by imposition from above. 
Further, these changes do not generally affect the principles on which 
the Laws governing the various Hindu societies are based. Now, the 
question is whether the changes proposed in the Bill are such as have 
been accepted by the people in general and require just legal sanction. 
My answer to this is emphatic ‘NO’. No doubt, the authors of Smritis 
and their interpreters made changes from time to time but they did 
so when they could enforce them by the popular support they had. The 
bulk of the people had abundant faith in their learning, in their 
foresight, in their purity of purpose and above all in their conduct. The 
authors of this proposed Twentieth Century Smriti have no such 
background. They do not have in the hearts of the people the status 
of those ancient Smritikars whose injunctions govern the lives of so 
many people even today. The diversity perceptible in different parts of 
the country goes a great way in establishing the fact that popular 
acceptance and not imposition from any central political authority has 
been the sanction behind the personal law of the Hindu. Unity in 
diversity is the chief characteristic of the Hindu life and religion and 
we should not take the seeming diversity as an evil which must be 
instantaneously removed. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


eee 


666 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The fundamental difference between the outlook of the ancient law 
givers and the present day law-givers is that, whereas the basis of the 
formers’ consideration was purely spiritual, the basis of the latters’ 
consideration is grossly material and to accept it, is to give a goby to 
our philosophy of life, to the continuity of our tradition and to the 
foundation of our culture. I, for one, am not prepared to do so. 

Besides this, I apprehend that there will be practical difficulties in 
implementing the provisions of the Bill. Just imagine how long it will 
take Government to educate the people that they should go to law court 
for getting their marriages registered. Just imagine what complications 
and confusion will the provisions for void and voidable marriages create. 
Just imagine what havoc will the provision for the dissolution of 
marriages and divorce play in the domestic life of the people whose 
conception of society has so far been quite different from the one on 
which these provisions are based. I do not agree with the view that only 
hard cases will come up for remedy. My own fear is that many interested 
persons will come into the picture to disrupt the domestic life of their 
neighbour relatives etc., for their selfish ends. Similarly, the provisions 
regarding succession will make the management of property difficult and 
become a prolific source of intrigue by designing persons in the society. 
Lawyers and law courts may prosper but families will be broken up and 
domestic peace will decay. 

The report of Dr. Dwarkanath Mitter, one of the members of the Hindu 
Law Committee, embodies the opinions of the vast bulk of Hindus. The 
facts on which he has based his conclusions are irrefutable. The report 
of the other members of the Committee is merely an attempt to explain 
away the irrefutable facts mentioned by Dr. Mitter in support of his 
contention. It appears that the Majority of the members of the Committee 
had already made up their minds on major issues and took no note of 
the public opinion expressed before them in different ways. I wonder 
how the Government of India of today which is so sensitive to public 
opinion has considered it proper to bring a measure of this kind before 
this House. For the sake of satisfying the sentiments of a few so-called 
“progressive” element in the Hindu Community, it should not have 
proceeded with the measure which is opposed by an overwhelmingly large 
number of Hindus. If those who advocate the adoption of this measure 
go from village to village and collect the reaction of the Hindus on the 
provisions of this Bill, I am sure that they will hardly find satisfactory 
support. At least in my Province, the public opinion is decidedly against 
this Bill. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


667 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 667 


*Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya (Madras : General) : Sir, the moment 
I rise before you I hear certain utterances from friends. Some say 
“Support; others say “Oppose.” 

Shri B. L, Sondhi (East Punjab : General) : You will do both. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Perhaps I am doing both, because 
on a matter like this it is our duty not to be dogmatic. Only great men 
and fools are dogmatic and I disclaim being either. It is much better 
to string our thoughts with the thoughts of others and try to evolve a 
G.C.M., a thing which we learnt in our early days of arithmetic, — the 
greatest common measure of agreement upon such vital questions as the 
structure and functioning of society, which is a living organism and not 
a dead joint stock company with its own memoranda, and articles of 
association which are liable to be changed any day by paying three rupees 
to the Registrar. This society which we have inherited and of which we 
are proud to call ourselves members has been in existence for perhaps 
thousands of years. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar : General): Since the creation. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Nobody knows when it started. At 
least I can say from the evidence that we have before us in Kautilya’s 
Artha Shastra that this had attained its prefection 2300 years ago. The 
same problems of marriage, of crime, of punishment, of psychological 
complications, of political puzzles, that were treated by Kautilya in his 
Artha Shastra are before me to day without one iota of change. I would 
ask friends who have not read that book to read it. Read the Sukra Nithi 
Sara : read the other political works of our ancient Hindu law. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Kautilya’s Artha Shastra is not 
unfortunately available. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : It is quite available for those who 
have a mind to get it. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : But I have tried my level best. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : I would therefore, urge the House 
to look into the antecedents and the conditions of progress and 
conditions of evolution which have characterised the changes in what 
we call the “Hindu society”. I do not say that we should be proud of 
Hindu society and Hindu culture, but after all what is called Indian 
culture is largely Hindu culture and what is called Indian society is 
largely Hindu society, and if other people have come and mixed with 

*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 543-52. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


668 


668 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


us — the Jats, the Moghuls, the Turks, the English and others — they have 
perhaps assimilated many of the good points in us and they have enabled 
us to assimilate many of their own good points, so that the confluence 
of these cultures over a thousand years has enriched, both in volume 
and in content, the stream of our own national culture. Now, we are 
the inheritors of this proud heritage. How shall we deal with it ? Is 
there a philosophy behind it or is it merely a random growth ? — an 
accretion of conditions, an amorphous composition in which parallel 
forces are in juxtaposition without organically combining with one 
another or is it a solution and an assimilation of all the various factors, 
with the merits dissolved and the demerits left on the surface ? These 
are the points which we have to consider. Have we considered these 
points before embarking upon this mighty reform? Who has initiated 
this reform ? When was it initiated ? In whose time was it initiated? 
Has it been taken up after the National Government has come into 
being, or is it merely a legacy of the past Government which we have 
taken on hand through the Secretariat ? What is our initiative ? What 
is our part in dealing with it ? Society, I told you, is a living organism. 
It has certain philosophical truths behind it. It has economic proposi- 
tions before it. Take Hindu society. Have you come across any society 
in the world which is more socialistic, inherently and internally, than 
Hindu society ? 

I have got fifty acres of land. I have got two sons. My two sons 
are each heirs to only twenty-five acres. My first son has four sons. 
Each boy gets only six acres. Is property allowed to accumulate in our 
system of inheritance ? Not at all. It is a socialistic structure of the 
supremost kind. You want to destroy this socialistic structure and then 
you want to substitute an individualistic civilisation where each man 
owns his property, where property is inherited not by birth, but by 
survivorship. What happens ? Individualistic property comes into being. 
Perhaps the next step will be Dr. Ambedkar’s Bill on a law of 
progeniture for the common man. Then you will create and maintain 
an aristocracy. You bring into existence a class society, not a classless 
society. A classless society where learning and property, learning and 
wealth are well balanced gives place to a society in which wealth reigns 
supreme. That is exactly what happens in the West. That is exactly 
what cannot happen in the East. Here, through a system of social 
organisation, we have balanced the wealth and the culture, and 
then having brought them into existence, we have attached greater 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


669 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 669 


value to culture than to wealth. Wealth has taken a subordinate place. 
Now what are you going to do ? You allow a lawyer to amass ten lakhs 
of rupees. He is the supreme master. He has obtained all the wealth 
that his brothers could have given him in sending him to England and 
making him a Barrister-at-Law. But the gains of his learning are his 
own exclusive property under the law which has been brought into 
existence by the British — thanks to their ideals. Now, whereas the 
other people, the other brothers, the agriculturists as well as the 
traders who have gone through the same process of righteous labour, 
have to divide their property with the educated Barrister-at-Law, the 
Barrister-at-Law is exempt from sharing his properties with those two 
brothers. Is this justice ? It is outrageous nonsense compared to the 
noble standards which have been adopted in our society. 

Now let us pause here for a moment and ask a question : Have you 
appointed a Commission to go into the social, political, economic and 
the moral implications of the structure and functions of this society ? 
Have you got a report based upon a study of the psychology that lies 
behind this structure which has endured the buffets of time and 
circumstance for a period easily and admittedly, of five thousand years 
and perhaps which has gone back to thirteen thousand years and may 
be, possibly to thirty thousand years, because there are all these three 
versions about the age of the Mahabharata and the Vedas, about the 
age of our society and ancient civilisation. How is it that you don’t 
do that. If you want to give tariff assistance to a little quantity of 
iron that is being imported from Antwerp, you appoint three people 
drawing Rs. 3000 each, constitute them into a Tariff Board, obtain a 
report from them based upon the evidence that has been led by all 
the capitalists in the country, then you consider it in the Finance 
Department, you place it before the Assembly and then you grant that 
tariff weightage. What have you done with regard to our society ? You 
snap your fingers at it — this ancient society, this relic of ancient 
barbarism, this vestige of antiquated stuff! No; you say “let us go the 
whole hog”. 

We have cast our universities after the style of London ; we have 
adopted our legal system after the style of High Courts in London and 
we have carved out Legislative councils and legislatures after the 
manner of the Parliament in the West, and now it only remains for 
us to copy the Western society. Western manners, Western social 
institutions and Western civic laws. Please do not mistake me. I have 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


670 


670 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


been in sympathy with divorce for a long time. I have been thinking 
of divorcing my wife and I have also heard that she wants to reciprocate 
the honour. That is not the point. I tell you I am in sympathy with 
many of the items of this measure. But I want to tell you what kind 
of approach and attitude you are adopting towards the institutions of 
India after you have attained Swaraj. This summary, this absolutely 
impromptu method of dealing with this question does not appeal to 
my fancy, much less to my conviction. But I know that you will tell 
me : “Oh, this Bill has been hanging fire ever since the Congress left 
the portals of the Legislature.” Yes, it has been hanging fire ! You 
however, remember that in 1938 July, the Congress passed a resolution 
that it should walk out of the legislature because armies had been sent 
to Egypt and to Singapore, which were then considered the frontiers 
of India. So, as a protest against that act, and as a protest against 
the breach of the pledged word of the Government who said that they 
would not send any armies abroad without the specific permission of 
the Legislature, we walked out and ever since we never walked in until 
1946. During this time, men who were not patriotically inclined, men 
who were the proteges of Western civilisation, men who had spent their 
whole time in England or abroad, were put into a Committee and they 
evolved this formula for us. I got in 1944 October the first report on 
the Hindu Law Reform Committee while we were in the Ahmadnagar 
Jail. Now the main inspirer and agent of this measure was Shri 
B. N. Rau to whom we owe all that we have achieved in the New 
Constitution. He is a lawyer noted for his knowledge of constitutional 
law, case law, codified law and customary law and one who has done 
yeoman service to us. He was a Judge to the Calcutta High Court in 
Bengal where Dayabhaga prevails. I suppose you know Mitakshara 
prevails in Madras and one or two other provinces while Mayukha is 
the Law in Bombay. This gentleman who never had any experience 
of Mitakshara and who was a Judge of the High Court of Calcutta 
and whose knowledge of law is absolutely unquestionable has initiated 
this. Later on the Congress Party or the popular party never had the 
opportunity of discussing this question in the Central Legislature. 
When Mr. Asoka Roy came as Law Member, he said that he would 
not touch this Bill even with a barge pole. (Shri Mahavir Tyagi : What 
is a barge pole). A barge pole is a pole which is used to drive a barge 
on the waters. 

After all, this matter has come up ; and as if we have been waiting 
for it in eagerness and expectancy, we have taken this up without 
so much as mentioning a word about it in our election manifesto. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


671 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 671 


Have you ever come across a party which draws up a comprehensive 
election manifesto covering all questions from China to Peru and 
contemplating the nationalisation of the key industries, abolition of drink 
and zamindaries and various other things, but never saying a word about 
social reform which is the central factor relating to India ? 

It is not merely a piece of social reform. In India society is closely 
mixed up and intertwined with religion. Religion is the sanction behind 
everything. Now I am a most irreligious man, but I have the greatest 
regard for the sentiments of my neighbour. Otherwise, I am an uncul- 
tured brute. If I want to practise my heresy upon the convictions of others 
then I am not worth the salt that I eat. Now then, not merely religion, 
but economic factors, social factors and other things are intertwined. The 
joint family system is the creation of ages. What is this joint family 
system ? It is an insurance trust; it is a co-operation union ; it is a 
labour society. 

It is a labour society where all the poor brothers toil; it is a cooperative 
society in which all the brothers live together — each for all and all for 
each, and it is an insurance union in which the widow of the deceased 
brother is the care and charge of the surviving brothers. This is what 
the Mahatma said when he opposed insurance. But I know everybody 
is not Mahatmaji. The Joint Hindu Family is a noble combination of these 
three features based upon a religious background and held together by 
a social bond. Can you produce an equal to it by all your labours, by 
all your statutes and by all the Halisbury’s Laws of England ? You cannot 
do any more than you can produce an equal to the economy of hand- 
5 p.m. spinning which the Father of the Nation rediscovered. Permit 

me, with my usual immodesty, to say that I wrote a Book 
in 1938 which is called “The Hindu Home Rediscovered”. As I entered 
life as a heretic, brought up in Christian traditions and western 
heresies, I began to discover in every festival, in every ceremony 
and in every religious observance of Hindu society there was 
something deeply religious, uplifting, inspiring and ennobling. 
When I lived with my sisters and my brothers, I rediscovered the Home 
and after twenty-five years I ventured to write this little book in 
which I have tried to idealise these things. I would not say that these 
ideals do exist in life, but when you judge an institution, you must 
judge it in its pristine purity, and not in its degenerated imitation. 
If you want to idealise any concept, popularise any institution 
and resuscitate it, then put it before the nation as it was conceived 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


672 


672 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and get the consent of the nation for it. I can assure you that wherever 
I go, I always state the pros and cons of every proposition on this Bill. 
This Bill may be good in parts as the Parson’s egg and it may also 
be bad in parts. If you say that you must do this for women because 
women have come to their own, yes, do it by all means, but why be 
in such a huffy ? I want them to come to their own, they have come 
to their own, and in the next Assembly I feel sure my sisters can fill 
half of the seats; out of five hundred, there can be easily two hundred 
and fifty women if they only make up their minds. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : Will you allow them ? 

Dr. B. Pattabhai Sitaramayya : I admired Rajkumariji when she 
said before the Provincial Model Constitution Committee that women did 
not require any reservations. I thought it was rather an audacious 
statement for her to make and a great responsibility to shoulder but 
I know now that they are quite able to take care of themselves. If half 
a dozen lady members of this House can drag us by heels and make 
us take up this Bill, I wonder what our position will be when there are 
two hundred and fifty of them here. I am not joking. If I have a voice 
at all at the time of selection, I may assure you that I will do it, 
notwithstanding Mr. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri. 

[At this stage Mr. Deputy Speaker vacated the Chair which was then 
occupied by Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao (one of the Panel of 
Chairmen)] 

In this connection, I tempted to read a little statement that I have 
here from Picture Post of March 12, 1949. 

“From woman comes an incessant call for equality. What does she 
mean by equality? From the material point of view at least, she has 
the lion’s share. Probably ninety per cent, of all advertisements cater 
solely for her. Film producers say eighty per cent, of films are made 
for her. Fiction publishers appear to think entirely in terms of woman. 
As for clothes, woman has a wide choice and range at reasonable prices, 
while shabby, thread-bars man can only gaze for long at a few miserable 
suitings in some sombre shop window and think of the fantastic prices 
charged. With our prophetic eye, let us gaze into the future. Woman has 
got more than equality and man has become a spinster’s spaniel existing 
on woman’s scraps and everything is beautifully lukewarm.” 

I may assure my sisters that nothing will be lost by their exercising 
patience. I was the other day questioned for having appeared on an 
orthodox platform with a Swamiji from Benaras and when I saw 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


673 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 673 


Prabhavati Raje — she was a wonderful woman worker — leading the 
audience completely with her like the Joan of Arc of old, I saw the danger 
of letting orthodoxy do this. On invitation I went there and I spoke for 
an hour, and I was taken to task for appearing on the opponent’s 
platform. I said, “What is the use of speaking to those who are converted? 
I must convert those who are not converted.” I fully believe in educating 
the people about this new Hindu Code Bill. You must not precipitate 
matters and decide this issue by force of majority. But whenever this 
may happen, it is our duty to educate the people. Let us produce the 
result by popular educational propaganda. After all you have not 
nationalised the key industries. Where has this item gone ? The 
capitalists struck and we had no money and we had to eat our words, — 
I believe in patience. One of these days things will be all right. We are 
afraid to do any nationalisation now. We are hesitating to abolish the 
zamindaries. We are hesitating to proceed with River Projects. We are 
hesitating to proceed with the development of cottage industries, — all 
because inflation is staring us in the face, and we cannot make all these 
necessary improvements. We are face to face with conflicts, contradictions 
all round. Life is not a smooth path like a journey on a railway. It is 
like a motor car journey upon bad roads in the midst of congested traffic. 
I ask you whether it is not the duty of the members of this august house 
to undertake the very useful and very fruitful task of educating their 
masters. What happened in the year 1878 when Robert Low said after 
the extension of the franchise. “Let us go and educate our masters.” Our 
masters are outside. We are not the masters. The Ministers are not our 
masters. We can deal with them as we like. We may dispense with them 
tomorrow if we do not want them. That is our right and that is our 
privilege and our safety also. Therefore I say that this is a matter in 
which we should go slow. I am second to none with regard to my love 
for social reform. I was a social reformer even in the year 1898 when 
I was in the B. A. class, which was 51 years ago, long before half of 
the audience was born, and ever since I have sustained that interest. 
I very early came under the influence of the Brahmo social reformers 
and I have fully imbibed the reformist spirit from the Christian 
missionaries under whom I studied from my fourth form to my B. A. 
classes. 

Therefore it is not what should be done on the subject that matters, 
but how we are going to do it. We have got to remember the political 
bearings as well. Tomorrow you are appearing before the Polls. What 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


674 


674 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a sad plight we were in yesterday ! I was not here yesterday ; otherwise 
I should have witnessed the scenes with my own eyes. I went to Alwar 
and returned only last night at eleven o’clock and the first thing that 
my wife told me was that there was a lathi charge and some people 
were dangerously wounded and so on. Naturally the news is exaggerated 
from lip to lip and from ear to ear. It is a most pathetic spectacle again 
that I witness today opposite to me. Generally I speak under an impulse 
or inspiration, but today I speak under an irritation of the sight of three 
women Police sitting opposite to me in the gallery. Has it come to this 
that this house cannot get on and the women that are in attendance 
in the gallery and below cannot be trusted except under the care of the 
baton of the women Police ? Are you really proud that these police women 
should arraign our sisters hereafter ? We have had enough of policemen. 
You know this is the most tragic development of this Bill. The Doctor 
will kindly note and if you cannot come to this house without the 
protection of the Police, women police for the women and men police 
for the men, then woe betide our progress, our legislation and our 
Assembly. I am really very sorry. I now leave the general observations 
and come to one or two salient points with which we are concerned today 
here and before that I shall submit a word about the progenitors of this 
legislation. I am very sorry that it should have fallen to Dr. Ambedkar’s 
lot to pilot this Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law) : I am not 

sorry at all. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : I know ; otherwise you would not 
be sitting so proudly in your seat. The doctor knows what I said about 
him. I referred to the indomitable, irresistible, unconquerable spirit of 
Dr. Ambedkar, — for good or for evil, whatever it be. We want always 
to say that the spirit is there and, therefore, we admire him, but at 
the same time, he is out of tune with society. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : He is perfectly in tune, absolutely 
in tune. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : I do not call him a misanthrope, 
but he is not a normal anthrope, that is all I can say ; the training, 
the surroundings, the environment, the culture, all these put him out 
of tune with the spirit of the nation. He is one of our best intellects, 
there is no doubt about it and I wish he would have health and prosperity 
for a long time, but all this does not mean that we accept his point 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


675 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 675 


of view with which we came into conflict even in the Constitution when 
we passed that steam road roller law of a common civil law. Some of 
us resisted, though in vain, with the best of our might and main. Now 
I recall to your mind something that I said in the first day when this 
Bill was introduced in this house. I hope many people have forgotten 
so that they may not blame me for repeating what I am saying. In fact, 
I myself have forgotten the main point, but that point was that, I take 
it., that social reform in this country must be effected through the 
intercession, through the advice and through the inspiration of a Social 
Council we must bring into existence. I then gave the example of the 
Church Council of England in which the ecclesiastical dignitaries form 
the main element of strength and whatever they bring in by way 
of changes in life or law, the House of Commons accepts without changing 
a comma or a full-stop and that is, as it ought to be, in regard to religious 
or social matters and let us adopt such a course. In Germany there used 
to be an Economic Council which dealt with economic matters which 
require expert knowledge. The Reichstagg used to accept the recommen- 
dations of that body. Let us, therefore, go slow and deliberately so that 
we may know exactly where we stand. 

Now I come to a few points in the Bill and I won’t detain you long. 
The Bill contains some very good points. I like civil marriage on the 
top of sacramental marriage. Mere civil marriage is like executing 
a document in order to register a transaction between two people. It 
is a contract. The moment a document is written, it gives rise to strife, 
whether the intention is correct, whether the consideration is passed, 
whether it is valid in law etc. but when it is a sacramental marriage, 
there is no appeal against it. The old purohit is never called upon in 
life to stand up in a court of law and give evidence as to the 
genuineness and the bona fides of marriage. The marriage is there and 
nobody questions ; it is like the integrity of the spoken word. When 
the nation has preserved the integrity of its spoken word, which it 
has lost during the British time and under the influence of the law 
courts, then I say, we shall have recovered our character once again. 
But there are circumstances such as those under which a friend of mine 
suddenly discovered on the marriage platform that his daughter 
and his would be son-in-law were of the same gotra. They could not 
possibly give up the marriage even at least for economic reasons, let 
alone religious reasons. So immediately they passed through the 
sacrament and then went to the Registrar of marriages and registered 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


676 


676 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


it. That it should be open to us to register our marriages is a great 
privilege and I also like that the question of the share of the property 
to the girls must be settled once and for all. For a long time I have 
felt that the daughter must be an equal inheritor of the father’s 
property with the sons. Now I see that it is going to bring about endless 
complications in our social and economic structure. There is a friend 
of mine who has six daughters and one son and I asked the girls one 
after another separately and individually as to whether they would like 
to have a share in the property of their father. No : they said, “this 
will give rise to quarrels with our brother. We do not want this. We 
have our husband’s property and that always remains with us.” It is 
not however available to them as the stridhana would be available to 
them. Stridhana is a most wonderful thing, and I should like to know 
where in the world is there a parallel to this stridhana ? The stridhana 
is an institution by means of which the stridhana given to the girl 
at the time of the marriage becomes the absolute property of the girl 
which cannot be touched by the husband or by the father or by any 
human being at all. It is the reserve fund of the family which she 
is sure of and when her husband is very ill, she goes to the market 
to sell the jewels away for paying the doctor’s fees and if the husband 
lives well and good, but if he dies, it is the last service to her Lord. 
Such a reserve fund is cast off and a share for the wife in the husband’s 
property under T. V. Seshagiri Ayyar’s Bill, which became law about 
15 years ago, has now come to be recognized, but after the death of 
the husband, in equal measure with each of the sons and only as a 
life interest. Our law, in spite of the British people’s unwillingness 
not to interfere with the religious institutions of this country for fear 
of their political stability being disturbed, has been slightly changed 
as has been already described by one of the earlier speakers and yet 
it is not sufficiently changed. The unfortunate feature is that the 
British people felt loathe to interfere with the social customs of this 
country for political reasons and therefore the law has become petrified. 
In every country custom goes on changing and when the King adopts 
a change in social customs, immediately that becomes the law and it 
sets the tone and the pace for all society. But unfortunately in our 
country for a thousand years we have not had indigenous kings and 
after the British came, they positively resisted all temptation to make 
any social changes in the social set-up. Therefore the custom has 
become petrified and it is that custom, that petrified custom which 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


677 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 677 


we must make plastic, which we must make elastic, which we must 
make impressionable and therefore, mutable. Instead of doing that if 
we suddenly throw one stone of law against another of custom, both 
the stones break and that is not the way of achieving this change. 
Changes in this customary law must be set in motion in order to bring 
about social changes. 

Now with regard to this custom for the girl’s share I am quite willing 
that she should have a share, but I wish to make an alteration and that 
is that the moment she marries, she becomes a partner in the husband’s 
property and that will not give any chance for the misbehaviour of the 
husband as it sometimes happens unfortunately. Then we go to the 
divorce question. I have spoken to many women. This morning four 
women came to me. They are good people, highly cultured, and there 
was also one among them who was introduced to me as one who had 
been abandoned by her husband, and they said, it is not only those who 
are happy that withheld their support from this measure, but also those 
who are unhappy, the unfortunate victims of man’s fury and tyranny. 
That is not the point, I said to them. The point is this. Ninety per cent, 
of our marriages are exellent but what about the remaining ten per cent? 
They want relief. In India we marry and love, the English people love 
and marry and then give up their love, because what is called love at 
an impressionable age is a fanciful affair. One does not know what it 
is. In Hindu society there is a law or rule that in respect of marriage 
Shree, Kulamu, Roopamu, Bandhu Shreni and Sampradayam, — all such 
things should be considered. All these have to be considered before a 
marriage is settled. Shree means Sampatti or prosperity, then comes 
Kulamu or caste and position, and then Roopamu, that is appearance, 
Sowndariya or beauty; and then Bandhu Shreni or collection of relations 
and then there is sampradayam or the tradition of the family. All these 
five have to be carefully considered. Can a girl of eighteen — quite 
marriageable in age — select by judging, all these things ? Can she 
distinguish between one and another among these things ? No. The other 
day I asked my wife’s sister’s husband’s sister. No, that is not a distant 
relationship, you know, my wife’s sister’s husband is my brother-in-law 
and his sister was married. But I learned that she had said something 
to her father before her marriage. I went to her husband’s house, with 
her husband accompanying me into the inner apartments and there I 
said to him, “ Do you know this girl never married you ?” He was 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


678 


678 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


aghast, half angry and half surprised. “What do you mean ?” he asked. 
I said, “I mean what I say, she never married you.” “Why ?” “She has 
married this, electricity, this motor-car that is in this house.” The story 
is that the girl had said to her father “I don’t care to whom you marry 
me, provided there is electricity and motor-car in their house.” The poor 
girl of sixteen or eighteen, how could she judge of things and conditions? 
She simply thinks, “I have been brought up in this house by my father, 
he gets twenty thousand rupees a year and there is electricity here, there 
is a motor-car, and a palatial house. I should like to have the same 
conditions there also.” That is all. But the English mother always 
complains that her daughter does not “make good”, that is the 
expression, “My daughter does not make good” she says. That is, “My 
daughter is not able to keep a bevy of young men round about her, 
dancing attendance on her, standing her bills at the cinemas and 
restaurants and so on.” That is what the mother wants. Don’t nod our 
head that way please. What I say is true. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I am supporting you. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Not you, but the friend behind you. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : Are you referring to me ? 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : No, to your neighbour. 

What happens in England ? The mother is always anxious that her 
daughter should be able to attract the attention of half-a-dozen suitors, 
and it is then for the parents to select one out of them to make an eligible 
choice for a son-in-law. But the mother always feels jealous of the maid- 
servant, because the maid-servant is able to make good, while her 
daughter is not able to. That is the tragedy. What does the maid-servant 
do ? At eight o’clock in the evening she changes her apron and gets into 
her clean smart gown and goes away. “Where are you going ?” “My lover 
is waiting outside, and I must go” “No, no, my son-in-law is coming now.” 
“Hang yourself and your son-in-law by the nearest tree. My lover is 
waiting and I am going.” 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : You have, a very poor opinion of women, 
whether Indian or foreign. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : But I have a very high opinion of 
my wife. 

Now then, the mother complains that “that woman is able to make 
good and attract a number of men, but this daughter of mine is not 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


679 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 679 


able to attract them.” And so the mother is sorry. That is the fashion. 
That is the custom of the country. That is the order of the day. And 
there is nothing wrong in it. That is the system which has come into 
being. Go to Malbar and see the Marumakkattayam system. That is an 
altogether different thing. For three years you may study it and still 
you will never understand its secret. But it is a beautiful system, and 
my friend Mr. Thanu Pillai was against changing it at all. 

Sir, your predecessor gave my predecessor twenty minutes after the 
bell. But I will take only two minutes more. 

Now it is not too late to mend. We have not gone too far. It is well 
that we have discussed this matter, and discussed it seriously, so 
thoroughly and so sombrely. We have given so much attention to this 
subject. Now what shall we do ? Shall we proceed with the measure ? 
I appeal to the hon. the Law Minister to withdraw it and then put it 
up — and a more stringent measure next time — , with due authority and 
sanction from the electroate. Then I say no man dares attack us. He 
will be summarily shot, because I will have the sanction of the country, 
I will have the election manifesto ; I will come armed with that power, 
that strength and I will have a right to do it. Now you come without 
authority. You simply depend upon four women police for your protection. 
That is a pathetic sight for one, for any progressive Congressman to 
witness. 

Then again, there is another thing. I trust and hope that whatever 
may happen — and I hope that the Bill will not be proceeded with — but 
if it should be proceeded with, I feel that full freedom may be given 
to every Member of this Assembly to vote as he pleases. If that is given, 
half the sting is taken away. But we have already fallen into the trap 
of allowing this thing to go on. Now, friends, let me warn you. This will 
have a serious repercussion upon our coming election. After all ... . 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Postpone elections for another five years. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : After all, remember that we are 
here as the representatives of the people and after all, remember that 
ninety per cent, of the people belong to one community, bound by 
one social law and one civic institution, one patriarchal system, all 
this is there, and people are not so intelligent as to discriminate between 
one thing and the other. They only feel irritated. They are already 
irritated by more than one circumstance. Yesterday’s demonstration 
was not so much a protest against the Hindu Code Bill as an expression 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


680 


680 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of a certain sullenness and anger of the people with the Congress and 
Congress institutions. It is no use our concealing it, Wherever I go I 
feel I am assailed and attacked. But through my garrulity, my long- 
windedness, through my talkativeness I manage to get over the thing. 
But at the same time, I know on what delicate ground I am travelling. 
I speak not merely as a critic of the Government, but as a responsible 
member of the Congress who has given cent, per cent, support on all 
occasions to this Government. I say however that he is not a well-wisher 
who simply flatters, or conceals the truth from the Government. Perhaps 
you remember that last spectacle — not a scene in Hamlet — a scene in 
the drama of Germany where the Kaiser on the 9th November 1918 
summoned all his generals and asked them to speak. Nobody would 
speak, they were all silent. Then he said, the Kaiser orders you to speak, 
and then Gen. Ludendroff spoke for when the Kaiser orders, and if he 
did not speak, he would shot. Just as when Queen Victoria asked Prince 
Albert to open the door. She said, “Dear, open the door” but the door 
does not open. Then she says, “The Queen of England orders you to open 
the door” and then the poor fellow came and opened the door. So it was 
with the Kaiser, and Ludendroff said, “Your Majesty, there are only 
twenty-four hours for you to escape across to Holland.” Then the Kaiser 
asked, “Why ?” “Why ? because the army would not fight”. The Kaiser 
said, “I will lead the army myself.” But the army would not fight and 
in twenty-four hours this man was transferred. When an unpleasant 
truth is said, please listen to it, because there is in it nothing but the 
best wishes for our conjoint prosperity and success. If not on principle, 
if not on sound morality, at least on expediency please reconsider the 
position and make it possible for the people to go along with you. 

*Acharya J. B, Kripalani (U. P. : General): Sir, in some quarters 

here is an apprehension that I may talk against the policy of the 
Government. Though I have spoken in this house only once, yet this 
apprehension exists in some quarters and I want to allay that 
apprehension. I stand here to support the broad principles of the Bill. 

I do so because I do not want this Government to resign upon a side 

issue, upon a social issue. I want it to resign on more substantial, 
political and economic issues. I would rather want it to resign, for 
example, as any other Government in a more democratic country would 
have resigned, on the issue of the sugar muddle, by which infants 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 13th December 1949, pp. 552-58. 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


681 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 681 


of the poor could not get sugar but tons could be had by those who were 
prepared to pay fancy prices. On such issues, if this Government goes, 
there will be no regret but I do not want it to resign upon a social side 
issue . . . 

An Honourable Member : Sugar is not more important than this 
measure. 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : Yet it is not as sweet. 

Even then I would not have come to support this Bill but for the 
pressure that I had from quarters from which I could not resist such 
pressure. I was told at home that I must support this Bill. I said that 
I was innocent of a knowledge of the Hindu law, that Hindu law ran 
into volumes and there were many volumes of commentary and how could 
I support or oppose a thing which I had not understood. Then I was 
quickly told “ I can make you to understand it.” 

An Honourable Member : Who was your teacher ? 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : So I submitted myself to a few curtain- 
lectures. I was assured that my teacher had been instructed by the 
highest authority in this Assembly, the great Dr. Ambedkar himself. 
After the curtain-lectures were over I was just as wise or as foolish as 
I was after my teachers in school or college had instructed me. I came 
to the conclusion that my teachers were more foolish than myself. 

When I was a professor I thought the students would pay me the same 
compliment. Knowing that, when I entered the class I always said 
“Gentlemen, your presence is assured and after I have marked the roll 
call you are free to go, because I know you will not give me more credit 
for my learning than I gave to my teachers.” 

Sir, I am pledged to support the Bill and I must support it, because 
I know that even though my wife may be absent, when she comes back 
she will not only take financial but moral and intellectual accounts from 
me. 

For me, Sir, it is not a question of religion in danger : it is a question 
of my home in danger. Much has been said about Hindu religion being 
in danger. I am afraid I cannot see the point. Hindu religion is not 
in danger when Hindus are thieves, rogues, fornicators, black-marketers 
or takers of bribes! Hindu religion is not endangered by these people 
but Hindu religion is endangered by people who want to reform a 
particular law! May be they are over-zealous but it is better to be 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


682 


682 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


over-zealous in things idealistic than be corrupt in material things. It 
is this mentality of ours that brought about the death of the Father of 
the Nation. It was supposed that the murderer was a better Hindu than 
the person who lived according to the highest ideals preached in the 
Gita and in the Upanishads and whose life was lived in the light of the 
teachings of our scriptures. I would wish the Hindu community to divest 
itself of such false notions about their religion. Our religion was not made 
by murderers and thieves; it was made by Sadhus, Sanyasis and 
Mahatmas. 

Yet, there is the other side of the question. A great deal of confusion 
has been caused, for one party says that religion is in danger and another 
party says that the modern religion of progress is in danger. If you do 
not support the Bill you are a reactionary. 

I will tell you how I was converted to support the Bill. One reason 
I have already told you. Another reason I will give you now. 

There was a woman and she whispered to another woman “Kripalani 
won’t support the Bill : he is a reactionary.” 

Shri B. L. Sondhi : Were they both members of this house ? 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : They were hon. Members, not members. 
She in confidence told me “I protested and I said Kripalani is progres- 
sive.” So I was put on my honour. You see what subtle kind of propaganda 
goes on. One woman tells something to another woman in confidence 
and she brings the story to me. Now how am I going to act ? I cannot 
consider myself reactionary and not progressive : I may be called a non- 
Hindu but for a modern man not to be modern is a greater stigma than 
to be without religion. I may not believe in God, but how can I not believe 
in the God of progress as is in the West ? 

I will also tell you why the first woman said that I was a 
reactionary — it is a very interesting story — but only if you promise 
not to interrupt me by your laughter. I happened to be the Chairman 
of the Fundamental Rights Committee. In the Fundamental Rights 
Committee the proposition brought forward was that it should be the 
fundamental right of women not to be in purdah. Of course I am 
in favour of all women going without purdah — and what male will 
not. I admire those people who would not, but I am not one of those 
admirable people. I said that I have no objection to this clause going 
in the Fundamental rights, provided that all purdah disappears — the 
ancient purdah and the modern purdah. Take a round in the City of 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


683 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 683 


Delhi. It is very difficult to see the face of a woman. There is always 
a mask. (An hon. Member : The powder) If the ancient purdah is to 
be removed the modern mask may also be removed because the modern 
mask is even more complete than the purdhah. The purdah you can take 
off at will, but the mask can only be taken off at home and by certain 
chemical processes. 

Lest you may misunderstand me I tell you that I am a great believer 
in human equality. And in humanity I also count womanity. I want that 
this Bill should be passed because it gives us equality with women. I 
think that this Bill is in the interests of our equality. I have always 
thought that in comparison with women we are at a very great 
disadvantage. First of all, nature has put us at a disadvantage, because 
if you think a little, you will admit that everything that a man can do 
a woman can also do. But there are certain things which a woman can 
do which men cannot do — not even in our imagination, not even in our 
dreams, not even in our nightmares. I cannot conceive. 

Some Honourable Members : No, you cannot! 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : I was talking of conceiving in an 
intellectual sense. But since you have already found out my meaning 
I need not dilate upon it. (An hon. Member : Oh, no.) But I have often 
been curious and have even asked women “what is this excruciating pain 
and what is this superb joy that you have in conception ?” and they 
only smile at my ignorance and give no answer. I have again asked them 
what pleasure they have in nursing the baby at the breast. Then also 
they smile at my ignorance and give no answer. In these matters I think 
we are at a very great disadvantage. They are great creators. Artists 
create inanimate objects, women create images of God, which sometimes 
degenerate into images of Satan. In these things, of course, nature has 
put a kind of block in our way and we cannot achieve equality with 
women. But in many other things we can achieve equality with women. 

So far as the question of women achieving equality with men is 
concerned, they have already achieved it in India. You know that as 
soon as we had Swaraj, we had a woman Governor. Two centuries 
of independence have passed in the United States of America, and 
there are fortyeight States, but I do not know if even once they have 
appointed a woman as Governor. Of course my knowledge of history 
may be old and I speak subject to correction, but I believe no woman 
was appointed as a federal Minister. I may also say that in a country 




D :\ AM B E D KAR -13\ V O L-14\ V 14-13 


MK D.S. 20-10-2013 S.K.-06-12-2013 


684 


684 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


like England, where female education is widespread, I do not know 
whether up to this time there has been a woman Cabinet Minister. I 
am not talking of the many auxiliary Ministers that we have here too — 
they are also called ‘Ministers’ — but I am talking in terms of Cabinet 
Ministers. So far as I know, there has not been one in England. Then 
I do not know whether in England and America there have been woman 
diplomats — ambassadors. And yet you must remember that one of our 
star ambassadors is a woman. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : We are proud of our women, Sir. 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : Well, Mr. Sidhva thinks that I am not 
proud. I am very proud of this. But I am thinking in terms of equality, 
not of pride. I say, “we have granted women equality, and now shall 
we be given some equality with women ?” I am very much oppressed 
because I am after all an old man. I have learned that old age is to 
be respected. But when a chip of girl comes into my drawing room I 
have to act just like a jack-in the-box and pop up. 

[At this stage Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam - 
Ayyangar) resumed the Chair.] 

I did not do that in former days. Not only that, may I tell you, Sir, 
that even when my wife comes in the drawing room I get up. Do you 
know why ? Because some boorish young man may be sitting there and 
he may not know the modern manners and he may not get up; just to 
give him an example, I rise. I want that there should be equality, because 
you just see, I as a male am obliged to get up when a female comes, 
while I know that when even our Prime Minister or the President or 
the Congress enters a room, I have seen young women sitting in their 
seats. This is a very great injustice to the mere male. My experience 
has been that if there is a quarrel between a man and a woman in the 
bazaar or in the market-place, — because I do not know about secret 
quarrels — or in the club, and supposing a man hit the woman, do you 
know what would happen ? There would be almost a riot and everybody 
would call the man a coward and rightly too. But supposing the man 
was beaten by a woman, do you know what would happen ? I think he 
would look very ridiculous and instead of anybody sympathising with 
him, he would be the object of ridicule and rightly too. Whether we beat 
or are beaten, both ways we are the losers. I want that this balance 
should be restored and there should be some equality to protect the mere 


man. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


685 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 685 


There is yet another thing. Not only in society are we at a disadvantage, 
but the law is also against us, as even our Law Minister will admit. 
Supposing a man runs away with a woman, the man is responsible in 
law. Supposing a woman runs away with a man, again the man is 
responsible. I have it on the highest authority, very modern authority, 
that it is the woman who is often the pursuer. Whether we are the 
aggressors or they are the aggressors, irrespective of aggression, the law 
comes down upon us. We are sufferers both ways. I would, therefore, 
request this house to bring about some equality, so that we men may 
be able to breathe more freely, so that if we are kicked, we may kick 
equally freely without ridicule, without the law coming to the help of 
the stronger party, namely, woman. You can now understand why I 
support this Bill. 

Let us now go into details. There is first of all the question of property. 
I really do not see how, we of the Congress, who are pledged to the 
abolition of private property, yet think in terms of as to whom one share 
or the other should go. I see a curious phenomenon in this nation which 
I have not observed in other nations. 

Shri Lakshminarayan Sahu (Orissa : General) : I want to know one 
thing. Is the Congress pledged to abolition of private property ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is the hon. Member’s opinion. 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani: I think if the Resolutions of the Congress 
are carefully read, it will be plain that the Congress does stand for the 
abolition of private property, that is, accumulated private property, not 
private property that is in use. But as the Deputy Speaker rightly said, 
this a question of opinion. I find that all people here are more concerned 
with redistribution of existing wealth. There is no effort in this land to 
create new wealth. Even our Socialist friends are not thinking in terms 
of creating wealth, but of redistributing the very little existing wealth that 
we have. I am indifferent where the little bit of existing wealth goes, 
whether it goes to the woman or to the man provided it remains in the 
nation. The nation should not be the poorer for it. You will be surprised 
to know, but I do not mind people taking bribes even, or going in the black 
market. After all, wealth does not go outside India. It is somewhere with 
the Indian people. I only think of the morality of it which is destroying 
our public life and our private morals. So far as wealth is concerned, it 
does not matter so much. After all these bribe-takers and these black- 
marketers are not taking away wealth to any foreign country. If it is not my 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


686 


686 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


brother-in-law, it is somebody else’s brother-in-law. It is after all there. 
So I do not for a moment think in these narrow terms of where the 
existing wealth goes. I am thinking in terms of the nation. The whole 
attention in England and other free countries is directed to creating more 
wealth rather than dividing the already meagre wealth that exists there. 
Therefore, I whole heartedly support that a share in ancestral wealth 
be given to women. If they have their own share, they may be more 
careful about their money. It has been my experience that the expenditure 
of a woman is much more than that of a man. I have seen that when 
girls go to college and school, the mother is more careful about their 
clothes than about the boys’ clothes. The young boys may toddle along 
to school walking all their way, but the young girls must go either in 
a tonga or in a bus even though the bus charges may come to Rs. 15 
a month. So in clothes and in transport charges and in other things, 
woman’s education costs more. This is when she is not married. When 
the women are married, you can look at their dress and at our dress. 
I have very often found at weddings that the boy looks like an idiot 
and the girl looks like a queen. I have seen it and anyone who has 
critically observed it will certify that it is so. On the road, I have also 
seen modern women and modern men going together. The modern man 
generally wears English dress and it is not on everybody that the English 
dress sits will. There are only a few exceptions. On most of us it looks 
very awkward. But the woman is in her native sari, full of colour, and 
even if she has not ornaments, she looks better and more respectably 
dressed than the man beside her — nowadays he walks a little behind 

5 p M her and looks awkard. Those who are not acquainted with 

Indian middle class society today, or are foreigners, would 
think that perhaps some chaprassi is going behind. Therefore, I say, Sir, 
they have their own property, we will not be bothered by these things. 
They will spend it as they like and I am sure they will spend it more 
economically than when they have to purchase things and the bills come 
to us. Therefore, I am a great advocate that the women should have 
their property share also. 

Then there is another point about which I am very particular. I am 
told that you cannot adopt a girl child. I happen to be in the unfortunate 
position that I have no children. 

Shri B. L, Sondhi : What a pity ! 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani: It is a very great pity. I thought that as 
a Hindu I could adopt a child. But I have always had a preference 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


687 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 687 


for a female child, I adopted a couple of girls, but they ran away with 
their husbands. I yet want to adopt a girl. I do not know why this 
provision is there that you cannot adopt a girl. The girls, so far as the 
father is concerned are more lovable than boys and the more saucy and 
impudent the girl is the more the father loves her. Therefore, I request 
that if there be any defect in this Bill it may be corrected and female 
children may also be allowed to be adopted. 

About divorce, Sir, I may tell you that I am not personally concerned, 
because my marriage was not criminal, but civil. It is open not to me, 
but certainly to my wife to divorce me any time she likes, if she feels 
that I am not behaving properly. But I find that so far as provisions 
for divorce are concerned this Bill is more retrograde than old custom. 
As we have been told by Shri Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar and a woman 
speaker, there is a simple system of divorce among the masses in the 
villages. There are no costly proceedings, there is no scandal, there are 
no newspaper articles. All this is avoided. I would suggest, Sir, that a 
more reasonable, more scientific and more up-to-date attitude be adopted 
in the matter of divorce. 

Sir, I have a suggestion to make, for what it is worth, for the 
consideration of the Law Minister and this suggestion would not involve 
expenditure, litigation, scandal or newspaper articles. All the marriages 
should be for five years and at the expiry of five years every marriage 
would be renewable. The renewal can take place by some declaration 
before any village officer or his parallel in a town or city. You can after 
five years go and say that you do not want to separate and the marriage 
continues. This will make divorce easy, scientific, without scandals, 
without litigation and I tell you it will be most up-to-date. I make this 
suggestion for whatever it is worth and I tell you it satisfies all the 
requirements of the new religion of progress and advancement. 

Shri L, Krishnaswami Bharathi : Sir, may I make a request to 
you, Sir, to allot one more day for the discussion of this Bill, in view 
of the fact that there are many hon. Members who wish to speak on 
it. The hon. the Prime Minister is here and he will be able to tell us 
whether Government would be prepared to allot tomorrow also for the 
discussion. 

The Honourable Shri Jawaharlal Nehru (Prime Minister) : Sir, 
the House knows that nothing is more precious than every day and 
every hour of this House. We have a great deal of very important 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


688 


688 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


business to get through during this session and there are not many days 
left over. Nevertheless, as I made it clear in the early stages, we want 
to give the fullest opportunity for this debate to be carried on and for 
as many members as possible to speak upon it. Naturally, this or any 
other debate, cannot be carried on indefinitely to the detriment of other 
public business. So Government have stated that they want to give as 
much time as possible, subject to the debate terminating and ending. 
I am perfectly prepared, on behalf of Government, to allot another day, 
that is tomorrow, subject to two provisos : one that the debate terminates 
tomorrow ; second that we sit on Saturday to conduct other business 
of the House. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Sir, may I suggest that it is very difficult for 
us to sit on Saturday. The Hon. the Prime Minister might just find time, 
because he has not to devote much time in the House. But we have to 
sit from morning till evening and in the evenings we have to attend 
meetings of Select Committees, besides attending to our other 
engagements. We have also to go through the various papers received 
by us, draft amendments and send them. Saturday and Sunday are the 
only two days when we can do that work. I would request you , Sir, 
not to take Saturday. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya (U. P. : General) : I have to submit, Sir, 
that this measure is one in which the whole country seems to be more 
interested than it has been in any other measure. Members of this House 
should be allowed full opportunity of expressing themselves about it. So 
long as there is a single member of this House, no matter whether he 
is in favour of the motion or against it, who as a representative of the 
people, wishes to have a say on this Bill, we should allow time for it. 
If we cannot find time for it tomorrow, Government should give more 
days for the discussion of the Bill. I submit that it will not be fair to 
the people of this country or to the Members here, that anybody who 
desires to express his opinion about this measure should not be allowed 
to do so. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. the Prime Minister has already said 
that he will allot one more official day for the discussion of this Bill. 
There are a number of other Bills which have been referred to Select 
Committees and others whose Select Committee reports have been 
presented to the House. Having regard to the business that is yet to 
be done, the hon. the Prime Minister evidently thinks that not more 
than one day can be allowed for the Hindu Code Bill. So far as that 
matter is concerned, it is an official day and I am completely 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


689 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 689 


in the hands of the Government. It is for the House to agree or to reject. 
I have nothing more to say in this matter. So far about twenty-seven 
Members have spoken and we have taken over seven days and nineteen 
plus five, twenty-four hours. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : How many are waiting to speak ? 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani (U. P. : Muslim) : What is the guarantee 
that we will be able to finish the discussion even tomorrow ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have about thirty-four names still who want 
to speak. The matter stands there and only tomorrow is allotted as an 
official day for the conduct of this business. It is for the House to consider 
it tomorrow. Now, as regards Saturday, it will be fixed as an official 
day because tomorrow is being taken up by this. You can arrange for 
the Select Committees to meet on some other day. 

The House will now adjourn till 10-45 a. m. tomorrow. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Wednesday, the 14th December, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


690 


690 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have received a letter from Mr. Kripalani 
that it was under a mis-understanding yesterday that he sat down. I 
thought that he had concluded his speech, He says that as soon as I 
got up, in deference to the Chair, he sat down. If that is so, I would 
like to give him an opportunity to continue his speech, but I would 
request him to conclude his speech in a very short time. 

fAcharya J. B. Kripalani (U. P. : General) : Sir, I thank you for 
the opportunity that you have given me to conclude my speech. I wanted 
to conclude it in a more serious manner. It appears to me that as a 
nation we lack a little humour and cannot penetrate to the serious 
purpose that lies behind the humour. 

My support to the Bill is wholehearted and it rests upon very sound 
grounds. It rests on the foundation of the character and tradition of 
Indian womanhood. Throughout history they have played a very 
distinguished part in our life and in our culture. In ancient names we 
have famous names who contributed to the learning of the times. Many 
of them were great writers, philosophers and poets. In mediaeval times 
when we were down and out, when wave after wave of foreign invasion 
came, our women confined themselves to the home with their ancient 
virtues undiminished. And when wounded and disappointed we went 
home they soothed our wounds and kept the home fires burning. They 
were a consolation to us. Not only that they kept our religion alive. They 
kept our traditions alive; they kept our culture alive. It is in Hindu homes 
with Hindu women that we find our culture and our religion at its best. 
Even today when gentlemen change their dresses, our women do not 
change theirs. It is this trait of Indian womanhood that was recognized 
by the Father of the Nation and that was so ably utilized by him. 

In our struggle for independence they stood shoulder to shoulder 
with us. Very often I know, they had to suffer more than we had 
to suffer. Even when some of them did not bear lathi charges and 
did not go to jails, I know the privations that they had to suffer and 
they suffered them cheerfully. They have always helped us in every 
way and I suppose it ill-behoves us to think that they are thinking 
of themselves alone. After all the wearer knows where the shoe 
pinches. They know what handicaps they are suffering from. I am 

*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 560-621. 
f Ibid, pp. 560-62. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


691 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 691 


sorry that a Member from Bengal should be very enthusiastic against 
this Bill not knowing the conditions of the widows in Bengal. I have 
seen them with my own eyes. 

Shri Suresh Chandra Majumdar (West Bengal : General) : Not all 
Bengal Members are. 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : I was talking only of one Member who 
is very enthusiastic against the Bill. As I was saying the wearer knows 
where the shoe pinches. I have no doubt that even when women get 
what they want, their traditional devotion to home, to their menfolk will 
not diminish and I have every reason to believe this. Sir, I am associated 
with women who may be considered as modern and you will excuse me 
if I give you a peep into my home life. You know and the House knows 
Mrs. Kripalani, but you know only her public activity. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari (Assam : General) : On a point of 
order. Sir. Can you discuss about Mrs. Kripalani who is not present in 
the House ? 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : Of course, I would seriously object if the 
Member discussed her, but I thought I had a little right to discuss her. 
As I was saying, she takes her full part in public life, but as soon as 
she is at home she is as good a housewife as any ancient woman. 

Though I do not like anybody to do physical work for me, I can tell you 
that when I am not looking, she does everything for me, including the brushing 
of my chappals and the washing of my clothes. I have also had the privilege 
of seeing other women who are considered modem. I am acquainted rather 
intimately with those Members whom you see only in the House, and I have 
seen them in their home surroundings with their children, with their husbands, 
with their brother and I have no hesitation in saying that they lack none of 
the virtues of the old but they have added a new virtue to enrich their life, 
that of public activity and public work. Sir, I come from a community in Sind 
where most of the women are educated and according to modem ideas they 
may be considered even fashionable, but when I go to their homes I have 
marked the pathetic way they love their husbands, their children and their 
brothers. 

An Honourable Member : Why pathetic ? 

Acharya J. B. Kripalani : I advisedly use the word because you do 
not know that this love of theirs is a very inconvenient thing to us 
menfolk, However much we may try to dominate the home and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


692 


692 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


make our will prevail, they go round us in such a manner, with such 
devoted service, with such faithfulness, with such steadfastness, with 
such patience that I have yet to see husbands in the world who are more 
henpecked than the Indian husbands. They always stoop to conquer. I 
have seen these modern ladies highly educated, as educated as ourselves, 
and I have found that, under their skin they are as ancient as any of 
their ancient sisters. I think those people who are married to old orthodox 
ladies and who have seen their devotion, if they were to see the devotion 
of the new, they will be surprised to see that there has been no change 
at all; and these women want that certain disabilities of theirs be taken 
away. It is said that, if women are given inheritance, love between 
brother and sister will diminish. I do not think that the love of our sisters 
is made of such flimsy stuff. It has centuries of tradition behind. I have 
seen sisters slaving away so that their brothers may be educated and 
find themselves on their feet. I have seen them sacrificing for the family. 
I come from a community where there is no joint family, where as soon 
as the son is married, he separates and lives alone, but I know because 
there is no joint family, there is greater love between the members of 
the family [Hear hear] and it was manifested recently when the Sindhis 
had to migrate from Sind and come to India. I have seen three or four 
families living together in one house. If anybody had a house outside, 
if anybody had settled outside Sind and he was living in India, that house 
was shared equally with nephews and cousins and in-laws and they bear 
the trouble of this terrible congestion very cheerfully. Many of them have 
to spend large sums of money. So this family love which has persisted 
for centuries is not going to end because there is a little change in the 
Hindu Law. 

As Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar has told us, this law has always 

been changing. It is the pride of the Hindu religion that 
12 noon it has adjusted itself to changing circumstances, It is true 

to the old, yet it takes as much of the new as it is necessary for 
the healthy life of the community. Times have changed. If foreign 
rule had not been here, our Shastras would have changed; our law 
would have changed. Foreign rule made these laws very rigid, and 
it is time that we bring in some new life and new light into them, 
and this Bill is trying to do that. I am sure the Bill would be put 
into some shape and form in Committee and that there will be no complaints. 
I am sure that our home life is not going to be disturbed and I am 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


693 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 693 


sure the love and the loyalty of our women is not going to diminish. 
That their devotion to their menfolk is not going to diminish in any way, 
and that the future women of India will be both true to their home and 
to the nation. Sir, I have done. 

*Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt (Bombay States): (English 
translation of the Hindi speech) Sir, ever since the Hindu Code Bill has 
been before the House, it has agitated the minds of the people in India. 
Dr. Sen claims that the bill has already been before us for the last fifty 
or sixty years. But, in the books I have gone through in this connection, 
nowhere, I have been able to find a reference to any earlier existence 
of this Code. There was however, a Hindu Law, changes wherein have, 
no doubt, been engaging the attention of the Hindu society from time 
to time. 

It was only after 1939 that we have come to know of this Hindu Code 
Bill in its present form. There may have been some talk on the occasion. 
Dr. Deshmukh had brought the Marriage Bill before this very House in 
1938. 

Dr. P. K. Sen (Bihar : General): May I just explain ? I said that 
it had been before the legislative anvil for longer than 60 years, i.e. from 
1856 or 1855, but that was with reference to the Marriage Law, not at 
all in respect to other aspects. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : I also say that only some of 
its aspects were before us and before the Hindu society. In fact such 
issues were not facing the Hindus only, the Parsis and the Muslims were 
similarly confronted by them. I mean only to give you some glimpses 
of the history of the manner in which this Hindu Code Bill has been 
brought before the House and the circumstances under which the 
Committee called the ‘Rau Committee’ was set up. I want also to give 
you an idea as to the time-limit fixed for framing the rules and 
regulations concerning the social structure of the Hindu society 
populating over 30 crores as also the methods employed for publicity 
and elicitation of public opinion or for ascertaining any other reaction. 
Whether the Hindu Code Bill should be introduced or not, the Hindu 
society should be integrated or not, or whether or not there should 
be a synthesis of the various piecemeal legislation of the Hindu Law 
are not the real issues. I want to draw your attention to the fact 
that the Rau Committee was set up on January 20,1944; they 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 576-85. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


694 


694 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


undertook the work and got a Draft Bill ready. The public came to know 
of this Bill on August 5, 1944 when they were given two months 
thereafter to send in their opinions by October 5, 1944. Sir, I will like 
to point out also that only 1,000 copies of this Bill were printed by the 
Government of India for a population of 30 crores. Subsequently 3,000 
more copies were printed under pressure of public demand. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi (U. P. : General): Were they printed in English 
or Hindi? 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : All the 4,000 copies were printed 
in English. Thereafter Shri Rau had asked the Provincial Governments 
to get a translation of the Bill printed and distributed. Despite this 
translation, to my knowledge not more than 50 to 60 thousands of such 
copies were distributed in all in a population of 30 crores. 

Now I would proceed to speak about the extent of publicity and 
circulation among people to ascertain their reaction to a Bill of this type 
which is of so much importance; which aims at integration of the Hindu 
society, which seeks to introduce a new way of life and which is 
considered to be a reformatory measure. A time-limit of two months was 
fixed for this purpose and thereafter the committee undertook a tour 
of the country. Their tour lasted for 38 days only. They did not visit 
all the cities and left out all towns and villages. Never did they care 
to go in the midst of people at any time during this tour nor approach 
any widow to enquire about the reason for her misery even though she 
may have continued to share property in accordance with the Dayabagh 
system of Bengal. They never went to Madras to know why our sisters 
and daughters were unhappy there in spite of the matriarchal system 
of sharing property. They did not find out whether widows were in 
distress in Bengal or Madras only or their fate was the same all over 
and, if so, what could be the possible reason for such distress. I can’t 
agree to the plea that they are in a miserable state only because they 
possess no share in the property. This is not the case. Their miseries 
exist not solely because of having no property whatsoever. Formerly a 
hitch existed that the women widowed in a young age could not seek 
wordly enjoyments, there was hardly any justification in refusing an 
opportunity for second marriage to such widows. Ishwar Chandra Vidya Sagar 
and Malabari Saheb made efforts in this behalf and though I do not remember 
it clearly but I think it was in 1856 that a Widow Remarriage Act was 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


695 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 695 


passed and is in force till-date. I would however like to know the number 
of people who availed its benefits or the nature of happiness and 
prosperity towards which this Act has contributed. I mean to submit that 
the mere legislation cannot bring a change in the society or nothing 
material can result by thrusting something down the people’s throats 
from above. I wish to cite the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act as an 
instance. The Act was first enacted in 1865 and Sir Cowasji Jehangir 
had placed a Bill to amend the original Act before this very House in 
1936. I intend to go in history of that very amending Bill. Some friends 
of the Parsi society felt the necessity for amendment just as we are 
feeling at present. Kripalaniji is required to support the Bill so that his 
home may not be in danger. Likewise I have no desire to put mine in 
danger. Should I also support it for that matter? 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma (U.P. : General): In this respect all 
aged men behave alike. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : Quite right. I don’t wish to reply 
Sharmaji just now. He may continue to follow his wife everywhere 
carrying her coat. 

Shri Krishna Chandra Sharma : But she never puts on a coat. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : My intention in this submission 
is to explain the course of action adopted by the Parsi friends once they 
had thought to reform and amend their Bill of 1865. What did they do? 
They set up a Law Committee from among their Panchayat. And what 
did this Committee do. It did no such thing as to hammer out an 
amending Bill, fix two months as time-limit to elicit public opinion 
and arrive at the decision thereafter. They had with them a 
questionnaire for four years which among other things wanted to 
know the number of Parsis who on basis of 1921 Census might be 
one lakh in all or at the most one and a half lakhs. The report was 
before them for another four years and it was only after that they 
had accepted the proposal. The Report was circulated in the Parsi 
Society again and opinions were invited on the same. These opinions 
did not come from Bombay. Ahmedabad or Madras people alone. 
Rather Parsis living in Persia and China, may be only a few of their 
families may have been there were consulted first on that Report and 
their desire ascertained. The educated persons and the lawyers always 
present an issue in a distorted way and people somehow accept their version 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


696 


696 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


of a thing. Being gifted with a powerful faculty of argumentation, they 
are competent to impress other in the way of their liking. But the Report 
in question was circulated even among those who possessed no such 
faculty. Opinions were invited from groups irrespective of their being 
in a minority and a majority. Thus when everyone was consulted in 1936 
the Bill was sent in an amended form. So the issue embodied in this 
Bill continued to engage their attention from 1923 to 1936 and the same 
was ultimately passed in an amended form. 

I have much respect for Shri Rau. He has laboured very hard and 
has been of great help in the framing of the Constitution. But I will 
submit that he has mentioned this fact about consulting only a very few 
persons in the Report itself and thinks no harm in that. He however, 
did agree that the society was divided on the issue. Sister Renuka is 
not present here just now, but I have to say no different thing about 
her as well. She was speaking on the Marriage Bill in 1943-44. On that 
occasion she had laid a claim that if a referendum were to be held and 
all votes to be counted then all the young men of high spirits (Joshila 
jawans) will be found to have supported that Bill. She had not used the 
phrase ‘joshila jawans’. I am merely elucidating the original phrase viz. 
‘the youth’ used by her. I wish to submit it to my sister along with the 
other six or eight in this House that if they really think the Bill a very 
necessary one in the interests of women like our Acharya Kripalani who 
has come round to see in it the liberation of our women then, please, 
do not give it a title like the Hindu Code Bill. Name it the Post 
Independence Civil Rights of Hindu Women Bill or something like that. 
Thereafter you may proceed to give them as many rights as you please. 
After all we have always shown reverence and done honour to our women. 
Our ladies accept their husband’s house as their own after marriage. 
Sister Sucheta has set up a house likewise. Once a woman goes to 
her husband’s house, that house becomes her’s also, she can claim 
her father’s house as her own no more. It becomes merely her father’s 
place from the time of her marriage. Her house is the one into which she 
is married. I need not go into further detail. But our sisters are wrong 
to think that it is a Bill of theirs only and for them only. Men have a 
right to it as much as the women do. I don’t want to discriminate anyway 
between them on this score. So no man or woman should take it that the 
Bill concerns a particular section of the society exclusively. I shall be excused 
if I take rather a longer time. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


697 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 697 


So I was telling how sister Renuka had laid a claim for the support 
of all the enthusiastic young men in case of a referendum. In the Report 
submitted by Shri Rau in 1947, he said, ‘ Opinion is sharply divided 
some to the left, some to the right. Also that those in favour of the Bill 
were persons of brain and quality whereas the others opposing it were 
mere idiots, devoid of any brain, possessing no status in life and without 
any sense to understand the society and its complexities.’ May I know 
who then are those who understand the society and its problems? Does 
Shri Rau understand it? And does the Dwarka Nath Mitter really not 
understand it? I have nothing to say about those people. But there is 
no one who could lay a claim to more work in this field than Malaviyaji, 
whose birth anniversary we have celebrated only yesterday and 
acknowledged him as an unequalled cultured man. He, though an 
orthodox, was always in the fore-front in the matters of reformation of 
the society and rights of the people. But that very venerable Malaviyaji 
had not thought it to be a proper way in which the Hindu Code Bill 
was being ushered in. We may not heed him. You all know Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru quite well. He too was second to none in wisdom or 
intellect. He had declared himself to be in favour of the Bill, but had 
agreed that it was not a suitable time to frame a Bill of this type. I 
go further. Sir Chiman Lall Setalwad enjoyed a status in life not less 
than any other man and had always taken a leading part towards 
reformation of the society. He never agreed to codification on principle 
but expressed himself in favour of giving a share to the widows and 
daughters without any codification. Surely it is not right to consider all 
persons to be wise who talk in the same vein as you do and denounced 
all others as mere fools who cannot share your opinions. I will request 
my brothers and sisters through this House and Sir, through you, not 
to consider the Bill in this manner. And, to my Hon. Leader, the Prime 
Minister, Pandit Jawahar Lai Nehru, who is not present in the House. 
I would like to say that I should certainly have joined with him — and 
I am in fact with him — in his efforts to evolve a uniform set of rules 
for the Hindu society and his desire to assemble the scattered provisions 
of Law and to form them into a system — a code — but I ask, have the 
public been, allowed an opportunity of expressing their views. Take the 
case of the small sized Parsi Community. They kept all their component 
parts with them, ascertained the opinion of each one of them 
separately and it was then only that the Bill was brought forward. 
Then only did they succeed for otherwise they could not have achieved 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


698 


698 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


their purpose. A bill to amend the Civil Marriage Act was brought 
forward in 1921 with the same object as now. Why are you going to 
frame a Hindu code, why not frame an Indian code ? All the people live 
in the same country — India; they ought to have similar ways and customs. 
When we have decided on one common language there should also be 
one common code for all the people of India so that this might lead to 
unity and result in a united India. I want to tell you about that period. 
The Christians and the Muslims raised such an opposition that Dr. Gaur 
had to say : ‘It aroused convulsive opposition from the Mohammedan 
and Parsi communities throughout India. I had no other go but to drop 
the Bill and bring a new bill in 1923.’ 

And he had taken that course. The Hindu society is not treated with 
any regard. No consideration is shown to a community which comprises 
such vast numbers. No consideration is shown to the counsel of 
Malaviyaji, leave alone Pattabhi sahib, Sir Alladi and Lakshmi Kanta 
Maitra. What they say is of no importance. Let alone others, here is 
the case of Rajendra Babu who is known as Ajatshatru. He is a living 
treasure-house of wisdom and intelligence and is the ornament of this 
country. Who has put the ideas of Gandhiji into practice and who could 
explain them not only to this country but also to the rest of the world. 
He says, ‘This is not the opportune time’. There are many things in it 
which are controversial. Please sift them out and do not touch upon them. 
But, what to do? Our leaders say, ‘No, this has to be expedited.’ Then, 
let them expedite it but they should at least see to it that the views 

and assent of all the people are obtained. There is one advantage in 

particular seized by Dr. Ambedkar, I will tell you what that advantage 

was. When this Bill was introduced in 1948 we all sat together and 

decided that nobody should make a speech on it for the present. Neither 
Dr. Ambedkar nor anyone else said anything in particular. At that time 
it was thought that if the Bill was just introduced this was likely to 
cause satisfaction to our sisters and to others who are reformists, who 
want unification and codification and to those who are rational. So it 
was agreed to let them have that satisfaction. Taking advantage of this, 
however, Dr. Ambedkar thought that it had been conceded by the people 
generally that the Bill was all right. No sir, we did not study some of its 
clauses some of its provisions. But, since our leaders said, ‘Let it move forward 
a bit’, we said ‘ Very well, take it forward. Bring it in the Bazaar’. Thus 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


699 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 699 


it has come into the Bazaar, it has been paraded in procession and here 
we are seeing it. I should like to say that if all the debate of ours had 
taken place before the Bill was sent to the Select Committee, it would 
have done a lot of good to Dr. Ambedkar and our friends of the Select 
Committee. They would have come to know what shape should he given 
to the various things. Now, we are faced with a sort of conundrum. Our 
confusion lies in this that if we say that it should again be sent to the 
Select Committee, it is not known to what a labyrinth of rules and 
procedure we might be landing ourselves. If, on the other hand, we say 
that we should hold it up for the present there is another sword hanging 
over our heads. Now, what are we to do? We are in a pretty fix and 
it is for our leaders and Providence to take us out of it. 

I was saying that we were not called for to introduce this measure 
at this particular juncture because we have not yet obtained the views 
of the Hindu society. Whatever Hindu society has been consulted belongs 
to the towns. And how many people were consulted ? There are 121 
individuals and 102 institutions who have filed written statements or 
given evidence. Now, shall we say this is the opinion of the Hindu 
society ? In case you want to know the opinion expressed by Mr. Mitter, 
and that too in regard to each part separately I am prepared to speak 
to you about it. Opposition has been offered to it every were barring 
Madras. Those belonging to the Dayabhaga School opposed it in Bengal. 
There is opposition from the Bombay side. Because of this antagonism 
and other causes it has come to face opposition. If, in spite of this 
opposition we were to say, ‘No’, what the minority say is along the truth 
and you will have to accept it. it is rather hard. The Hindu society should 
be unified. This should certainly be done on the basis of a system. How 
can I say the women, our sisters, should be given no share? But let our 
sisters themselves be asked to say if, after they have received their share, 
they would still have any love left for their parental home. How much 
love would be still left? Just ask one of the reformed women of 
to-day where her father lives, where her brother lives. They keep to their 
own cottage, homestead or mansion and do not so much as greet a 
relative. Such are the reformed people of to-day. Hence if it comes to 
shares what will become of us? However what I wanted to say was 
that in spite of all these objections we are faced with the minority issue. 
Even though the view of everyone have not been obtained we are being 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


700 


700 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


treated to that kind of pressure. We are urged to accept it under duress. 
They fail to see, however, what complications are bound to arise later 
on. 

Hence, I want to say. kindly find out a middle course. Only a middle 
course would give satisfaction to us and to society and cause the unrest 
to subside. Just as Pataskarji observed to day we are already up against 
a number of difficulties. Why create another big one at this juncture? 
Why plant another thorny bush and thereby spoil the path rendering 
extra labour necessary later on for its clearance? Why should you act 
in that manner? Kindly attend to some other task and let this one be 
postponed for a year or two. I should like to suggest to my sister — 
veritable goddesses as they are — to those of them who have welcomed 
this measure that in the interests of the country, they should take upon 
themselves to go to our Jawaharlalji and appeal to him that this means 
my be held up for one or two years. This would help in many ways. 
But as it is, their line of thought is that if this Bill is not passed now 
or at any rate in 1950, it may never be passed, because those who come 
hereafter would not allow it to be passed. But let me tell you that even 
if you pass it to day you should know what is going to happen later 
on. Such a type of people will come in to fill these seats who will say, 
‘ As our very first duty let us set right this Hindu code that has been 
enacted’. Hence. I beg you kindly to prevent this if you can. If however, 
you cannot do that then, my advice is : ‘Not to the left, not to the right, 
come in the middle; find out the golden mean. This alone can satisfy 
the community. 

Secondly, I wish to refer to what Dr. Ambedkar said in reply to a 
point of order raised by Mr. Sarwate to which, Mr. Deputy-Speaker, you 
also added your support, viz., that this Bill is going to be applicable to 
the provinces only and that if it is sought to be made applicable to the 
States it will be sent to them, it will be circulated, before it is decided 
what is to be done about it. Dr. Ambedkar made the following observation : 

“When the occasion comes for the extension of the bill to the Indian 
states, no doubt this Legislature, when a proper motion is placed before 
it, or the Government of the day will take note of their wishes and 
intentions and the States which have come into the Indian Union will be 
consulted.” 

If this is the position then what is passed to-day will be sent to the 
States after six months and by the time the states enforce it you will 
have gone still further ahead. The States’ people who are already 
somewhat backward, will be left even further behind. You should 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


701 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 701 


therefore, kindly keep that point in view and see what can be done about 
it. 

I may be permitted to say that the mode of obtaining public opinion 
was not perfect. I have already said that. It took us two and a half to 
three years to frame our Constitution and even though we have proceeded 
with the utmost caution, there are so many people who say it is no good. 
We consulted the Provincial Governments, supplied them copies of the 
Draft constitution and it was discussed there in their legislative 
assemblies and cabinets before they sent us their views. As you know, 
the Rau Committee never sent their draft report to any provincial 
Government. This is how it has come up. Hence, I wish to point out 
that the opinion was not taken fully and properly. The basis of your 
claim is also not sound. I am in no doubt on that score. Renuka Bahan 
remarked, ‘ Half of the country will be with it, but the report of the 
Rau Committee says Says.’ ‘ The society is very much divided.’ In view 
of this whom should I rely upon? Should I rely upon those who gave 
their report in 1947 after investigation or upon Renuka Bahan’s 
statement of 1944? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Several other Members have yet to speak. 
Kindly conclude it. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : I shall be closing in five or seven 
minutes. I should say a few things more if you permit. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Just as you please. You have taken thirty 
minutes already. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : I shall speak just a little more 
and then close very soon. I must say that it is the Hindu Community 
alone which would quietly take whatever blows you might give it. Look 
at the Muslim community. Did anyone have the courage to draw up a 
code for them? Why not unite the Shia and Sunni schools of thought? 
Could you just dare meddle with the law of the Christians ? Or could 
you dare tackle the Parsis? This poor community alone must stand 
every thing. Is it because you think it is dead? Dr. Ambedkar say 
he belongs to the Shudra caste. I hold him very high. Someone gives 
him the title of Muni (saint), another raises him to the rank of Rishi 
(sage) whereas he himself says he is a Shudra. Then let him be 
Vishwamitra. Whatever you are, but, of course, you are a wise man. 
Why nurse that inferiority complex? He says, ‘Smritis’ continued to 
be prepared. The Brahmans went on writing. What else had they to 
do after all? What is the work being done by your department? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


702 


702 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


That was exactly what the writers of Smritis did. It was a department 
which amended laws and rules from time to time. Just as you prepare 
and put up amendments to laws they did likewise. I however do not 
wish to go into this question, Nor do I wish to go into other extraneous 
matters. Our sisters say this thing has come to be included in the 
fundamental right and that those who are opposing it have not been 
able to comprehend the fundamental rights. “You do not understand the 
fundamental rights,” they say. Does it form the fundamental right or 
even state law? Does the Hindu Code constitute State law or is it personal 
and private law? If you were to bring forward a bill in regard to an 
Indian Code, I could say with authority nobody would oppose it, but to- 
day you are out to frame a Hindu Code and to make a change in the 
Hindu Law. But personal law is not State law and therefore it does not 
apply. Gaur had remarked, ‘ it will only be Avtar who might come 
someday and bring forth this Code.’ Shri Gaur is perhaps sitting in 
Nagpur now and he must have been gratified to learn that the Avtar 
has manifested himself at last and that the Hindu Code Bill has arrived. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Disgraced persons. 

Shri Gokulhhai Daulatram Bhatt : Saying a few words more I wish 
to conclude my speech in a short time. It is said that brothers and sisters 
should be equally treated. Shri Kripalani has left, why would he hear what 
the others say? So I wish to say why this double right should be given 
to the sisters. She will take her stridhana from her father’s place, will take 
all the dowry given to her by her father, will take her personal share and 
apart from this all her share in the husband’s property is still there. Then 
how the sisters have become so selfish? The women are themselves 
prosperity incarnate, why do they want more of this wordly wealth? 
Shrimati Kamala Chaudhuri has given out that without doubt wealth and 
prosperity will automatically flow back to the wealthy and prosperous. 
Women are themselves wealth and prosperity incarnate, why do they want 
to add to their prosperity ? With the slight illusion and fascination they 
still possess they have been able to capture and subdue the whole world, 
if the illusion and fascination would increase then nobody can foretell what 
would not come to happen. If the wealth (may a) will undoubtedly flow back 
to the wealthy then subsist Nature and Nature only in this world and 
exclude Man therefrom. If by this exclusion of Man the maya is able to 
subsist, then do accordingly. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


703 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 703 


Our friends from Travancore and Cochin are far advanced but they 
should also keep in mind that a solitary swallow will not make summer. 
They should make the villagers also pace with them and if they also 
are to be taken along then kindly give this Bill more publicity and explain 
it to them the various implications and then the purpose will surely be 
achieved. There is not the least doubt about this fact. At places it is 
being said that by passing this Bill a reversed state of affairs is being 
created, and to some extent this allegation is right also. Let the water 
trickle down its natural course and if by spurning the minority view 
point here you would reverse the state of affairs then today you may 
be able to do so; but in future a time will come when such drastic changes 
would be made therein that would stun you speechless. The inevitable 
must come to pass. I do not like to go in details. 

I wish to say one thing more that our Smritikar (law giver) 
Yagnyavalkya has gone a step ahead of Manusmriti. Even I do not want 
to enter into the controversy as to which of the Manus has been the 
author of this Manusmriti because there have been a number of Manus. 
But Shri Vigyaneshwar, the famous annotator of Yagyavalkya Smriti, 
who has written the Mitakshara annotation and the annotators who have 
written Dayabhag and Mayukh annotations have propounded different 
and distinct opinions. I do not want to quote all the illustrations. But 
they have laid down that if a woman be not given her stridhan then 
she also should get a share in the property equal to that of the son. 
This has expressly been mentioned. I wish to say with all the emphasis 
at my command that in our Smritis a mention is made of stridhan. The 
people of England have not yet codified their law. I wish to inform you 
that according to the English Book of Prayers the prohibited degrees 
of relationship for marriage were determined in 1565 A. D. The same 
continued to be in force till 1915 A. D. and in 1915 A. D. only one 
alteration was made in the prohibited degrees of relationship viz., till 
now a marriage could not be consumated with the wife’s sister. So I 
wish to say that we have stepped far ahead as compared to this. There they 
took so many years to change one degree of prohibited relationship but here 
according to the Civil Marriage Act the people have been permitted to enter 
into matrimonial alliance with the second cousins also. Those who like many 
take recourse of Civil Marriage, but why you want to impose the same 
restriction on all others. The Civil marriage Act provides for marriages 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


704 


704 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


with second cousins. Those who wish to adopt the system may follow 
it. While framing this Bill we should keep in mind the Principle of 
Eugenics also. It is wrong to consider that our Smritikars (annotators) 
have mentioned nothing at random. Our Smritikars were past-masters 
of the Science of Eugenics. They were not common people. They were 
highly learned and well informed persons. Whatever doctrines they laid 
down were perfect in all respects and were propounded after mature 
consideration. Their decrees were so perfect that it was not at all deemed 
essential to effect any changes in them say after 6, 8, 10 or 12 months. 
Our Smritikars were very wise and intelligent. Deep meditation of 
hundreds of years is essential to suggest any changes in what they have 
written. Undoubtedly you may make suitable amendments there in, 
because from time to time suitable amendments have been made in these 
Smrities. But we must consider this fully well whether by introducing 
these changes the society will be benefitted or put to loss. 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar : General): Are the Hon. Members 
of this House not intelligent? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Please go on. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : I am not so intelligent and 
learned as Shri Kamath is. I do not allege that the Hon. Members here 
do not possess intelligence. Everybody has got his own intelligence. 
Everybody can think. But I say that I will not accept lying down all 
that Dr. Ambedkar says in a manner that great men have great views. 
Similarly if any Pandit (scholar) were to come and say that whatever 
has been done for the untouchables is not at all justified, then also I 
will not take his word for granted because I do not believe in the maxim 
that great men have great views. But I was submitting that whatever 
our Smritikars have done, have done after fully taking into consideration 
the future of the society. It is quite true that these Smrities were codified 
according to the then needs of the society. Today our society consists 
of numerous castes and sub-castes, the people belong to different sects, 
they believe in various doctrines, there are Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists and 
followers of other schools of thought and so on. They are divided up into 
numerous religious sects. It is not an easy task to inter-blend them in 
a single system. 

Sir, I will now take only a little more time. I had just stated that 
the honourable Dr. Ambedkar said, “Custom will eat into the code 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


705 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 705 


and therefore custom should not prevail” On the other hand he says that 
the law governing the succession rights of Rulers and jagirdars, which 
should not be there, should continue; and when there is a question of 
usages and customary rights, he says that this should not be there. 

There is the point of succession. Another point is that of adoption 
where he says that customs and usages should not be allowed to continue. 
Both these things are untenable. You had better put an end to it, make 
it uniform or abolish it outright. Sir, I would again bring it to your notice 
that petty conferences are being held at other places on account of which 
I am feeling some difficulty in speaking. 

An Honourable Member : He is repeating the same arguments. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law): It is now 
one hour since the gentleman has been speaking. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. The best way of asking him not 
to speak longer is not to make noise but to leave him alone so that I 
may ask him to complete his speech early. The Hon. Member knows that 
many other Members are anxious to speak. He has already taken more 
than 45 minutes. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : Shri I am indebted to you. So I 
was telling you that on the one hand you say that the custom is no problem, 
these customs and usages should continue; on the other, if this is acted 
upon it would tantamount to kill the Hindu Code. I do not want both these 
things. You ask as to grow more food. If we have to grow foodgrains in 
all the land in our possession, be it a garden or beautiful lawns, we must 
cultivate all these lands. On the one land; you want that your lawns should 
also remain intact, and on the other, you desire that more foodgrains should 
be grown. Such a course does not appeal to me. 

You know what is custom ? We should understand family customs, 
village customs and national customs — ’Shastrad ruri balysi (Custom 
overrides the sacred laws). What is the meaning of Shastral ? By 
referring to shastras again and again you people would be thinking that 
I am raving like a maniac. The Shastra is a science, a treatise and 
a law. That is a Smriti. After this you will not like to appreciate any 
such thing. So he will not like to involve himself in any such 
controversy which the divorce problem has created. A man and a 
woman sit in a Panchayat and say that they want to get rid of one 
another. They say that they have enjoyed the pleasures of the world 
and want to go to some other place. They will not involve themselves 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


706 


706 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


in such a botheration of having a recourse to the District Court or High 
Court for this purpose. If they behave in such a manner the reverse 
will be the case. 

When I go to the village, I will tell the people that the Hindu Code 
Bill has been framed in such a manner and it contains a provision of 
such like matters. Those people will then say that they do not want this 
in such a form. The existing village Panchayats are quite good and these 
should be allowed to carry on as they are doing at present and they 
do not want to involve themselves in such complications of law which 
will enable the lawyers to thrive and the poor to become poorer. With 
your blessings, all these things abundantly exist in the Hindu law. 

Sir I was just saying what is likely to be the net result of all such 
things. I cannot touch here every aspect because I have not got sufficient 
time at my disposal that I should refer to all such things, as many of 
my brethren are desirous of speaking on it. 

So Sir, I was just going to say that this is a question of vital 
importance. I would advise my honourable friends sitting here who have 
expressed their opinion in favour of its being passed to consider it once 
again more carefully. This is not the time for hasty action. You are liable 
to be called to account by the people for your doing of it. With all due 
respects, I would also like to request our esteemed leader the honourable 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru that this question which has been brought up 
before us is so vital and of such a fundamental importance that we should 
necessarily consider over it most carefully. All the more necessary that 
the public opinion should be elicited in this matter. My honourable sister 
Shrimati Renuka Ray had referred to a referendum. In this connection 
I would like to say that as the elections are likely to be held in the 
near future, you can at that time elicit the opinion of the measses 
whether or not they want the Hindu Code. You can place it before the 
public that we are framing a Hindu Code Bill of this nature and whether 
or not they like it. If you are able to enlist the opinion of the people 
on this issue, then you are at full liberty to pass it in this House. This 
should be agreed upon as the basis of referendum. I am not a man to 
be swayed over by the newspaper reports. The newspapers are given to 
the publication of exaggerated versions of such matters simply to promote 
their circulation. I have got no personal grudge against the newspaper 
men. I cherish solicitude for them and have every sympathy with them. 
But so far as the question of holding a referrendum is concerned, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


707 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 707 


I would like to tell my honourable sister Shrimati Renuka Ray, who is 
not present here at the moment and other sisters that as elections are 
likely to be held after a few months, this question can then be placed 
by them before the public. You can tell the people that we have framed 
such a Hindu Code Bill and want to pass it. If the people vote in your 
favour on this issue, then we can surely pass it here. 

Thus, I would like to request the Government to consider over this 
matter and not to pass it at this moment. To conclude, I would say this 
much, “Not to the left, not to the right, come in the middle to find out 
the golden mean.” 

Shri R. K. Sidhva (C. P. and Berar : General): Sir, My friend has 
mentioned the Parsi Matrimonial Act. Will you kindly give me five 
minutes to explain? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not going to allow it because he did 
not criticise it in any manner. He said the Parsi Marriage Bill was sent 
round to all persons all over the world. He used that as an agrument 
in the case of this Bill which involves three hundred millions people. 
Therefore on that ground the Hon. Member cannot claim a right to speak. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : No. Sir, He has made incorrect statements. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then the Hon. Member must have brought 
it to my notice. We cannot start an argument over every matter. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva : Have I no right to speak on this Bill ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Every Member has a right to speak, I have 
absolutely no doubt about it. Only time does not seem to permit. 

* Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand (East Punjab : General): Sir, the debate 
on the Bill has gone on for several days. Both sides of the question have 
been put before you. I do not want to repeat the arguments which have 
been given on the one side or the other. I have only two submissions 
to make, one to the supporters of the Bill and one to opponents of the 
Bill and after that I have to place one suggestion for consideration of 
the House for such changes as I think should be made in the Bill to 
make it acceptable to all or at any rate to a large part of the House 
and also of the country. I will ask the indulgence of the House therefore 
for a few minutes to permit me to place my views before it. 

The first suggestion that I have to make to the opponents of the 
Bill is this. They say that this House is not competent to touch the 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 585-99. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


708 


708 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


provisions of Hindu law, because it is a matter of a time honoured religion 
which has come to us through centuries and that it is only a Pandit 
Parishad which will be competent to effect any change. I submit with 
great humility that is a position which cannot be accepted for a single 
minute. Hindu law, as has been pointed out by Sir Alladi Krishanaswami 
Ayyar and others, has never been static. It has changed from time to 
time. Each time when the structure of society changed a smritikar 
appeared — a sage, a rishi, a muni — and he made such modifications as 
were suited to the times. This process went on for centuries until the 
country came under British rule. During this period, the only changes 
that could be made in the law were either by judges who were to interpret 
the law or by the legislature. No new sage could appear with the 
authority of a Manu or a Yagnavalkya or a Viswamitra. Either the judges 
who were duty bound to interpret the law as they found it in the smritis 
or nibandas could interpret it or the legislature had to intervene. It is 
idle therefore to contend in the year 1949 that the legislature is not 
competent because it consists of all types of people who are not learned 
in the smritis. That is a argument which I submit, should be rejected 
forthwith. If you see the course of events that the legislatures of this 
country have followed for more than a century, you will find that 
whenever it was found that the Hindu law or any branch of it was found 
to be defective, legislation was introduced. It began with the Removal 
of Sati Act in 1829 under the guidance of late Ram Mohan Roy The 
custom of sati which was considered to be a part of Hindu religion, but 
which was not really a part of it and which was an abuse, if I may 
say so, of the principles of religion, had to be done away with and for 
that purpose legislation was introduced as far back as 1829. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is too much of whispering going on. 
The reporters are unable to take notes. I am also not able to hear. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : The Speaker’s voice is indistinct. 
He has got two mikes close to each other. We do not hear him properly 
either. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He is speaking before the phone. Each seat 
has been converted into a small phone. What am I to do? 

The Honourable Member will kindly resume after Lunch. The House 
is adjourned till 2.30 p.m. 

Shri A. Thanu Pillai (United State of Travancore and Cochin): May 
I make a suggestion ? (Interruption). My point is this. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


709 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 709 


Some Honourable Members : The House has already been 
adjourned. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : You are late. The House has already been 
adjourned 

Shri A. Thanu Pillai : I am sorry. I did not know. 

The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the 
Clock 


The Assembly re-assembled after lunch at Half Past Two of the Clock, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) in the Chair. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Sir, when the House rose, I was referring 
to the Acts passed in 1829 under the inspiration of Shri Ram Mohan 
Roy for the abolition of sati. Now as we all know, it was argued at that 
time that sati was a part of Hindu religion. It was said that sati was 
one of the essential features of our dharma and any interference with 
it would be an attack on Hindu religion. But the sense of the community 
prevailed, the law was passed and sati ceased to exist. This custom, as 
I was saying, was not a part of Hindu law. It was an innovation which 
has been introduced during the, what are called dark ages, or the 
medieval ages. Luckily that was removed by legislative enactment. 

After that we had the 1850 Act for the removal of class disabilities 
so far as inheritance was concerned. If a person or the heir changed 
his religion the right of succession was not affected. That was the second 
great change that was made in Hindu law. Then came another very great 
reform in 1856 when the Widow Re-marriage Act was passed. For 
centuries it was believed that the Hindu religion did not permit the re- 
marriage of widows. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : May I know. Sir, if the Treasury Benches are 
represented. 

The Honourable Shri K. C. Neogy (Minister of Commerce): 
Government is one and indivisible and so long as there is one Minister 
present I think he is competent to represent the whole Government. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think it is always a healthy ambition for 
Members on the other side to come and sit over this side. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : As I was saying, widow re-marriage 
was considered to be an essential feature of Hindu religion and any 
suggestion to repeal that law or to enact a permissible legislation which 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


710 


710 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


would enable a widow to remarry was opposed tooth and nail. But under 
the leadership of Shri Ishwar Chandra Vidya Sagar and other leaders 
of that day public opinion asserted itself and this great disability under 
which Hindu women suffered was removed by another piece of legislation. 
Well, the Hindu religion did not come to an end by the enactment of 
that legislation. 

After that there have been numerous other Acts by which Hindu law 
has been modified by the Parliament or the Legislative Assembly of the 
day. Most of you will remember the great agitation which took place 
in 1890 and 1891 when the age of Consent Bill was introduced. At that 
time the cry was raised that it would be a gross interference with the 
Hindu religion if a legislature consisting of Hindus, Muslims, Christians 
and dominated by bureaucrats were to legislate in regard to a custom 
which permitted intercourse with a child wife below the age of twelve. 
If you have a recollection of what appeared in the papers, even advance 
papers like the Amrit Bazar Patrika, you will see in what kind of 
convulsion the Hindu society was at that time. But again the legislators 
persisted and that Bill was passed a Bill which ultimately has culminated 
in the last session by almost unanimous vote of the House in the further 
amending Bill which our friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava introduced 
and which if I remember aright was unanimously passed by all sides 
of the House. At that time none of our friends thought that this Assembly 
was not competent to legislate with regard to a matter which was 
considered to be an essential part of the Hindu religion. Coming to more 
recent times, you will find that in 1916 the Indian Legislature passed 
what is called the Dispensation of Property Act, an Act which has had 
the effect of repealing the law which has been laid down by Privy Council 
in what is known as Tagore versus Tagor case. In that case, following 
certain texts of the Smritis the Privy Council had ruled that behests 
or gifts in favour of a class of persons who are unborn on the date of 
the gift were void according to Hindu Law. That had continued to be 
the law for about sixty or seventy years. It had been suggested that that 
was a wrong interpretation of the texts. The matter was examined and 
it was found that certain texts according to their literal meaning could 
only lead to the conclusion at which the Privy Council had arrived. This 
was found to be a great handicap and a great injustice. Therefore the 
legislature again intervened and by a unanimous vote of the House, it 
passed that Bill in 1916. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


711 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 711 


After that came what is called the Removal of Disabilities Bill. Under 
certain texts of Hindu Law as enunciated by some of the Smritis if a 
person was suffering from a physical disability, if he was blind, if he 
was deaf and dumb he was not entitled to inheritance. Many people 
thought that whatever the meaning of the texts might be, this was a 
great hardship. If out of five sons, one was deaf or was blind or suffered 
from some other disability, it was more necessary in his case that he 
should get a share in the father’s patrimony rather than the persons 
who are physically fit and capable of earning. Well, that text might have 
been of some validity or of some utility at a time when in ancient times 
the structure of society was such that in order to increase the family 
wealth it was necessary that all should work. It had become obsolete 
and the Hindu community revolted against it and the agitation was such 
that the Indian Legislature passed this Act in 1928 after which persons 
suffering from physical defects were allowed to inherit in the same way 
as persons who were physically sound. This was another inroad into 
Hindu Law. 

Then came another and very important Act, Act II of 1929 by which 
certain classes of people, who till that time had been ruled by the courts 
as not entitled to succeed to property, were allowed to succeed. According 
to the text of the Mitakshara school, it had been ruled by the courts 
in India and ultimately by the Privy Council that there were only five 
classes of females who were entitled to succeed, because these five were 
mentioned in Mitakshara. The Bombay school was of opinion that this 
list was not exhaustive but it was only illustrative and the great 
commentator Nil Kantha and his followers held this practice was due 
to a wrong interpretation of the Mitakshara in Northern India. Well, 
a Bill was introduced in this Assembly and after a great deal of 
deliberation that Bill was passed and the daughter, the sister and the 
sister’s son and so on were all included in the list of heirs. That again 
was a great change in the structure of Hindu Law particularly in 
Northern India. 

You are all aware of the Sarada Act. I will not repeat that. At that 
time also it was argued and argued seriously in this House also that 
fixing a minimum limit for marriage was an interference with Hindu 
religion. Well, the opposition did not succeed and the legislature persisted 
and the Bill was ultimately passed. 

After that, we have had what is known as the Deshmukh Bill. That 
Bill of 1937 had a great effect : it effected a very great change in 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


712 


712 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Hindu Law of succession. In areas governed by Mitakshara school, when 
there was a joint Hindu family after the death of one co-sharer, if he 
left no son the widow was not entitled to any share. She was dependent 
upon the brothers-in-law or the husband’s father and the other coparcener, 
dependent entirely upon their mercy for their maintenance. She was to 
receive only food and clothing and nothing else; mere maintenance only. 
Under that law it was enacted that childless widows would be entitled 
to the same share of the property as her husband would be entitled to 
and if she so liked, she could even ask for the property to be partitioned. 
It was held at the time that Hindu women in a joint family being entitled 
to sue for partition was considered to be repugnant to the fundamental 
principles of the Hindu Law, but the Legislature again made this change, 
a change which was warranted by the changing times, by the rising 
consciousness not only among women but among the men in this country, 
among Hindus who wanted that this should be done to their sisters and 
mothers. Now, at that time also there was a great deal of stir in the 
country but ultimately that stir also died down. Twelve years have passed 
and we cannot say that Hindu society in any way has crumbled to pieces 
or that Hindu religion has been attacked in a very vital matter so that 
it is now going to pieces. 

I come now to more recent times. In 1946, shortly before the present 
Assembly came into existence, a Bill permitted marriages among sagotras 
was passed by this Legislature. That Bill did not interfere with the 
prohibited degrees. Even though persons were living in different parts 
of the country and did not belong to the same caste, yet because they 
belonged to the same Gotra according to some technical meaning of the 
texts, the marriages could be invalidated, Such marriages, even though 
performed in several parts of the country, their validity was in doubt. 
That was again an enabling measure which was passed in 1946 and to 
which no serious objection has been taken. 

Now, I would ask Hon. Members to bear in mind what we did in 
the last April session of this Assembly. My esteemed friend, Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava brought a very simple Bill consisting of one 
section only, but a Bill which was of a most far-reaching and 
important character. By that Bill it was enacted that notwithstanding 
any text of Hindu law or any custom or usage having the force of 
law to the contrary, a marriage between various castes of Hindus would 
be deemed to have been validly made. That was a very great step, a 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


713 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 713 


step which permitted inter-caste marriages and which removed such 
restrictions as one must marry either in his own sub-caste or, at any 
rate in his caste. That was the measure which was passed by this House 
unanimously, and so far as I remember at the consideration stage the 
only voice raised against it was that of Dr. Ambedkar. All other Members 
orthodox and un-orthodox, person governed by Dayabhaga, Mitakshara, 
by the Mayukha, person governed by tribal customs and everybody 
supported the Bill. Dr. Ambedkar : of course accepted it on a very 
narrrow ground. He was entirely in favour of the principle of the Bill 
but he thought that as this Hindu Code which was a very embracive 
measure was before the Assembly and therefore we should have a 
comprehensive measure that was a very technical type of objection. 
Otherwise we all unanimously supported that Bill and it came sometime 
late at the end of April. Now I will ask my orthodox friends who say 
that Hindu Dharma is in danger as to what has become of that. We 
were saying when the Constitution was under consideration that we want 
to have a classless and a casteless society. That is contrary to certain 
texts of Hindu law which have been in force in various parts of the 
country for centuries, but still the Bill was enacted and it is a part of 
the law of the land. At that time, if I may be permitted to say so, nobody 
took an objection that this House was not competent to deal with it 
because it had been elected only for the purpose of framing the 
Constitution or for the purpose of carrying on the day to day 
administration. Abolition of caste system in the matter of marriages was 
surely not part of the day to day administration of the country. It was 
a very vital and a very material and a very substantial change in Hindu 
law of marriage, the law which prevails in some form or another in 
all the Schools from Kashmir to Kanya Kumari and from Bengal to 
Gujarat but we all did it with open eyes when the Bill was passed 
and Mr. Munshi who was here at that time said that the Bill was 
a far-reaching one, though the Bill is a very short one; it is a very 
big change and a very important change. The whole House cheered 
him at that, I will ask my orthodox friends, the opponents of 
the Bill where was their regard and their enthusiasm for Hindu 
Law or Hindu Dharma at that time? I submit, therefore with great 
deference to my orthodox friends that this cry which is being 
raised, that this Bill which is now before the House is all attack 
upon the Hindu religion that the foundations of the Hindu 
religion will be undermined, that the whole fabric of Hindu society 
and Hindu culture will crumble to pieces or that this House is not 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


714 


714 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


competent to enact a measure of this kind simply because it does not 
have many learned pandits or that the Members who are here were not 
elected for a specific purpose. I submit with the due deference that there 
is no force in this objection and I would most respectfully ask my 
orthodox friends to consider the history of the legislation which I had 
placed before them the various measures which we ourselves have passed 
in recent times and to consider that they might attack the Bill upon 
other grounds, but to say that this House is not competent either being 
merely a legislative assembly or that we have got no mandate of the 
country to look into this measure to enact or consider it and pass it, 
I submit with very great deference that that argument is not sound. 
I will ask them to examine the Bill upon its merits to accept it or to 
throw it out. It is one thing to say that the Bill has not been sufficiently 
considered; it is one thing to say that there are provisions in the Bill 
which require further discussion and examination; it is one thing to say 
that the bill requires to be re-cast in certain matters. Even today as 
I suggested and as Sir B. N. Rau in his original report of the Committee 
said perhaps it will be advisable to take this reform of Hindu law in 
parts. I can quite understand that, but when every morning — I hope I 
will be pardoned for saying so — every mail has been bringing in letters 
during these months, letters and reprints from speeches delivered by 
persons, resolutions passed by the Dharma Sangh and this society and 
that society, all giving the opinion of this great man and that great man 
and saying that this Assembly is not competent to deal with them : I 
with the greatest deference and in all humility submit that that is neither 
correct nor logical nor reasonable, and therefore, I would submit to my 
friends, the opponents of the Bill not to press those arguments but to 
look at the Bill very reasonably, rationally and with a proper point of 
view. 

That was my submission to my orthodox friends and now I may be 
permitted to say a word to our friends, the supporters of the Bill. 

Shri H, V. Kamath : Are they heterodox or orthodox? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Well let everbody decide it for himself. 
Now the position is that this Bill was introduced. It had as we know 
a very brief discussion at the first stage. When we met in the Select 
Committee we were given only six days to consider this important 
Bill and when certain objections were raised by Members of the 
Committee to some parts of the Bill, we were told that the principle 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


715 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 715 


of this proposal goes against the fundamental principles of the Bill which 
have been accepted by the House when it passed the first reading and 
therefore, we the Members of the Select Committee who wished to move 
amendments to those vital matters are out of court and we were out 
of order. We submitted to the ruling and we had only six days to discuss 
this Bill in the heat of July and we did the best that we could under 
the circumstances within the short time at our disposal and within the 
narrow limits which were laid down by the Hon. Law Minister at that 
time. That was not only the Law Minister, but there were certain 
enthusiastic Members of the Select Committee who thought : “Well now 
is the time we have got this Bill; let us push it through in this very 
session and before the month of October or November arrives, it will 
be a part of the Statute Book.” Several objections and several arguments 
were given : ‘Let us wait for a few months.’ Ultimately the Select 
Committee decided to proceed with it on a majority of two. 

Things have gone in such a way that within one month this Bill could 
not be put on the Statute Book. Things have dragged on due to 
circumstances much beyond the control of us, beyond the control 
3 p M of the majority of the select Committee. One point which 

I raised in the Select Committee and one which I also dwelt 
at some length in my note of dissent and which I ask the permission 
of the House to repeat was that this Bill is a very half hearted, and 
a very, if I may say so, a very truncated measure. I fully endorse the 
view and I have no hesitation in repeating it, that the time has come 
when we must give full rights to our sisters and our daughters; that 
is to say, the time has come when we cannot allow the old texts to 
continue, or their interpretations which have been given by the British 
Courts that a woman has not got a full estate, that a woman is not 
entitled to succeed to this type of property or to that type of property 
and so on and so forth that must go. In the first place I maintain, and 
I have always maintained it that all that is against our original Hindu 
law. I maintain and I hope to show; if the Hon. Deputy Speaker will 
permit me a few more minutes, that this theory that a woman’s estate 
is limited is a creature, a creation of the British Indian Courts. It 
is not countenanced, not supported by the Mitakshara law not by the 
Mayukha nor by the Smritis. All that must be done away with 
But in order to do that, what shall we do? I suggested that some 
changes should be made in the Bill, that we must look at it from 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


716 


716 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


another angle which will give woman a higher status than we have got 
in the Bill; they said “No, we have got the Bill having the imprimature 
of Shri B. N. Rau and the authority of Dr. Ambedkar, and no change 
of a substantial nature can be made in it.” That was the attitude of the 
supporters of the Bill. If I may be pardoned for saying that, in the Select 
Committee and later on also, they have not been less fanatical than the 
opponents of the Bill. They say, “ Well there is the Bill, take it or leave 
it and reject it if you can. That is being repeated now after the declaration 
which the Prime Minister was pleased to make a few days ago, and which 
I know, must naturally, tie down most Members of the House in their 
vote.” 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Well, it will have an unconscious effect, 
even if permission is given to everybody to vote as he likes. Well, I ask 
the friends who are supporters of the Bill, I ask my sisters ‘ Does this 
Bill do you full justice? Is this all that you want? Does it give you the 
rights you want?’ I say, ‘no’; I say most emphatically, ‘no, it does not’. 
It is a most truncated and half-hearted measure, and if I may say so, 
it will do the maximum of mischief to Hindu society and the minimum 
of good to the members of the female sex. 

An Honourable Member : Are they agreeable to your solution? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : I do not know. Now I will deal with a 
few of the provisions of the Bill. One of the provisions of the Bill is 
that the chapters relating to succession, etc. will not apply to inheritance 
of agricultural land. Why? Because at that time when the Bill was 
introduced, the position was that under Entry 7 of the Seventh Schedule 
of the Government of India Act of 1935, this Legislature, the Indian 
Legislature could not pass any law relating to agricultural land, that 
was a provincial subject. Well, that was the position at that time. 
In 1938, Dr. Deshmukh’s Bill was extended to include agricultural 
land also. The matter went then before the Federal Court and the 
Federal Court agreed that this was ultra vires of the Indian Legislature. 
That was the decision of the Court and that was the provision of 
the Government of India Act, 1935. And therefore naturally, Sir 
B. N. Rau and the Committee, as well as Dr. Ambedkar and his Law 
department omitted it and they said this is a matter which will have 
to be left to each Provincial Legislature to deal with. But luckily, 
by that time, the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly 
had published its Draft Constitution. In that Draft Constitution it has 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


717 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 717 


been stated that Entry ? in the Seventh Schedule be amended so as to 
include or rather to make the subject a concurrent subject, namely, the 
subject of succession to immovable property or movable property, 
including agricultural land. That was the provision. I suggested at that 
time, in my minute of dissent, both in the Select Committee and in my 
minute of dissent, that we might wait for a few months so that whatever 
measure we adopt to give redress to females, giving them a share in 
their father’s or husband’s property that that might apply to all kinds 
of properties. What you want is unformity of law, and I venture to point 
out that instead of uniformity, you will have diversity, and instead of 
unity, you will have confusion. If this provision had been passed, the 
position would have been, when a man’s immovable property is situated 
in a town, when he has urban property, to that movable property one 
law, namely the law of Dr. Ambedkar’s court but with regard to 
agricultural land situated, some three miles off, the old law will continue. 
The sons will have all the rights from the moment of their birth and 
the rule of survivorship will remain, and nobody will know what is the 
position with regard to the property. See how many loopholes you are 
leaving? If you do not want to give the property to your daughter, you 
can sell her share in Poona and go and buy agricultural land five miles 
outside and then you can deprive your daughter of her share, and thus 
circumvent the provisions of the Bill. But now luckily, what has 
happened? To-day when we are at the end of this first of the second 
reading of this Bill, the situation is this. The suggestion of Dr. Ambedkar 
and the Drafting Committee has been unanimously accepted by the 
Constituent Assembly and it will, God willing, come into force on the 
26th January which will be long before the third reading of this Bill. 
I asked the other day whether he is going to make a change now so 
that this particular clause in the Bill which excludes agricultural land 
be removed so that we might give one fourth or half or full share or 
no share, and he said, “No.” 

The Honourable Dr, B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think the Hon. 
Member is entitled to disclose a conversation. All I said was that that 
was my present view : later on we may reconsider the position, Now 
that we have power, one of the impediments in our way had been 
removed. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : I am very glad that my learned friend 
has corrected me. I am much thankful to him for the correction, that 
his present intention is not to repeal that clause, but to retain the 
distinction but later on... 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


718 


718 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not said anything 
like that at all. I do not think my friend is entitled to use a conversation. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : No conversation, but what you have said 
now on the floor of the House. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : These are matters which 
I alone cannot decide. I have to take the consent of my colleagues. 

Mr. Deputy speaker : The Hon. Member may go on with the Bill 
as it is, saying that the Bill as it is does not provide for agricultural 
land. He need not refer to private conversations. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Take the Bill as it is. Whether the change 
will be made now or later with the consent of the Cabinet or other parties 
is a different matter. But what is the position now. Agricultural land 
is being excluded. Agricultural land forms more than 80 per cent of the 
property of Hindus in any part of the country. Therefore our sisters, 
daughters and other female relations are excluded under this Bill from 
succession to a very large portion of property. That is another reason 
for which it is necessary to reconsider the Bill and not to proceed with 
it in its present form. Whatever law you may have, you should apply 
it to all property — agricultural, urban, movable or immovable. 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma (U. P. : General): If my Hon. friend will 
give away for a minute I would like to know, whether, if this law is 
applied to agricultural property also, it will not lead to veritable 
fragmentation of land. (Interruption.) 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let there be no interruptions. The closure 
may come in at any time and I am giving a warning to the House in 
advance. The less the interruptions the greater is the chance for a larger 
number of speakers to take part. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : With regard to fragmentation I am not 
afraid of it. It is bound to come about if you have a larger number of 
heirs. If a man has five sons, there is bound to be fragmentation and 
if he has two daughters also there will be more fragmentation. I am 
not afraid of fragmentation whether with regard to immovable or urban 
property also. If you have one or two houses, two sons and five daughters 
and they decide to divide the property, there is bound to be fragmentation. 
Therefore, with great deference to both parties this argument is wholly 
extraneous and should be left out of consideration. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


719 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 719 


Under this Bill more than 80 per cent of the property is being excluded. 
That is one serious drawback from the point of view of reform. 

One of the objections raised is this. A man may have a house and 
a small bit of land. Some of the villagers have a kutcha shop also. There 
will be so many divisions and the son-in-law will be introduced into the 
family. Some supporters of the Bill say that it is a reasonable objection 
and therefore we must introduce a clause at the third reading by which 
the dwelling house of the family will be excluded from succession. That 
is to say, the daughter though she will be entitled to succession, will 
not get a share in the dwelling house. If that is so that will reduce the 
urban property still more. Out of the 30 crores of Hindus, except a few 
rich people, how many possess more than one dwelling house in which 
the whole family lives? Normally in the villages it is one house and a 
piece of land. If a trader he has a small kutcha shop also. If you exclude 
the dwelling house from the inheritance of the daughter, you take out 
another slice from the property. 

Another objection is that the sons-in-law will be introduced, and what 
might happen in most cases is that they will create trouble and since 
they could not manage the property in another village, they will arrange 
to sell it to some local person. That will lead to the disruption of the 
family. To meet that, suggestions are being made that the daughter will 
no doubt get a share but only its money value. You must then give to 
the brothers a right of pre-emption within one or two years of the 
marriage; the brothers will be entitled to pay to the sister or her husband 
the money value of the share and keep the property. That again, I submit, 
will lead to great trouble. It will be difficult to ascertain the market 
value of the property and this will lead to endless litigation and confer 
little on the daughter. Agricultural land is excluded, dwelling houses are 
excluded and various other things will come in. It may be said that the 
whole share is too much, give her a half or a quarter share, I ask why 
not give her a full share? 

If you analyse the Bill calmly and quietly and not take as smriti which 
has come down from the Heavens, it will be found that it does not give 
the minimum of benefit to the female heirs. 

This Bill will destroy the Hindu joint family. Whether, it is good or 
bad, people still cling to it. Yesterday our revered brother Mr. Alladi 
Krishnaswami Ayyar pointed out that in the villages in Madras it is 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


720 


720 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


still in force. My friend Mr. Santhanam may take another view. But it 
is there. Yet it is there and has a hold on some people, whatever might 
their proportion. All other principles of Hindu law such as survivorship, 
succession, the son having a share you are abolishing. What is the 
necessity? The necessity is to enable the daughter to get a share. I 
therefore submit that parts 5, 6 and 7 of the Bill introduce drastic 
changes in the Hindu family system and give the minimum benefit in 
its present from to the females. 

I would therefore ask the supporters of the Bill whether it is necessary 
to push the Bill to a final vote at this stage either tomorrow or in the 
next session. Is it not desirable to give the matter more consideration 
and to see whether there is any other way of securing full benefit to 
the female members of a joint Hindu family, whether they are governed 
by Mitakshara or Dayabhaga and at the same time causing the least 
disturbance to the systems that prevail in various parts of the country. 

I have made my submissions both to the orthodox and reformer friends. 
I have to make only one suggestion. I have not worked out the scheme 
in my mind, it will take a lot of time. But I shall place before the House 
the broad outlines of it. And I will ask Dr. Ambedkar, I will ask the 
other legal Members, I will ask the reforming Members, I will ask the 
orthodox Members to see whether that is not an alternative worth 
considering. In fact, up to this morning I was hesitating to speak on 
the subject and my view was to place it before the Committee which, 
it has been promised, will be meeting shortly and I had intended if I 
am a member of that Committee to place it there. But when I was called 
upon to speak to day I thought the best course was to place it before 
the House. My suggestion is this. 

What is our objective? Our objective is to give to the female 
members of our family full right in the property. What we should 
do therefore is this. Do not disturb the joint family. Do not overrule 
the law of survivorship. Let them continue as they are as long as 
they can. But a woman, as soon as she is married, should in the 
Mitakshara family become a full co-parcener in that property. At 
present she is a member of a joint family but not a member of the 
co-parcenary. I will ask hon. Members to permit me for three minutes 
just to place my proposal before them and then to consider it. Any 
interruption on that point will not help. It is only a proposal for your 
consideration, for the consideration of the Committee and for the 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


721 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 721 


consideration of the Law Minister and the Prime Minister and others 
who may be interested in this matter. At present every woman after 
her marriage passes into the gotra of the husband, and she becomes a 
member of the joint family but with very limited rights. Up till 1937, 
her rights as given by the British Indian courts were those of maintenance 
only. She had no legal right in the property, she could only stay and 
enjoy it. 

That was the position. In 1937 came the Deshmukh Act that on the 
husband’s death she will be entitled to a share of the property — the same 
share as the husband — and also entitled to have her share separated 
if she could not pull on with the brothers-in-law or other members of 
the family. What I am suggesting is this. Add to that, only one thing 
namely that she will become a full co-parcener. Just as in the Mitakshara 
family, the moment a son is born he acquires the right in the father’s 
ancestral property and from the moment of this birth becomes a co-sharer 
or co-parcener, similarly let a woman from the moment of her marriage 
become a co-parcener, with full rights. There may be her own sons and 
others. They will all continue to live together without any necessity to 
separate, But if she thinks that it is not possible to live together with 
them she can separate her share and take it way — separate it in the 
same manner as she can do under the 1937 Act after the death of her 
husband. That is one change. If you do that you will not disturb the 
father’s property and you will not disturb the joint family. Let the joint 
family continue as long as it can. Somebody said it was crumbling. 
Somebody said it was Cruimbling only for the purpose of Income-tax. 
Others asked as to how many people pay Income-tax and said that 99.5 
per cent, of the Hindu population does not pay Income-tax still they have 
the joint family system. These arguments mean nothing. If these are 
the circumstances under which the joint family is crumbling, let it 
crumble. But let it continue for as long as it can. 

What I am suggesting is not something new or something which 
is against the spirit of Hindu Law. If I may say so, it is in accordance 
with the spirit of the original law — the law of the Veda, the law as 
given in the early Shastra by Jaimini and others. I do not want to 
prolong my speech. But I would like to state what the position was 
in Vedic times and in times which shortly followed. You please 
read certain portions in Dwarkanath Mitter’s book published in 1913 
on “the position of women in Hindu Law”. You also please read 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


722 


722 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


in Volume XI of the Allahabad Law Journal a very learned article by 
the late Dr. Satish Chandra Banerjee of Allahabad, one of the most 
promising and most eminent lawyers that this country had produced but 
whose career was unfortunately cut short by his death at a very early 
age. It is a very elaborate article. Also the book of Dr. K. Biswas of 
Patna. All these contain quotations from the Vedas and other persons 
who came in before Manu as to what the position of women at that time 
was. The position of the women at that time was that, she was a full 
owner of the property of the husband. Maharishi Jaimni says, commenting 
on the Vedic texts, that “the wife is entitled to the wealth from the 
moment of her marriage and whatever is acquired by the husband also 
belongs to her.” That is to say she becomes a full co-parcener. Then, 
dealing with another text, he says “Not only is the woman possessed 
of the same religious and civil rights as man but all wealth which he 
(that is the husband) acquires is at her disposal. She is entitled to control 
even the disposition of acquired property by the husband” — his own 
acquired property. That is the conception of a co-parcener which we had. 
Just as a son from the moment of his birth gets a share and can control 
the father’s alienations, unless they are for family necessities or for just 
purposes, similarly should the woman have the right from the time of 
her marriage. My submission is, let us go back to these old Vedic texts 
and all our Hindu law and its glory before the period of degradation 
began and the rights of women came to be curtailed, and let us make 
her a co-parcener. That is one branch of my suggestion. 

The other branch of my suggestion is the one which Sir Alladi 
Krishnaswami Ayyar made yesterday that a woman should have full right 
to alienate her property and this fiction of a Hindu widow’s status must 
be done away with. With regard to that I would ask the indulgence of 
the House for two minutes. All my friends who are opposing the Bill 
say “we want to go to the Shastra”. We don’t want to go beyond the 
Shastras, particularly the Mitakshara which was followed by the 
country. With the exception of Bengal the whole country has followed 
it. What was the law of Mitakshara on this point ? I would ask you 
to look to Vijnaneshwar, Chapter II, Section 11 verses 2 and 4 of 
his commentary on Yagnavalkya as to what is a woman’s stridhan. 
After quoting certain things, that is whatever is given by way of 
presents to the woman at the time of marriage — which is not 
important — he says: “And in addition to that, the stridhan consists 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


723 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 723 


of all property obtained by inheritance by partition, by seizure (that is 
by adverse possession)” and so on. That is to say, the property inherited 
by the woman from her husband or from her father or anybody else ought 

to be her full absolute property and nobody can control it. This was the 

law laid down by Vijnaneshwar in the 11th Century. That had continued 
to be law until the British came. Another commentator of the Banaras 
school N. S. Viramatadhira repeats it. Nilakantha, the author of 
Mayukha which is the leading authority in the Bombay Province, 
particularly in Gujarat and the Island of Bombay again repeats it. Except 
in Bengal in every other Province, that was the law until the British 
came. When the British came they said. “Well, let us examine the original 
texts of Mitakshard’ . They said it was a commentary upon Yajnavalkya. 
Yajnavalkya used certain specific notes and used the word adi and adi 
is interpreted by Vijnaneshwar in this manner. That was the position. 

A great deal of struggle went on. Of course some Courts struggled, 

particularly Madras, for a number of years. But ultimately the Privy 
Council said, “Well we must do it”, though it was quite contrary to the 
rule which the Privy Council itself had laid down that if there was a 
difference between the Smritikar and the commentary we must follow 
the commentator. That was the rule they laid down, but somehow or 
other they departed from it here. 

So, I say, go back to the Vedic position with regard to the position of 
a daughter’s and a husband’s family, and go back to the position of 
Mitakshara. Tear off all this mass of judicial literature which has arisen 
in this country during all this period and go back to what was the law up 
to the eighteenth century. If you do these two things, I tell my friends, the 
supporters of the Bill and those who want to reform, that you will be getting 
much more. If the woman becomes a co-parcener in a husband’s family. You 
don’t disturb the joint family; the sons may continue. There may be good 
things in it, there may be bad things, but let it crumble away and die its 
natural death later on. But give the woman a right in her husband’s property, 
the same right as the son or the husband has. There may be some further 
points to be considered as to how this property is to go after her death 
and so on, but these are details into which I won’t enter. I will ask Hon. 
Members to give this matter the most serious consideration and then to 
see whether this is not a scheme which is not much better. 

With regard to the unmarried daughter, I see no reason whatsoever 
why she should not get a full share along with the brothers in the 
father’s property, because no dowry has been given to her and she 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


724 


724 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


should not be made dependent. Some of my friends have been painting 
glowing pictures of the love which the brother has for the sister and 
how they take great efforts for the marriage of the sister. Quite true 
some people do it, many do it, but we know of cases also to the contrary 
where the brothers, particularly the brother’s wife corners the whole 
thing and very little is left by way of dowry to the sister particularly 
if she is going into a family which is not very strong and has not got 
much influence in the village. So, we must make provision for that also. 
May I say that there is considerable authority in the Shastras also for 
that. Some say her share should be one -fourth, some say equal, some 
say it should be one-half. I am not for half. Following the Mohammedan 
law : she must be given full. 

Shri B. L, Sondhi (East Punjab : General): For how long will the 
unmarried girl continue to enjoy the property? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Once property is vested, it vests and there 
is no question of divesting it. After all it won’t create much disturbance 
in the family. We must make some provision; we can see that adjustments 
are made later on. 

A word regarding the Chapter relating to marriage and the Chapter 
on divorce. My objection to this portion of the Bill is a very simple one. 
The first part of the Chapter deals with monogamy and I am a whole- 
hearted supporter of the provision that every Hindu should marry once 
only and not more than that. The majority of our people do that. 

Shri H. V. Kamath : Once or not at all. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : All the arguments that there is no son 
etc., are of no use. Where is the guarantee that if you marry three wives 
one after another, one of them will produce a son? It is all a matter 
of chance. Therefore that is an argument which does not appeal to me 
in the least. As a matter of fact and as a matter of practice the large 
majority of Hindus have only one wife and I see no reason why that 
provision should not be put in here. 

Shri Lakshminaran Sahu : In Utkal there is an excess of three lakhs 
of women. If you start talking of one for one, I should like to know where 
would you provide for the three lakh extras ? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : Here again religion has been brought in. 
In Baroda, in 1931 the Monogamy and Divorce Bill was passed by 
a legislature 95 per cent of the members of which were Hindus, under 
the aegis of a Maharaja who was an orthodox Hindu. For nineteen 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


725 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 725 


years that Bill has been in force. Can we say that Hinduism in Baroda 
has come to an end because of that Bill? In Bombay Mrs. Munshi’s Bill 
was passed in 1946 and became a part of the law of the land. In Madras, 
last year, the Madras Legislature passed a similar Bill. Thus, we have 
got practically the whole of South India where monogamy is a law of 
the land. Hinduism there has not been destroyed. All our Madras friends 
are as strong and as kicking as they ever were. Therefore, I consider 
this provision is a very salutary one and must be maintained. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : If you, Sir, permit I should like 
to ask one or two questions for information sake. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He does not give in. 

Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt : Whatever you have said about 
monogamy is quite true but what I want to ask is whether a man is 
permitted to remarry in the life time of his first wife if she consents 
to such marriage? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : I am very glad, our respectable brother 
Gokulbhaiji has put that question. I say that you can get a woman’s 
consent in any way you like. I have seen notorious cases of that. In one 
case there was an old man and an old woman. A very learned pandit, 
an astrologer was brought in and after performing all the pujahs he said 
to the woman. “Your husband is going to die during the course of the 
next three months; the only remedy against that is that he should 
remarry and if he marries again he will have a son” and all that. And 
that old lady, thinking that this great calamity was coming upon her, 
gave her consent, Now of course, there is not only one woman but five 
women in that house. (Interruption.) 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. The Hon. Member has been 
anxious to sit down for the past half an hour but on account of the 
frequent questions he has to go on. 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : I come to the last point, the question of 
divorce. One of the great mistakes which have been made in this Bill 
is to make the provisions for the dissolution of civil marriages similar 
to the provisions for the dissolution of sacramental marriages. In this 
respect, the Bill as now reported by the Select Committee differs from 
the Bill which was orginally framed by Sir B. N. Rau’s Committee 
in 1944 and then revised by him in 1945. What I say is so far as 
civil marriage is concerned you maintain the present law which 
gives the same rights as the Bill gives. But do not try to introduce 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


726 


726 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


provision for conversion of sacramental marriage into civil marriage. 
Sacrament is a sacrament. As has been originally suggested and as has 
been permitted by some of our old Smritikars, the rule of divorce should 
be limited within the narrowest possible bounds. With regard to this 
B. N. Rau’s position was this. 

Impotency at the time of the marriage which has continued up to the 
date of divorce. This is a condition to which no reasonable person can 
object. 

Then the person may have been an idiot and the fact may have been 
concealed. This is a second physical thing, which cannot be quarrelled 
with. 

In addition to these two conditions, you can allow divorce when a 
person changes religion. A Hindu may become a Muslim and marry. 
Under the fiction in the Hindu law, law that the marriage is indissoluble 
and the sacrament still continues, the wife is helpless. On what principle 
can you do that when the husband has changed his religion and gone 
to another and married wives according to his new religion? 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Would it not result in this that whenever a 
divorce is needed instead of undergoing the routine legal proceedings, 
people will change their religion? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : No, they won’t change their religion. In 
addition to the above conditions, you can add desertion of the woman 
for a certain period; call it five years, six years or seven years. These 
conditions are, I submit, nothing new. They were known to our ancient 
Smritikars. I feel that divorce should be limited to these three or four 
cases. Have we not seen cases in which the husband after marrying 
has abandoned his wife? Have these unfortunate women no remedy? 
They should have a remedy. But I would limit it to these three or 
four conditions. But do not introduce litigation. If it is a case of 
providing adultery, evidence can be faked. Some sort of collusive 
evidence can be produced and the charge proved. But I do want to 
introduce that in a sacramental marriage. My submission as in my 
minute of dissent is that the chapter relating to marriage and divorce 
should be recast. We have two kinds of Hindu marriages: the civil 
and the sacramental. In the one, you know the conditions under which 
it can be dissolved. In the other, you can have all your new modern 
ideas. I would ask the supporters of this Bill to give their serious 
consideration to it and see whether it improves the position of women. 
If my suggestions are accepted, it will make the present Bill much 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


727 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 727 


better and women will rise to the full stature of their womanhood. They 
will have full right to property. It will give them emancipation on the 
economic side. Under the new Constitution there is adult franchise. We 
have women Ministers in charge of different branches of Administration. 
We cannot limit the right of woman, the mistress of the house and say 
that she would be entitled only to maintenance but not other rights. That 
would be a gross injustice. It would be contrary to our ancient Laws. 
What was introduced in between might have suited the particular 
circumstances and conditions of those days, but they are all outworm. 
They are not part of the Hindu religion and should be done away with. 
We should get rid of this jungle growth and go back to Vedic conceptions. 
These are briefly my submissions and I would ask everybody to give them 
their serious consideration. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam (Minister of State for Transport 
and Railways) : May I ask one question in clarification? Supposing a 
woman becomes a co-parcener in her husband’s family ... will her share 
be part of the husband’s share or will it be separate? 

Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand : So long as they are joint, it will be joint 
ownership of the whole family just as you and your sons are co-parceners 
in the property; but if there is a division, then she will become 
independent. It is a new addition just as a son. It is very simple. 

An Honourable Member : Sir, the question may now be put. 

Some Honourable Members : No. no. 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani (U. P. : Muslim): I will take only five 
minutes. 

Some Honourable Members : rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. Will all Members kindly take 
their seats? I find a large number of Members interested in speaking, 
but as I said yesterday, if we go on at this rate, we may have no time 
even if we sit for a month or two months. There is no tendency on the 
part of Members to limit their speeches. This Hindu Code covers not 
only Hindus, Hindu law of marriage and customs but it applies to Jains 
and Sikhs also. It does not apply to Muslims, Christians and Parsis. 
(interruption). 

An Honourable Member : There are clauses which affect other 
people also. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members know fully well that when the 
Speaker is on his legs, no Member should get up. I need not remind 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


728 


728 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


hon. Members about that. I, therefore, propose to call a Member of Jain 
community and a member of Sikh community and then others. Prof. K. 
T. Shah. 

Shri H. J. Khandekar : (C. P. and Berar : General) : Why not the 
Harijans? 

Maulana Hasrat Mohani : rose. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not going to allow this Hon. Member 
to come in now I will first start with the others. 

The Honourable Shri Satyanarayan Sinha (Minister of State for 
Parliamentary Affairs) : I want to make one suggestion. If the House 
agrees, we can sit till 7 o’ clock today and even after that, if members 
are not satisfied and there are still others who want to speak we can 
sit on Saturday also. Government is prepared to allot half of Saturday 
for this business. There will be no Question Hour on Saturday and before 
Lunch we will have more than 2 X A hours. If that suits your purpose and 
if the House agrees, the House agrees, then that will obviate all the 
difficulties. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think it is a very reasonable proposal. I 
have already said the House will sit on Saturday. There is no going back 
upon that. If owing to exigencies of public business, it is necessary that 
we should sit on Saturday, heavens will not fall. We are sitting on 
Saturdays for committee meetings. I have requested the Government to 
cancel Select Committee meetings on that day. I shall also see that no 
Select Committee meetings are fixed for Saturday. Hon. Members will 
be relieved of all other parliamentary work so that they can take part 
in the discussion on the Hindu Code. 

The Hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs has just suggested, on 
behalf of Government, that they are willing to allot Saturday, which they 
had orginally intended for other Government business, for the 
discussion on Hindu Code. Finding that more Hon. Members are 
anxious to speak, they are prepared to allot Saturday, the forenoon 
of which will be earmarked for non-official Member and the afternoon, 
allotted to the Hon. Minister of Law for his reply. In addition, he 
makes another suggestion for the acceptance of the House. It is open 
to them to accept it or to reject it. In view of that there are many 
Hon. Members who are anxious to speak. We may sit till seven o’clock 
today. I leave it at 5 o’clock today, when I shall find out whether the 
House is tired or is still active to continue the discussion. Personally 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


729 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 729 


I and my friends of the panel of chairmen are prepared to sit till seven 
o’clock. I am entirely in the hands of the House in regard to this matter. 

The Honourable Shri Satyanarayan Sinha : Sir, I said on behalf 
of Government, that they are prepared to allot half of Saturday for the 
discussion on the Hindu Code Bill. But as you have already said that 
the whole of the day would be allotted for this purpose, Government 
will agree to that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I hope Government will accept the suggestion 
which I have made. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya (U. P. : General): Sir, I wish to submit 
to you in connection with your ruling, that on the assumption that 
Saturday will be a free day, some of us have made important and 
unavoidable engagements elsewhere. Speaking about myself, I have got 
some unavoidable and important engagement on that day. I hope, Sir, 
you will keep that fact also in mind. If we had known that Saturday 
would be a working day we would not have done that. Now this will 
be upsetting all our engagements, and I, therefore, request that instead 
of Saturday some other day might be fixed for the discussion of this 
important measure. It is open to the Government to do so easily. They 
can take up Government work on Saturday and allot some other day for 
the discussion of this measure. We will have no objection to that But I 
hope that the House will appreciate that if others who wish to take part 
in this debate, are not able to come on that day, they should be given some 
consideration. 

The Honourable Shri Satyanarayan Sinha : I think, Government 
will have no objection if Hon. Members wish to sit on Monday. On 
Saturday we shall take up other Government business. 

Shri Ajit Prasad Jain (U. P. : General): Why not continue tomorrow 
and finish the discussion on this Bill? 

The Honourable Shri Satyanarayan Sinha : On Saturday we are 
meeting for Transacting Government business. Government is prepared 
to have the discussion of this Bill put for Monday, but all the same 
Saturday will be an Official day. 

The Honourable Shri K. Santhanam : Members will have less time 
on Monday than on Saturday, But if the members are willing to conclude 
the debate on Monday we won’t have any objection. But if the postponement 
is due to dilatory tactics. . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am really sorry, our friends are not 
cooperating. A suggestion came from Pandit Govind Malaviya and some 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


730 


730 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


other Hon. Members — he is an important member and is taking keen 
interest in this Bill on one side or the other — that they would prefer 
this measure being taken up on any day other than Saturday and 
Government in consideration of their wishes was prepared to take it up 
on Monday. The Government spokesman has said so. Hon. Members are 
aware that on Monday there will be the question hour. Knowing this 
full well they have accepted that day. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Most respectfully I would like to 
point out to you, Sir, that Saturday is a holiday given to us for certain 
purposes. I am willing to forego that holiday if there is an important 
reason for it. Now I want to ask this House, is it convinced, is it willing 
to finish this Bill as early as possible? What is the urgency for this Bill? 
We have more important Bills. We have the Insurance Bill which, 
according to you, must be passed into law this session. If this Bill 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member will resume his seat. We 
have been hearing this objection from some Hon. Members that there 
is no hurry to get on with this Bill. I am afraid there is no unanimity 
of opinion in this House so far as that matter is concerned. If there was 
that unanimity we would not be thirsting for time like this. It is a well 
known fact that opinion on that point is divided. On the mere suggestion 
of one Hon. Member I do not want to take the opinion of this House. 

Now it is clear that Saturday will be an official day when official 
business other than the Hindu Code Bill will be transacted. On Monday 
I propose to allow the non-official members to speak till mid-day. In the 
afternoon I propose to call upon the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Several of us have been waiting long to catch 
your eye. Shall I take it as your ruling that, on the Hindu Code Bill 
no more Hindus shall be allowed to speak? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I did not say so; nor would I say so. The 
Hon. Member has, unfortunately, though he is very alert, misunderstood 
me. All that, I said was that, not one single Jain or Sikh member, to 
whom also this Bill equally applies, has spoken. 

Shri H. J. Khandekar : What about Harijans? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The sponsor of this Bill is the Leader of 
the Harijans. It is no good saying that the Harijans do not belong 
to the Hindu community. I think Harijans are as much Hindus as 
any others. This caste consciousness need not be pursued any further. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13WOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


731 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 731 


All that I said was that Jain and Sikh members will be given 
preference to other members. I have no intention of shutting out any 
others. 

As it stands at present, I find that the suggestion of the Government 
is very reasonable. They have spent so many days on the discussion 
4 p M of this Bill and have given one more day. If still on Monday, 

it is the general wish of the House that they should go on, 
I am absolutely in the hands of the House. So far as the Chair is 
concerned, it is satisfied that there has been sufficient discussion. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : I protest against this. I feel that the Chair’s 
benign eye should not make a distinction between any class, caste or 
creed. Your eye should go round the House without distinction of majority 
or minority. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member has thoroughly misunderstood 
me. Whenever a Bill comes up for discussion which affects certain 
communities — unfortunately there are different communities in this 
country — a chance should be given to the representatives of all communities 
to express their views. If the Hon. Member reads this Bill, he will find 
that the scope of the Bill includes Jains and Sikhs also. A number of 
Hindus have already spoken and so I must allow some Jains and Sikhs 
to speak now. We must know their viewpoints before we go through the 
Bill clause by clause. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : I protest 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I cannot tolerate this. The Hon. Member will 
kindly note that it is improper to use this language. 

* Prof. K. T. Shah (Bihar : General): Sir, originally when the Bill 
was first introduced and this motion came before the House, I had no 
great intention to intervenue in the debate. But now that the debate 
has proceeded so far and a variety of view have been placed before this 
House, now that there is freedom of voting from Party mandate, I feel 
it necessary to make some observations arising out of the motion, and 
of the Bill, which I trust, will receive the consideration of the Hon. the 
Law Minister and his colleagues. 

You Sir, have been pleased to say that I have been called upon 
as a Jain to speak on the matter. I stand here only as a member 
of the House, and can claim no special right or privilege to speak as 
a member of any community. I call myself only as Indian citizen and 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 602-607. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


732 


732 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


do not regard a belief in any particular faith a qualification or a 
disqualification for participating in discussions like this. I speak only 
as a member of this House. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : On a point of order, Sir, you called 
upon Prof. Shah to speak on behalf of the Jains but he says that he 
does not claim to represent the Jains. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is no point of order. ‘ 

Prof. K. T. Shah : I may also add at the same time that I am going 
to support in general the provisions underlying this Bill even though 
I happen to have tried to form an opposition which is not yet recognized. 
Coming though, as it does, from a member professing to be in the 
opposition, and coming also from one who has consistently opposed almost 
every provision of the Constitution, every attempt at legislation of a 
structural or reforming kind that this Government has made. I hope and 
trust that the support that I am now extending, unconditionally and 
unreservedly to Bill will meet with the appreciation that it deserves. 
Unless Government feel the wisdom of the old saving that the Devil may 
also quote the Scripture and that, therefore any support coming from 
me should be looked at askance, it should be welcome. If that is their 
view, the opposition to this Bill would be served much more effectively 
by me than I at least would like to wish. 

Holding this view, Sir, and offering my co-operation in this manner, 
I would like to say in all humility, with the utmost deference to this 
House, and even at the risk of incurring the charge that we as a people 
lack a sense of humor, I would not like to use any expression or 
illustrating which might in any way introduce a tone of levity or lightness 
in this discussion. I regard this matter, this subject, as so vital to the 
very existence of our country, I regard this Bill as of such far-reaching 
consequence that I will not allow any expression or illustration to creep 
into my remarks which might in any way give any observer, any outsider, 
any student of our affairs, an appearance as though we are not 
sufficiently serious in this matter. 

Having made these observations, I would proceed to examine some 
of the objections that have been raised some of the pleas that have 
been urged in regard to the subject matter or even the basic principle 
of the Bill. The challenge has been made, Sir, whether this body is 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


733 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 733 

competent to deal with a subject of this character, whether the House 
has been elected on a clear issue to determine the contents of this Bill, 
or whether there is sufficient urgency in this matter to allow this House 
to deal with this proposition. I for one do not think that there can or 
should be a question about the competence of this body to deal with 
subjects of this character. The Hon. Member, who spoke just before me, 
has given a number of illustrations in which structural changes including 
the Constitution had been proposed by legislative measures in this House 
and carried. Even more important reforms had been made by the 
legislature preceding this which was not of the same sovereign character 
that this Legislature is, and therefore the question as to the competence 
of this House to deal with matters of this character seems to me to be 
irrelevant, unbecoming and if I may say so, not quite respectful towards 
this Assembly, for while it is quite true that this single issue was not 
placed before the electors, those of us who recollect the manner and method 
by which we have been elected to this House will realize that not on any issue 
4PM WaS ^' s House elected except that of acquiring independence 

and shaping a constitution for the country. If you press that 
argument too far, I am afraid you will render many matters with which 
this House has dealt with as either illegal or ultra vires. I would not 
like therefore that any suggestion of this character can be or should be 
advanced so as to throw any doubt whatsoever, on the competence, the 
authority and correctness of this House in dealing with and disposing 
of such matters. 

Sir, in general elections also, it is not possible to have each issue 
separately examined. As all those, who have an experience of popular 
general elections, will realize general elections are always fought on a 
multiplicity of issues. There is therefore not any clear indication of 
a majority on any individual issue of such complexity as we are 
dealing with now. Unless the Constitution provides a method like 
referendum, unless we had a constitutional device like that suggested 
by Mr. Gokulbhai Bhatt, we would find it extremely difficult if not 
impossible, to get a clear verdict of the people on issues of this 
character. There would really be no means of ascertaining popular 
opinion. Even then there may be those who would say, given the state 
of public education in this country, given the state or the condition 
in which the press in the country is monopolized by a few individuals, 
given also the lack of experience of the voter in matters of this character, 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-14 MK Ms 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 


734 


734 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the decision of the people, even if competent, may be open to question. 
I would therefore suggest that an argument of this character ought not 
to influence the judgment of this House and we should confine ourselves 
to the discussion of the proposition, as I am happy to see in many 
quarters it has been. 

The opposition to the Bill is led and is made up of people for whose 
opinions, I have personally very warm regard. I am not, therefore, 
prepared to say that this is an opposition of vested interests, that this 
is an opposition inspired by ulterior motives or dictated by other 
considerations. I fully realize, Sir, that the opposition has in many cases 
very serious grounds for holding the views that they do, and though, 
I have the misfortune of differing from them, I cannot for that reason 
say that their views are not entitled to the widest consideration we can 
give them. On that standpoint, I feel that there is a great deal of force 
in the arguments of those who question the urgency of the matter and 
are prepared — if not differ discussion — at least take much more time 
on the discussion than seems likely to give to this matter, but by saying 
this, I should not be misunderstood I should not be understood to say, 
that I would like the matter to be indefinitely postponed. I should like 
this body whose sovereignty, I would not question, to give a decision 
on this matter once and for all, and though I am fully alive to the 
consideration advanced by one of the hon. speakers that there is no 
guarantee that the next House will accept the decision, even if we give 
it, I feel that once an indication is given, once a sign-post is erected, 
once a road is built, it would be difficult to reverse the engine and go 
back. However, that is a matter of faith rather than of reason, of general 
belief rather than of intellectual conviction, and I am therefore, open 
on this matter, altogether, but taking however into consideration the 
main points that have been urged against the merits of the provisions 
contained in the Bill, I feel it impossible to accord my support to the 
opponents of the several sections of the Bill, several chapters in the Bill, 
or the provisions in the Bill. The main difficulty centres round, so far 
as I can see on the position of women. I have already said Sir, that 
I have not the slightest desire to bring in the least bit of levity in this 
discussion, and therefore, some of the arguments, some of the points 
made earlier in this debate on this matter leave me somewhat cold. 
We are building up a country of equal citizens irrespective of religion, 
sex, class or creed. If that is the principle upon which we take our 
stand, if that is the preamble of our Constitution and the guiding 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


735 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 735 


principle of the life that we are to build up for this country hereafter 
then I think that the provisions of this Bill are in full conformity 
with the ideals enunciated in the preamble to the Constitution and 
as such, anything which we now propose, that would be in any way 
different from or derogatory of this provision, ought not to be accepted 
by us. The attempt made in this bill to place women on a position 
of equality in regard to family relationships, in regard to inheritance, 
in regard to property, in regard to marriage or divorce, is an attempt 
not only in consonance with conditions now prevailing all over the 
world and coming into vogue in our society as well, but are conditions, 
which in my opinion are dictated by a full realization of the actual 
conditions and observed trend of events everywhere. It is true that 
for ages past, marriage has been regarded as a sacrament, but there 
is nothing, so for as I can see in this Bill, to prevent anybody from 
realizing and treating it even today as a sacrament. After all, I 
venture to submit, sacrament is a mere matter of your own heart 
and creation than an imposition from outside. How many sacraments 
are there, which though continuing to be sacraments are daily broken, 
broken in the worst possible manner and disgrace, both the breakers 
and those who are parties to that? Sacraments cannot change merely 
because the law gives a particular character to the relationship of 
man and wife as is attempted to be in this Bill. Whether or not, the 
law declares and recognizes a union to be a civil marriage or a civil 
contract, those who are parties to such a union, who have a very 
highly idealized opinion of the nature and function and objects of such 
a union will not cease to continue to do so. If however, circumstances 
develop which make it impossible for them any longer to continue 
in that position, if conditions develop which make it impossible to 
maintain that high ideal. I for one think that it would be much better 
to discontinue the relationship by any legal and reasonable manner 
that can be found than to continue it to the mutual prejudice, to the 
continued misery of the parties concerned or the offspring. It is not 
a very pleasant matter, Sir, to suggest that there should be freedom 
for divorce if unions could be all made in the form in the ideal, in 
the spirit in which they were supposed to have been made, but we 
live in a mundane world, with material considerations, with human 
weaknesses and therefore, it is too much to expect that merely by 
an ordinance, merely by a fireman, we would continue to keep and 
maintain unions in the idealist sense in which they have been 
believed conceived and maintained. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


736 


736 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Permission, therefore to dissolve in a legal, reasonable public manner 
unions which have become oppressive, which have become a source of 
misery to the parties and their off-springs, is nothing more in my opinion 
that a recognition of the actual prevailing circumstances and the 
developments that may have in any given case taken place, and therefore, 
it is that even though one may not like the idea, one must recognize 
realities, one must face the actual position and admit that it is much 
better that we should discontinue or dissolve such unions than that we 
should continue a misery for such parties. 

The idea that these unions should be monogamous in character while 
they last is also one which in my opinion is the basis, is the foundational 
condition of a continued happiness, continued success of such unions. 
There may be occasions, however, when such unions as I have just said 
prove unbearable or intolerable by circumstances that neither party could 
foresee, but in that case, without too much fuss, without going into an 
operation that might involve washing of the dirty linen and mere playing 
to the gallery, so to say, by sensationalism, we might in our law devise 
machinery by which this union could be easily dissolved without 
unnecessary prejudice to any party. I do not see therefore that we need 
insist upon reasons or conditions or excuses that any other legal systems 
have been made necessary for granting divorce and I think it would be 
much better if divorce is made easy, simple and unexpensive, more than 
is at any rate, the case in some of the western countries whose model 
we have been following. The question of inheritance, the question of 
enjoying a share of the patrimony is again one which does not seem 
to me to be a just cause for the degree of heat that it seems to have 
evoked in this House. After all, in this country how many people are 
in a position to have property and leave such property outside beyond 
their life? If you go by standards, if you go by measurements such as 
that of the income-tax statistics, you will find that perhaps less than 
a million people are in a position to have an income of about Rs. 250 
a month and that would include all people, not only those who are 
regarded as income-tax payers, but those who try or manage to escape 
that. 

In a population of over 300 millions, the income tax paying class 
number about one million, or with their dependent about three to 
four millions and that is less than one per cent of the total population 
who can possibly afford to have some property that can be divided 
or that can be the cause of disaffection or of inequality of rights as 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


737 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 737 


between the descendants of common parents. I see really no reason why 
on this subject any heat should be generated, as regards the recognition 
of equal rights of daughters and sons in the matter of division of 
patrimony. Speaking for myself, I may say, I do not believe in any 
property at all, and the sooner the day comes when property as a whole 
is abolished, when provision is made for everybody by the community, 
provision to see that everybody gets work and gets his or her wants or 
requirements met, the sooner that day comes the better for the 
community. And this source of evil, a learned lawyer called it the source 
of strife, I call it this property which is the source of evil, I say that 
property should be abolished, and the sooner it is done the better it would 
be for the community and for legislations of this kind. If it were possible 
at this stage to suggest an amendment of the kind I like, I would even 
suggest that all clauses relating to property be abolished or deleted and 
a simple proposition be inserted, that while property continues, property 
of any kind, both land or personal, it shall be equally divided. That would 
be sufficient for the time being and we ought to endeavour that the day 
draws nigher and nigher when property as a whole will be abolished 
and everbody would have the same right to work, the same right to enjoy 
a given standard of life as those who are advantageously situated with 
patrimonies in their hands. 

On these two crucial issues therefore, one of marriage and the other 
of inheritance, I say that the Bill goes no further than what conditions 
around us necessitate. If and while you maintain an individualistic 
society, if and while property remains to be the corner-stone of or 
the foundation of your social system, and the profit motive remains 
the governing impulse of the social machine, so long I see no reason 
why there should be inequality. The equality should not be merely 
nominal. Political equality, the right to vote would mean nothing so long 
as economic equality also is not assured to every human being, to 
every citizen of this country. One has heard a great deal and I was 
very glad to hear it all that in the essence of Indian civilisation, in 
the essence of our social system, the highest honour is paid to womanhood. 
If that is true — and I do not doubt it — then I do not see why 
mere sanction of equality in property should be excluded, if you are 
really so worshipful of womanhood, if you are so respectful 
and reverential to womanhood, why do you hesitate at all to give her 
equal right to what after all, is mundane property, that which must 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


738 


738 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


be left behind by every one of us. However much we may be attached 
to it, however much one may hold and accumulate property, I do 
hold and I say it with the utmost reverence and the utmost humility, 
that I consider that in the process of evolution, woman seems to 
be more highly evolved, a finer organism than man, it is not, however, 
any disparagement of either sex. All I say is that, given the 
function that nature seems to have entrusted to women, given also 
the function and the objects with which womanhood has to deal in 
this social system, we cannot rever, we cannot regard or respect 
womanhood too much, and as such I would not like the least sign 
of inequality, the least semblance of differentiation or invidious 
distinction between man and woman, as between son and daughter 
of the same parents. 

The question, however, of adoption or of guardianship and so on, 
does not interest me to the extent that some Hon. Members of this 
House seem to be interested in it. Adoption or for the matter of that, 
testamentary powers appear to be artificial extension of the human 
personality beyond death which is utterly unnatural, in my point 
of view. It is bad enough to have and hold and control property, 
it is bad enough to have and hold the property and the profit 
motive in our minds while we are alive. Why should we continue 
to prolong our personality? Why should we desire to insist upon 
our orders being obeyed even after death? Why should there be 
this artificial extension of personality by such an instrument 
as adoption? Knowing, however, that it is an ancient institution, 
knowing however, that it is an institution which many regard as 
a point or as a factor in their salvation, I am not prepared to suggest 
that here and now we should abolish it. I am prepared to say, if 
you regard it as a source of your salvation, if you regard it 
as something by which your personality is perpetuated, your civilisation 
or culture or work in life is continued, then it is necessary. But, 
in that case, you need hot have inequality between man and 
woman. No discrimination or legal restriction between man and 
woman. The same right should be extended to every one in the 
community. I base my support of this Bill on grounds of social justice, 
economic equality and of political propriety. I should think that the 
Constitution that we have adopted, that the ideals that we have held 
before us, that the hopes that we have entertained of a planned and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


739 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 739 


progressive society here after, in view of all that, I think we cannot 
do better than take this Bill as the beginning in the right direction. We 
cannot do better than recognise the provisions it has incorporated, 
regarding removing all inequalities as between man and woman. It 
is not merely a matter of recording every five years or every three 
years one’s vote at the general election. It is also a matter relating 
to life and work, of equal opportunities to health and education of 
standard of life and the same fulfilment of the elementary wants of 
human beings, in the matter of food, shelter and clothing. These 
should be available, and should be made available if they are not 
available by the concerted and common action of our society as a 
whole. Society should realise this obligation that it is not merely a 
paper proposition that we have enunciated in our Constitution, but 
it is a sacred duty and obligation that ought to be discharged at the 
shortest measure of time that we can manage it, that all these things 
should be made available to every citizen of the country so that the 
hopes and aspirations that we have formed, so that the hopes that 
we have entertained ever since the freedom of this country was 
achieved, could be realised. It has been said by a very great 
American — President Lincoln, that a nation cannot be half slave and 
half free. While not exactly Slaves one half of this country, of our 
community still feel disabilities and weaknesses or invidious 
discrimination against them, which it does not wish, should be 
allowed to continue any longer. In this connection may I mention a 
statistical fact which perhaps is not realised by every person in this 
House. It is this. While woman is in a majority at birth, on the overall 
population she is in a very striking minority. Whatever may be the 
conditions in a province like Utkal, on the whole, in India woman 
has always been in a minority almost beginning from the age when 
marriage begins, from about fifteen onwards, their numbers go on 
thinning so that in the over all population woman was and is still 
in a minority. What is the significance of that? 

[At this stage Mr. Deputy-Speaker vacated the Chair which was then 
occupied by Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao (one of the Panel of 
Chairmen). ] 

I for one think, that is because of the unequal treatment given to 
women as between boy and girl, as between son and daughter that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 740 

740 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


it has resulted in a majority at birth being reduced to a minority 
on the whole, so that that charges of unequal treatment must be 
faced. Here is a Bill which tries to remove that. There are many 
provisions in the Bill which may not satisfy everybody, even those 
who on principle accept the Bill, even those who realise that it goes 
a great way forward in rationalising our society, simplifying our 
legislation and organising our social system to a given end. But we 
are not discussing details just now. Specific provisions apart, the 
principle underlying the Bill, the motive spring of the entire structure 
should commend itself to the House and I trust the House will accept 
it. 

Shri Lakshminarayan Sahu (Orissa : General): (English 

translation of the above speech) I would like to say, Sir, that I did 
not mention this thing as a joke that there are more women in Utkal. 
The number of women in Utkal exceeds by three to four lakhs and 
when it is not possible to find out a match for their marriage, then 
they are married to a Sahada tree. 

Prof, K. T. Shah : I am speaking of the whole country and not 
of any particular province. Therefore it is not necessary for me to 
answer this particular question. Let it be left there. 

*Sardar Hukam Singh (East Punjab : Sikh): Sir, at this late stage 
of the debate, I feel it is not very easy to advance fresh arguments 
or make new points on the subject on which so many distinguished 
lawyers and eminent scholars have taken part for so many days. But 
as I have been called as a representative of a particular community 
to which this Bill applies, I must say something which should 
represent the feelings of my community so far as this particular code 
is concerned. 

I do not agree with my learned friend Prof. Shah when he said 
that he wants to speak only as an Indian. I would have gladly 
repeated the same phrase, had this code applied to every citizen of 
India but as it stands it applies to certain communities only. 
Therefore I feel and believe that I have a right and a duty to speak 
on behalf of my community. 


*C.A. (leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 607-10. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


741 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 741 


Though I have the advantage of having heard so man scholars at the 
same time I feel I have certain disadvantages as well because most of 
the things have been said and if I repeat them they would look stale. 
I have, therefore, decided to confine myself to certain points only which 
particularly concern my community and on which I feel that I have to 
express my views. 

At the outset I might make it clear that I do not want society to 
stagnate. I am not one of those who would say that social laws should 
remain as they are, I would like to change them as times change. I am 
not so orthodox as to say that we have no right to march with the times. 
Nor am I of the opinion that this House is not competent to enact this 
legislation on account of its being elected indirectly or on account of lack 
of a special mandate as regards this Bill or on account of any other 
reason, I feel that this House is competent to enact any legislation and 
hence this Bill also is within its competence. In spite of all this, I feel 
that I cannot lend my wholehearted support to this measure as it stands. 

If the original scheme had been adhered to as suggested by the Rau 
Committee, perhaps certain portions of this Code might have been passed 
without opposition. There must be unanimity on certain branches of this 
Code. But I will confine myself to certain points only and therefore I 
do not want to touch on all aspects of the general principles of the 
legislation. 

The Preamble says that the Bill is intended to amend and codify 
certain branches of the Hindu law as now in force. But when I look into 
the Bill, I find that there is nothing of Hindu law that is being codified 
here. Divorce is being taken from the Christian countries and the law 
of inheritance from Muslim law. To me it is rather a misnomer to call 
it a codification of Hindu law. 

Dr. Mono Mohon Das (West Bengal : General): There are so many 
castes and tribes in the country among whom the divorce custom is 
prevalent. Are they not Hindus? Does the hon. Member want to get rid 
of them? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : If you will permit me, I will come to that 
question later. I hope you will have the patience to hear me. 

As I said I will confine myself only to certain points so far as 
my community is concerned and will not go beyond them. In the 
Preamble, it is said, that the Bill is intended to amend and codify 
the Hindu law and I repeat that I do not find that in this Code. If 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


742 


742 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


as we were told by the Mover at the outset that 90 per cent, of the 
people have divorce, I have no objection and let them remain as they 
are. You might call that Hindu law but not this system you are 
introducing in this Code. 

In clause 2, it is said that this Bill applies to Sikhs as well. It 
would have been a matter of gratification or even of much pride to 
us, if Sikhs had been included among Hindus for the conferment of 
certain rights. But what I find here is that as soon as the embrace 
is extended in clause 2 a severe blow is dealt to all coustoms and 
usages by clause 4. All custom is gone and usages eliminated. I must 
submit here that “custom” in clause 3 has been defined as “having 
been continuously and uniformly observed” and that it must be 
“certain and not unreasonable nor opposed to public policy”. Why 
should such a sacred rule of conduct be treated with such contempt 
that it should be ruled over once for all? I have grave objection to 
that. My objection is particularly based on this fact that my Province, 
namely the Punjab, is a Province where custom is the first rule of 
law. In all matters like divorce, marriage, succession, inheritance, 
wills etc. custom is the first rule as is laid down in the Punjab Laws 
Act. They have those customs which they observe from a long time 
and everybody in the village understands what that rule is which he 
is to observe. There have been judicial pronouncements on these 
customs and they are ordinarily understood by every villager, There 
is no dispute about that. Therefore, I feel that this change would bring 
about a fresh phraseology and would create complications for simple 
peasants who have all along understood their laws well. 

My second objection is about marriage. I might make one observation 
here. It might be said that the Sikhs have all along been governed 
by Hindu law up to now. But what I object to is the change that 
is being brought about. I have no objection absolutely if the Hindu 
Law were to continue as it is. But as the changes are being brought 
from outside, I feel the Sikhs must have a grievance and feel that 
either customs should be allowed to remain as they are or they should 
not necessarily be bound to revolve round the wheel as it goes on. 
I was referring to the marriage question. Of course I feel that in 
Hindu law or in Hindu culture the wife has so long been advised to 
merge herself into the will of the husband. She has been an embodiment 
of sacrifice. That has been her nobility and greatness. If now our 
females feel that they have been subjugated for so long a time, that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


743 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 743 


they have suffered and that they are not prepared now to continue 
to suffer, I would certainly advise my brothers to take up the subordinate 
position. But I feel that this insistence on equality in every matter 
and in home life would not be conducive to happiness or peace in the 
family. 

Then again my complaint is that only two kinds of marriages have 
been recognised in this Bill. One is the sacramental form and the 
other is the civil form. I must inform the House, though I believe, 
most of the Members would be knowing it already, that the Sikhs 
have another form of marriage which they have observed for the last 
one hundred years. That is called Anand marriage ceremony. That 
is a simple form. The couple are brought before the Guru Granth 
Saheb, they take a vow and go four times round the Granth Saheb, 
then offer prayer and then the marriage is complete. Now, it is not 
civil marriage because it has not to be registered anywhere. It is not 
scramental marriage because the sapinda relationship or the 
restrictions of prohibited relationship degrees are not adhered to 
strictly. Therefore what I am afraid of is that this form of marriage 
that we have been observing for so long would not be a valid marriage. 
Doubts arose in the beginning of this century and then a particular 
Act had to be passed in 1909 — the Anand Marriage Validating Act — 
when it was enacted that all marriages solemnised according to this 
form were valid. But now, as I read it, I am doubtful whether this 
marriage will be recognised under the Hindu Code. Therefore, I feel 
that the Sikhs would feel much concerned over this and would have 
grave apprehensions over this matter particularly. I want to bring 
it to the particular notice of the Mover that, left to themselves, they 
are not prepared to forego this form of marriage and he should take 
particular note of this. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad ( West Bengal Muslim): Such a marriage 
would be invalid under this Bill. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I also feel that it would be invalid under 
this Bill and that is why I am submitting the position before the House 
and before the Mover particularly. 

Then I have to submit one observation about divorce. It has been 
said that divorce is already there among a large percentage of the 
population. It may be. My appeal is this. If it is there let it go on. 
Do not restrict it with certain conditions that would make it more 
expensive. An ordinary man would feel that this change is not for 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


744 


744 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the better but for the worse. If they have an easy mode of dissolution 
of marriage now and are hereafter being compelled to resort to some 
more complicated and more expensive method, certainly they would 
not welcome it. It is argued that there are evils creeping. The bill 
is a permissive one. That there is no compulsion for anybody, but 
we have to be on our guard whether the remedy proposed is not worse 
than the malady itself. There are evils no doubt to a certain extent. 
But if we loosen the bonds, a small percentage of the population would 
be happy to break all ties and secure relief from their self-created 
miseries. But what about the large minority? Would you not be 
opening a trap for them, and a temptation to make mistakes, and 
have a trial of their future as they will realise that there is a way 
out to end it? 

Then I come to my second main point and that is about adoption. 
Adoption in my province, that is the Punjab, is a peculiar institution. 
It is called the customary appointment of an heir. It has nothing to 
do with religion. It is a simple declaration for practical purposes, 
where the owner of a land nominates a person who is to be his 
assistant for cultivation during his lifetime and an heir to his farm 
after his death. As I have said, it has nothing to do with religion. 
There is no restriction as to age or as to relationship. You are now 
proposing in this Code that a daughter’s son or a sister’s son may 
be adopted but I must convey to you that already in the customary 
appointment of an heir daughter’s sons are most ordinarily appointed, 
sister’s sons also are appointed. There are absolutely no restrictions. 
A young man can adopt a man of his farmer’s age, a man with many 
sons might be appointed as an heir. That might look strange to some 
people here but I tell you that it is a fact. A married man, a man 
with children might be appointed an heir. That is a most secular 
institution; it has got nothing to do with religion. How are you going 
to provide for such an institution? Are you going to throw it out? 
Surely that has the sanctity and sensation of ages, it is so popular 
in our part of the country that it cannot be thrown away like that. 
People would not submit to it so easily and so far as this part of 
the law is concerned, it would be a dead letter if it is pressed and 
forced on our people there. 

Then there is the question of succession. I agree with my friends 
that our females, sisters and daughters, should have a share in the 
property, but I cut it short by saying that I agree with my learned 
friend Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand when he enunciated some time ago that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


745 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 745 


they should have a share in the father-in law’s property and not in the 
father’s property after marriage. I have particular reasons for that 
because as I have stated the circumstances of my province are very 
peculiar. The Punjab is a province of small peasants; small farms of three 
or four acres are the ordinary holdings. Such a person cannot be expected 
to have more than two bullocks which he might have secured after raising 
some loan, one hal and one panjali and one gadda also to take manure 
to the field or to bring fodder from the fields to his house. The Code 
would not apply to agricultural land, but what about the movables? What 
about his bullocks? Take the simple case of a family with one son and 
one daughter. The father dies, these movables are to be divided among 
these two. (An Honourable Member : Why not ?) I don’t say that , I say 
it must be divided. Ordinarily they would have a cow as well and I think 
the Mover would have to give us the mode of dividing that cow, hal 
and panjali. The son-in law who comes from a distance, of say fifty miles, 
is interested in that part of the country; here he cannot live with this 
brother-in-law because the four acres holding cannot provide him with 
anything. His interest is elsewhere and therefore he must divide the 
property and go away. The sister would demand her share; surely she 
will take away one bullock, one half of the cart, one half of the panjali 
and would go away never to come back, thanking the framers of this 
Code, and of course not to be welcomed again ! (An Honourable Member. 
The brother’s own brother-in-law will thank him !). That is a very easy 
question that is put, but it is not realised that when there are more 
than one-two, three or four — brothers in the East Punjab, they join the 
army, they are adventurers, they have gone to the farthest corners of 
the world to Argentine, Brazil and South America. They bring money 
from there and buy more lands, they live together with a common 
kitchen. 

Sir my submission is that this provision would create difficulties. I 
agree with my learned friend Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand that so long as the 
daughter is unmarried she must have a share in her father’s property, 
but as soon as she is married she must be transferred to her father- 
in-law’s, there to have an equal share with right of partition and 
everything else. I am not against giving a share to the females — I might 
not be misunderstood in that respect. 

I am afraid that our educated girls have much leisure. An ordinary 
girl, when she gets educated, does not absorb herself in the household 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


746 


746 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


duties, therefore she has not enough work to keep her busy in the 
house. 

[At this stage, Mr. Deputy Speaker (Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar) 
resumed the Chair.] 

The State should provide occupation for their leisure hours, give them 
useful and constructive work to do. Legislation like this and divorces 
would not root out the evils that you want to eradicate. Before destroying 
the joint family, the State must provide for old-age maintenance, illness 
allowance and several other things. If the pious duty is gone a mere 
charge on property would not do. The effects of this legislation, so far 
as I can think out, will be further fragmentation, love and sympathy, 
eliminated divorce and partition courts in larger numbers, female 
infanticide promoted, and care and attention of children neglected. 

Shri V. I. Muniswamy Pillay : rose — 

Shri B. Das (Orissa: General): Sir, are we continuing till 7 O’clock.. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have no objection to sit till 7 o’clock. What 
is the general sense of the House? 

Some Honourable Members : No. no. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi (Madras : General) : Sir, we can 
sit as long as there is a quorum. 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have heard sufficiently. One voice cannot 
multiply itself into many. How long is the hon. Member likely to take? 

Shri V. I. Muniswamy Pillay (Madras : General): About fifteen 
minutes. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Sir, the idea is to give opportunities 
to as many Members as would want to speak. It is rather surprising 
that people don’t want to speak. I suggest that we sit as long as people 
are ready to speak and we are here to hear and when there is no quorum 
we will automatically stop. 

Shrimati Purnima Banerji (U.P. General): The argument 

forwarded by hon. Members is that many members want to speak 

5 P. M. on such an important measure as the Hindu Code. When 
there are so many of us who are willing to say what we 
want to say and can be accomodated what is the objection to sitting till 
seven? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


747 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 747 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : I entirely agree. If majority of the members 
are willing to sit and speak I have no objection. 

Some Honourable Members : Yes, we are willing. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Very Well. Let Mr. Muniswamy Pillay finish. 
We will see. 

* Shri V. I. Muniswamy Pillay : Coming as I do from a community 
that was at the outside of the Hindu Society for centuries, I welcome 
this measure of religious and social reform. We, who form one-sixth of 
the population of India, welcomed the advent of Mahatma Gandhi who 
revolutionised the Hindu society so that not only Caste Hindus but all 
sections of the Hindus could have an equal place. Some of the friends 
who preceded me said that religion was in danger. I do not know 
wherefrom and in what from their objection springs. This country is 
proud of many Avatars — Lord Buddha, Sankara, Ramanuja — and great 
social reformers like Ram Mohan Roy and in the present century, the 
great Mahatma Gandhi who found that untouchability was eating into 
the very vitals of our nation and himself showed the way for inter-caste 
marriage. All these reforms show that we are in line with the present 

age. Whenever any social reform came up before the legislatures, 

obstructions were placed in the way, so that reforms may not come about. 
Coming from Madras, I may inform this House what kind of trouble we 

had when the Temple Entry scheme was before the Madras Legislature. 

Even in the matter of removal of social disabilities of untouchables, the 
Ministers had to find themselves in the midst of people who threw chilly 
powder in their face. Such is the state of affairs when we bring social 
reform in this country. The great Sankara who brought Advaitism to 
our land, when he was asked by his Guru “Who are you?” he said: 

^ ^o^-l R' ^ I 

Pm cl l ^ ^ RTcH H ■'5FR':ll 

FhsTI 'T I 

fNWfMW: II 

These were the words uttered by the great Sankara. He never 
differentiated man from man, woman from woman. He thought every 
one was equal. I do not understand why there should be so much 
opposition to this Bill. In the South the great philosopher. Thiruvalluvar 
has given to the world tenets as to how a man and woman should 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 611-14. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


748 


748 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


move; what are the conditions under which they should live. They are 
pearls. I do not understand why there should be objection to the woman 
getting equal share in all amentities that are given by God to the human 
beings. 

Some of the members who preceded me said that the time is not 
opportune. This measure has been before the country ever since the 
resolution of the Central Assembly was adopted on 20th January 1944. 
This Hindu Code has reached the nook and corner of India and not only 
educated men but the masses in general have understood the theme of 
this legislation. I do not know whether such members, as told the House 
that it is not competent to deal with this Bill, are talking with a sense 
of their responsibility to the country. I do not know whether members 
of this Assembly who have the proud privilege to produce a Constitution 
for thirty crores of people, which has been welcomed not only in India 
but in foreign countries, are not competent to deal with this Bill for 
the uplift of women in this country. We have clearly laid down in the 
Fundamental Right of the Constitution that the State shall not discriminate 
on grounds only of “religion, caste, sex....”. We have got again Article 
15 (3) which says that “Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State 
from making any special provision for women and children.” Again in 
Article 46, it is stated : “The State shall promote with special care the 
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the 

people ” do not women come under this category , and ought they 

not to be protected? After all, this legislation is a permissible one and 
ought to be welcomed by everybody. 

If you study the rules regarding marriage, inheritance, adoption and 
all these things of Hindus in the different provinces, you will find that 
they are not the same. They differ in many places. In the Constitution 
we have said that we must evolve a common Civil Code. This legislation 
is, in my opinion, the forerunner before we come to that stage. I come 
from a district where there are a lot of hill tribes. Their marriage 
ceremonies, laws of inheritance etc. differ substantially from those of 
Hindus, although they profess to be Hindus. Among the picturesque Toda 
aboriginal community, there is poligamy and due to this social evil the 
community is dwindling. The ceremonrials of the other tribal community 
of Badagas also differ from those of Hindus, although they profess to 
be Hindus. The custom among them is that when a man wants to marry 
a girl, he has to pay dowry — what they call Thiraipanam. After that, 
if the woman wants to go away from the husband and if another man 
were to pay the same dowry i. e., Thiraipanam, the woman is free to 
choose another man. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


749 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 749 


In a land which has produced great saints and sages are we to continue 
these things? Whether it is the tribals or hill tribes they all have to 
be protected according to the New Constitution. 

Sir, in Madras province, as has already been observed by some of my 
hon. friends, poligamy has been statutorily abolished. Now, unless we 
codify the law for the whole country, it is open to a man to leave Madras, 
get married in some other province and return to Madras. Unless there 
is a uniformity in regard to the law obtaining in all the provinces, it 
is not possible for the Madras province alone to have this law enforced. 

The other cardinal points of the Hindu Code Bill which is now before 
the House are the chapters relating to marriage and divorce. It has 
already been pointed out how essential it is to have both civil and 
sacramental marriage. According to this, the Scheduled Castes find that 
the yogam must be performed and the ordinary thali tied. Then only 
does the marriage become true, Even now after the Civil Marriage Acts 
have come into force, I find people taking to this. I can find no reason 
why the same method cannot be adopted throughout and for all Hindus, 
orthodox or otherwise. 

Clause 33(f) makes reference to “adultery”. I wish that the word 
“adultery” had not been used at all in the Code, for, as was pointed out 
by Swami Vivekananda, so long as there live three women in our land 
the chastity of India will be upheld. I do not think, Sir. that adultery 
is largely prevalent in any section of the Hindu society. There may, of 
course, be rare cases. But there is no reason why that should necessitate 
a statutory provision. 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 9 and clause 16, I find penalties in regard 
to people breaking the law. The amount specified is too high, particularly 
for the poorer section of the people. I feel that it must be a very nominal 
amount. In the matter of judicial separation it is all right in the case 
of people who have got money and can afford to go to the courts to get 
a dissolution. But what about the villages in which India abounds. 
Communal panchayats consisting of members chosen by a few people will 
decide the matter, I do not think this procedure is correct. I think some 
formula must be evolved which will lead to the constitution of 
representative panchayats which will decide cases of dissolution. 

Next I come to the question of stridhana, that is what is given to 
the women either by her father or by her brothers. What is to happen 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


750 


750 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


if it is not properly used by the husband. I feel Sir, that some clause 
must be inserted so that the stridhana may always remain the property 
of the woman. 

Clause 72 which deals with adoption says: “No adoption which has 
been validly made can be cancelled by the adoptive father or mother 
or any other person, nor can the adopted son renounce his status 
as such and return to the family of his birth.” I think, Sir, if the 
son or anybody who is adopted were to misbehave and squander the 
money of the family, there must be a saving clause whereby such 
a thing could be prevented. 

Section 93 deals with the dowry to be held in trust for wife and 
says that it shall come into force after the commencement of this 
Code. I feel, Sir, that section must apply to all cases existing before 
the commencement of the Code. 

Sir, I would finally point out that bringing this Hindu Code into 
force will greatly relieve all those women who are under the harsh 
treatment of men. Many people have been saying that the women are 
enjoying equal privileges and facilities. But in reality it is not so. 
In a few cases it may be so. But about 90 per cent of the women 
are still suffering from many social hardships. Out of the four yugas, 
Krita, Treta, Dvapara and Kali, we are now in the fourth yugam, 
iron age and are strong to bring in reforms. We must see that the 
women enjoy as many facilities as men. It is said that the hand that 
rock the cradle shall win the world. Before they grasp forcibly these 
facilities let us give them peacefully. I, therefore, support the Hindu 
Code Bill that has been brought by this Government and when it has 
come into fruition I might say that my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar who 
has taken so much of trouble would have added a further feather 
to his hat. 

* Shri O, V. Alagesan ( Madras : General) : Sir, yesterday 
Dr. Ambedkar said that he was very glad that it had fallen to his 
lot to pilot this Bill. Sir, his name is sure to go down in history as 
the able midwife that assisted at the birth of the Constitution of free 
India. Sir, he is ambitious. He wants to add a further feather to his 
cap and he is justified. His ambition is to supersede the ancient rishis, 
Manu, Yajnavalkya and a host of other ancient law givers. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VI, Part II, 14th December 1949, pp. 614-21. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


751 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 751 


One of the previous speakers — I think it is Mr. Pataskar — made a 
reference to Section 44 of the New Constitution which relates to a 
uniform civil code for the whole country. He pleaded and asked: “Why 
not withdraw this Hindu Code and have a Civil Code? It may sound 
like pleading for postponing the day of mischief. But why does not 

Government come out with a statement of policy on this question? Is 
this a first step in that direction? Would they bring in more measures 
to put into effect Article 44 of the Constitution following this? I do not 
want to embarrass the Government, but all the same I would appreciate 
a clear statement of policy from the Government. 

Sir, the other day it delighted everyone’s heart to hear the hon. 

Mr. Santhanam pleading for monogamy. He challenged anybody to raise 
his little finger against this institution. Saint Tyagaraja admirably 
summed up Rama’s character in his own inimitable manner in these 
words: 

Oka mata, oka banam, oka pathni, 

That is One word, one arrow and one wife. 

We are all glad that that ideal has been placed before us. Sir, I ask, 
is it good only for the Hindus? Will the Government bring forward a 
Bill common to all and make monogamy applicable to all citizens of 
India ? I say this not to embarrass Government. I would like to repeat. 

When it is put in this manner, you will have to put the problem in its 

proper bearing. You will remember that there is a community in India 
which will object to it on grounds of religion and you will also remember 
the unhappy happenings that followed the partition in this country. You 
will be saying that it will be an interference with religion, that it will 
be against the secular nature of the State. Now the Prime Minister has 
declared that our State is going to be a secular one. We should educate 
the people on the secular nature of the State. There are many things 
that are happening on the other side of the border which are sure to 
have their reactions on this side. That State is based shamefacedly on 
a theocratic basis and they propose to carry the full implications of that 
policy and such a policy on the other side cannot fail to have its reactions 
on this side. So, people begin to entertain misgivings about the secular 
nature of our State. They understand it in this light and there is good 
reason for that, that secularism means meddling with everything Hindu, 
and fighting shy of any other group. That is the way in which the general 
mass of the people in this country react to measures like this. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


752 


752 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


So in the interests of the secular State that we want to establish in 
this country, we should try to carry the people also with us. It is no 
good Government alone saying that we are a secular State, and if that 
is not properly understood, properly appreciated by the general mass of 
the people in the country, then the State cannot long continue to be 
secular. We will be losing the ideal that we want to realise in this country 
and we will be postponing the day of such realisation. That is why, Sir, 
I say that people are at present not in a proper mood. They are sullen. 
They are in a pique; just as a child which is in a pique refuses to eat 
even the sweetest thing, people are not in a mood to appreciate this 
reform. Even though it may contain some good parts. So the best thing 
would be not to press down the throats of the people anything which 
they do not want. Dr. Ambedkar last time quoted Burke. He struck a 
gloomy note and gave us a warning just as he did at the conclusion of 
his speech during the third reading of the Constitution He said : 

“Anybody who wants to conserve should be prepared to repair.” 

It is very good, Sir, we should be prepared to repair, but does this 
Bill represent mere repair? I should say it pulls down the house in which 
we have been living. It wants to plan a new structure. It wants to make 
structural alterations. It is not mere carrying out repairs here and there. 
It is a structural repair. I should say that it is a new structure that 
it wants to put in the place of the old one. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : All repair is structural 
repair. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : I have no objection to carry out even structural 
repairs, but before carrying out such structural repairs, this House itself 
should undergo a structural repair. That is what I want to say. By saying 
this, I do not minimise even by an iota the representative and sovereign 
character of this House. Sir, when we put through other legislation — 
Prof. Shah was labouring this point — nobody is surprised. It is a routine 
matter, but this is treated on a different basis. This is viewed with 
suspicion, with anger. That is the reason why I say we should discriminate, 
and allow the House that will have been structurally repaired to carry 
out this reform with greater confidence and with a degree of success 
which can be attained by then. 

Sir, another point is the atmosphere in which this Bill is sought 
to be pushed through. Sir, there was a great one in this country who 
led our thought and action. Even though we were slaves he taught 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


753 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 753 


us to think and act like free men and we followed him. That was the 
tradition that he established. Long before this country was technically 
free, he ushered in an atmosphere of free thinking and action. But 
unfortunately, he is no more with us to guide us, but his example is 
there for us to follow. Even on a matter like the abolition of untouchability, 
temple entry and such allied matters, he advised that we should not 
accomplish those worthy objectives by means of legislation. He presuaded 
and preached to the people the necessity for such measures. He even 
imposed suffering on himself. That is how he brought about this mighty 
reform and it has become an established fact today. It is that way that 
we should follow and not force down reforms upon the throats of 
unwilling people. 

Shri V. L Muniswamy Pillay : It is for you to educate them. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : We should go about the country and educate 
the people. The general elections are coming very shortly and that will 
be the best time for it. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai (Madras : General) : That is the whole fear. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : That will be a wonderful opportunity to educate 
the people on the various provisions contained in this Bill. There is much 
force in what the Congress President said yesterday. The Labour 
Government in Britain, how does it function? It has postponed a very 
important measure, a Bill for which they took the permission of the 
electorate. It had the sanction of the electorate but after taking note 
of the situation in the country, they have postponed it till after the 
general election. They are going to take the verdict of the people afresh 
and then push through the measure. When such is the case in regard 
to a matter on which the permission, the sanction of the electorate had 
been obtained, then I should think it is much more necessary in this 
case where we did not give even an inkling of our ideas to the electorate. 
Sir, we have seen the spectacle of this Bill being debated for two days 
in every session. It is like the promise for renewing the gold bangles 
for the next deepavali. That is how we have been going on and it is 
good that we go on like this, because, who knows even the sisters who 
have given their enthusiastic support to this Bill may change their minds 
tomorrow and they may try to improve it on their own lines. After all 
one does not remain static and more so woman. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : There are also some men who change their 
opinions. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


754 


754 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Shri O. V. Alagesan : The great poet Valmiki who is the Adikavi 
of our country said this. The reference is only to the general characteristics 
of women. This does not apply to anybody in particular. Valmiki 
said : 

Sathahvadhanam lolathram 

That is : 

Women change as lighting. 

That is what he said. 

Similarly they can change their minds and try to improve. I should 
like to ask you and the House whether they have not gained by waiting 
so far. They have gained because in the Rau Committee recommendations, 
the daughters had only half a share and now according to Dr. Ambedkar’s 
Bill, daughters will be getting equal shares with the sons. 

Again Sir, if they wait, they may get more. Daughters may get two 
times. Also we have heard on the first day the hon. Mr. A.K. Menon. 
The other day in a different place we heard Mr. Thanu Pillai., They are 
very anxious about this and they feel that they are being pushed back 
instead of being pushed forward. While the rest of India is pushed 
forward, the Malabaries very strongly feel that they are being pushed 
backward under this Bill. Sir, they may convince others and the whole 
land may come under Marumakkattayam, though the matriarchal system 
is disappearing elsewhere. Our friends from Malabar may be able to 
convince the other hon. Members of this House and then the whole thing 
may be Marumakkattayam and that will be a brighter prospect. They 
will not lose anything by waiting because they have got persuasive 
powers; they can persuade, they can seduce, they can manage all these 
things. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member need not use that expression. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : I am sorry. I withdraw the word. 

We witnessed the wonderful spectacle in this House, Sir, of a speech 
which began as a wonderful satire and ended in a sorrowful sermon. 
Overnight the satire was converted into a sermon. So when we see this, 
nothing is impossible. It can be improved even according to the 
protagonists of this Bill in a very radical way and they may have a better 
Bill if they wait and then they can have the satisfaction of having taken 
the permission of the country also for that. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


755 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 755 


Sir, I should like to put another point of view. What is the approach 
that this Bill makes towards the problem? The approach is that inequality 
exists in the Hindu society between man and woman. I should very 
respectfully submit that this conception of inequality between man and 
woman is a biblical conception. The Hindu conception is that of 
Ardhanareeswara, that is of man and woman being equal. That is our 
conception, Sir, that is the basic Hindu conception. I do not say that 
it has been entirely translated into practice and I do not make that claim, 
but that is the basic conception of Hinduism. The conception is not one 
of inequality, but it is one of dissimilarity. If man represents strength 
woman represents endurance; if man represents intellect woman represents 
enlightenment; if man represents grammar, woman represents poetry. 
The great poet Kalidasa has described Parvati and Parameshwara as 
word and meaning and that is the basic approach. You do a basic wrong 
when you approach this question from the point of inequality between 
man and woman. 

Again Sir, I should like to point out that the present atmosphere is 
not a free atmosphere because we have never examined our institutions 
as an independent nation, especially on this subject. It is not Yagnavalkya 
or Manu that is so much current as the British courts and we have never 
had on opportunity to examine our Indian institutions with a dispassionate 
and an unbiased open mind. Always the bias of western ideas and 
western notions had been there. Though our political slavery have been 
removed, still the spell of western civilization and ideas continues. So, 
it is better if some time elapses and we may be able to view and examine 
both the good and bad points in our institutions in an independent way, 
in a fresh way and that will give us an opportunity to mend this Bill 
and even improve. 

Sir, another reason behind this Bill is a sense of injustice done by 
man to woman. I do not want to repeat all the things that have been 
said before, both in humour and seriousness, but, Sir, I can claim that 
there has been no injustice done to woman by man. I should like to say 
that it is only a mental aberration of high strung natures due to 
unattached circumstances which enable one to do anything except lead 
a normal life. That is how I would put it. In this land nothing has been 
done by man to wrong woman. I should like to examine some of the 
arguments put forward by the other side. Sir, I find a growing practice 
among the occupants of the Treasury Benches. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


756 


756 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


When a bill is generally debated, they say some people have opposed 
and others have supported and hence this Bill represents the largest 
common measure of agreement. That is a very easy way of disposing — 
and I do not think the learned Minister in charge of this Bill will do 
it and I have no doubt about it. It is not the largest common measure, 
but the least common measure, I would say. 

Then, Sir, it is said that opposition to this bill is based on prejudice 
and sentiment and not on reason. I should like to point out that support 
is also based on the same blindness, on the same prejudice and on the 
same unreason. It is not as if support is enlightened and only opposition 
is ignorant. 

Again, Sir, it is said in support of this measure that this is only an 
enabling and permissive measure. It was said in another place that the 
orthodox can go on in the old way without interference and the reformers 
also may go their own way or it permits such of those who want to take 
advantage of the provisions of the Bill to tread their path and leave 
others entirely free to pursue their own path. I think Dr. Ambedkar said 
it. Sir, this is like enacting a general law of licence and saying that 
such of those who want to take advantage of it can do so. The plea that 
it is only a permissive and a enabling measure, in my opinion cannot 
hold water. Then it is said that there has been opposition in the past 
to Bills of similar nature like the Sarda Act. This stands on an entirely 
different footing. There is difference between that Act and this Bill. 

Dr. Tek Chand was saying that this Bill has been before the country 
for a very long time and so we need not wait any more. It is true that 
the Bill has been before the country for a number of years. But then 
the Congress was not in office and so nobody took it seriously. As soon 
as the Congress came into office and Dr. Ambedkar piloted this Bill as 
a Minister of the Congress Party, then everybody took it seriously, and 
they now know that it will be put into force, and that is why, I say, 
the people should be given an opportunity to examine this Bill. There 
is difference between the position that it occupied so far and the position 
that it occupies now. 

Sir, It is also said that many women who are opposed to this Bill, 
do so under the influence of their men-folk. This, I think, is an unfounded 
charge. May I ask whether the women who support this Bill are 
displeased with their husbands ? Or, may I ask whether the man who 
supports this Bill do so under the influence of their womenfolk ? It is 
no use putting forth such frivolous arguments. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


757 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 757 


Shri B. Das : There is nobody here to answer these questions. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : Can you say that they are pleased with their 
husbands when they marry again and again ? 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : I am coming to that Madam, please have a 
little patience. 

Shrimati G, Durgabai : Please answer that question first. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : Yes, I will, in my own time and in my own 
way. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : May I know till what time we intend 
sitting ? 

Some Honourable Members : Six o’clock. 

Some Honourable Members : Seven o’clock. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am finding the House getting thinner, and 
thinner, and when it is quite thin I will get up. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Let us rise for tea, now Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No, the hon. Member will finish soon. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : Sir, the justification for a measure of this kind 
can be two-fold. There should be a conscious demand from the public 
for such a measure; or a few people, who have set their hearts upon 
a measure of reform, may think that it is good for the entire community, 
while the community may not be conscious of the goodness of it. Then 
it is the duty of those, who think that such a measure of reform is 
beneficial to the whole community, to go and educate the people about 
the soundness of their stand. I only plead that the people who bring 
forward this measure and who believe that this is a measure beneficial 
to Hindu society, that they should go and educate the people. I do not 
want anything more from the protagonists of this Bill. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : They have done it. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : My sister here says that they have done it 
already, but I should like to point out that the claim made by these 
reformer friends, this microscopic minority, that may speak on behalf 
of the majority of the Hindus, is the tallest claim ever made. They should 
have patience, and as I have pointed out earlier, they should educate 
the people about the goodness of this Bill, and not rush it through to 
have some satisfaction. 

Another important thing I wish to point out is this. If this Bill is 
rushed and passed into an Act, then portions of it will remain a dead 
letter just as the Widow Remarriage Act has remained a dead letter 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


758 


758 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


though enacted a century ago. So if you do not want it to remain a dead 
letter, but that it should be taken advantage of by the members of the 
community then it is better to wait and educate the people. 

Now I would like to pass on to a few of the important observations 
made by Dr. Ambedkar. This Bill seems to be a Law of Exceptions. 
Dr. Ambedkar said that the coparcenary system allows ten categories 
of property to remain outside the purview of the coparcenary. They form 
private property. So he says, because it has granted so many exceptions, 
let it, once and for all, go. That is one of the points that he has made. 
And then he says, woman has absolute right to Stridhana and so let 
it be so for all property. And also that this coparcenary system has the 
seeds of disruption in itself, and so let the joint family go. I would ask 
him ; he has just now passed the Constitution and the various provisions 
in the Constitution, as you know, are riddled with provisos and 
exceptions. For that reason, are we to make the exceptions into the main 
articles? When you look into the pleadings, it looks as if one has to make 
the exceptions into the main law. 

Then again, Sir, this Bill about which my sisters are so 
enamoured 

Shrimati G. Durgabai : Brothers also. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : This Bill does not in my opinion deserve it. 
Monogamy has been praised by one and all. It is not such a new 
institution. Women have been having monogamy in this land, but were 
there divorces provided? As soon as men are brought, within this law 
of monogamy there is demand for provision for divorce. As long as woman 
was under monogamy, there was no provision for divorce, but now they 
say divorce is the natural corollary of monogamy. Why are my sisters 
so very enthusiastic about it ? What is the meaning of it? If divorce 
is the natural corollary of monogamy, how is it that this natural corollary 
did not come into existence so far? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How long further will the hon. Member go 
on? 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : Only ten more minutes, but I shall try to cut 
short. So I say it is not a very pleasant thing to be given the right to 
divorce. I do not want to read out extracts, but many women have pointed 
out that this divorce would work greater havoc for women than for men. 

Shri A. Thanu Pillai : Is the hon. Member advocating monogamy 
without divorce? 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


759 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 759 


Shri O. V. Alagesan : I want monogamy without provision for divorce. 
Sir, what this bill gives with one hand it takes away by the other. 

Dr. Ambedkar, in justifying the provision for divorce, has enumerated 
the difficulties that the women who are deserted by their husbands 
nowadays are made to undergo. All these difficulties the divorced women 
will have to undergo. The prospect for the divorced woman is as bleak 
as the prospect is today for the deserted woman. It is easier for the 
divorced man to marry again and it will not be as easy for the divorced 
woman. 

Dr. P. Subbarayan (Madras : General): So you want a double 
standard. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : I want my sisters to make note of it and beware 
of the pit to which it leads them. 

Even on other grounds I would very seriously object to the provision 
of divorce. What is the experience of other countries? This has been 
touched on by other speakers and I do not want to enlarge on it. Recently 
we were told that the number of divorced cases in Paris alone increased 
from 600 to 1200, which is only 100 per cent increase. 

An Honourable Member : There is no Paris in India . 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : I am glad there is no Paris in India just now 
but I am afraid the Bill tries to usher in Paris in India. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : Baroda is there and Malabar is 
there. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : In one of the most advanced countries in the 
world, Soviet Russia, the family as an institution is breaking up. Soviet 
Russia is hard put to resuscitating the family as an institution, having 
allowed easy divorce. They now want to inculcate the sacredness of the 
family as an institution and infuse communist morality into their 
citizens. They are trying hard to save this institution which they have 
lost by lightly introducing divorce in their land. One had only to write 
a postcard to the Registrar saying that he is divorcing his wife and he 
had his divorce. I understand that they have now made their divorce 
laws more difficult. There is an example before us. 

Shri L. Krishnaswami Bharathi : What about Malabar? Why go 
to Russia and Paris? 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : There they have tried this method and found 
it dangerous. Why put ourselves in the same situation and again try 
to remove it ? Our Indian homes today are poor, steeped in ignorance 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


760 


760 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and ill-health, but it cannot be said that our homes are broken ones. 
In other countries they may be rich, healthy and very enlightened but 
one is sorry to note that many of the homes in other countries are broken 
ones and that is entirely due to the license given in their divorce 
provisions. That is my opinion. 

Such an eminent person like Dr. Tek Chand said that the joint Hindu 
family should be kept and wife be made a coparcener in the family. I 
should like to say that the real economic independence of women would 
come not by giving a share to the daughter, to which I have no objection, 
but by giving her an equal share in the husband’s property. That is how 
she will attain her economic independence. It is not by taking a share 
from the father’s property. After all the daughter is a trust to be given 
away to the son-in-law. The father keeps the girl as a trust and it is 
therefore better and more proper that she is made a joint owner or equal 
sharer in the husband’s property rather than made to claim a share in 
the father’s property. She may claim a share in the father’s property 
if she remains unmarried. 

I do not want to dilate further but I should like to end on this note. 
The chief man who conceived the Code (though a gentleman found it 
difficult to conceive yesterday) was Mr. B. N. Rau and we may be sure 
that he is very anxious about this Bill. He would want to see all his 
proposals, though in a modified form to be put into effect as early as 
possible and I should like to read his opinion, which has also been the 
opinion of the Hindu Law Committee 

Shrimati G, Durgabai : There was a select committee to consider 
those proposals; not he alone. 

Shri O. V. Alagesan : The Hindu Law Committee has stated as 
follows : 

“The aim should be as far as possible to arrive at agreed solutions and 
to avoid anything likely to arouse acrimonious controversy. This need not 
mean any real slowing down of the pace of reform, for true reform proceeds 
by persuasion rather than coercion.” 

Sir, I have done. 

The Assembly then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Thursday, the 15th December, 1949. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


761 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 761 


* HINDU CODE — contd 

Mr. Speaker : The motion that the House was considering was: 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 

as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

* The Honourable Shri Jawaharlal Nehru (Prime Minister) : Sir 
I crave your leave and the indulgence of the House to make a statement 
in regard to the Hindu code Bill and I trust that the Statement I make 
will meet the approval of the House. 

When at the commencement of this Session, I referred in the course 
of my remarks to the Hindu Code Bill, I said that Government attached 
a great deal of importance to this measure and they hoped that this 
consideration stage would be passed during this session. At the same 
time Government were very well aware that there was a variety of 
opinion on this subject and a large number of people were interested 
in the provisions of this Bill. And, therefore, I had suggested then that 
we propose to follow a course which we hoped would lead to a broadbased 
agreement in regard to a number of controversial clauses in the Bill. 
I should like now to amplify that statement and to make clear the policy 
of Government in regard to this matter. We have had fairly prolonged 
debate on this Bill, not only in this session but in previous sessions. 
We had set aside two days on this occasion and as the House knows, 
those days have been prolonged on two occasions. Government had no 
desire and have no desire to restrict debate on an important measure 
of this kind and in spite of the fact that we have been very hard pressed 
for time — and we have very important legislative measures awaiting 
disposal during this session — we extended the debate on two occasions 
and indeed to day was also fixed for it. 

While we have no such desire to restrict this debate, naturally 
Government is hard put to it to find more and more time, still 
we are prepared to find more time because of the importance of 
the measure and the desire of some Members of the House. But there 
was another aspect to this question and that was this; that if we are 
going to consider this matter in a spirit of trying to find an agreement 
as far as possible, in regard to controversial clauses, if, as I said we 
are going to proceed on the lines I indicated right at the commencement, 
then it is desirable for us at this stage to carry on this debate and 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VII, Part II, 19th December 1949, pp. 783-85. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


762 


762 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


perhaps produce an atmosphere, or help in producing an atmosphere, 
which does not lead easily to that kind of settlement? That was an 
important consideration which Government had in mind. Right at the 
commencement, as I have reminder the House, we had that in view. It 
was no intention of the government to proceed with this merely by virtue 
of a majority and complete acceptance of every clause of this Bill although 
there might be considerable variety of opinion in regard to it. The 
position of Government, so far as this bill is concerned is this. We stand 
committed to the broad approach of the Bill as a whole. We are prepared, 
however to consider every clause in a spirit of accommodation. Naturally, 
Government have put forward this measure as it is because they believe 
in it. But in such matters they desire to have as large a measure of 
support as possible. Now there is a distinction between that and this 
general consideration at this stage which is going on, and which they 
feel has been debated quite considerably, and a large number of Members 
of the House have participated in this debate. They attach importance 
to the conclusion of that stage of the debate so that they may take up 
the next stage of consideration, that informal consideration, as soon as 
possible. Now that informal consideration cannot effectively take place 
in that way until this first stage is ended. Otherwise we remain in mid- 
air, and we cannot get on to that next stage. So our proposal now is, 
and I venture to place it before the House, that we conclude this debate, 
on this consideration motion as early as possible. I would not mind 
government giving more time, even at the expense of other legislative 
measures; but I would submit to the House that if the general proposal 
to have this informal discussion is agreeable to the House, then it is 
desirable to go to that stage and not to vitiate the atmosphere by 
acrimonious debate any more at this stage. 

When I talk about informal consultations, I should like to make 
clear what I mean. I say ‘informal’, not that I do not consider 
it important, but because I wish to give a measure of flexibility to 
that discussion so that my hon. colleague the law Minister, who 
has shouldered the burden of this Bill, and who I trust will gladly accept 
and give effect to the proposals that I have made, so that he can consult 
not only the Members of the Select Committee, but other Members 
of this House who are interested and may even consult others outside 
this House. Now, that would be difficult if a certain rigid procedure 
was adopted, and also when you adopt a formal and rigid procedure, 
it becomes a little more difficult for that attitude of free and easy 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


763 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 763 


discussion, and give and take which might prevail more easily if the 
procedure were more flexible and informal. Therefore, I make this 
proposal to the House and I do submit that in this matter, having 
considered all the discussions and debate that we have gone through, 
this is a reasonable proposal which should meet with the approval 
of all sections of the House because it is an attempt, a real attempt 
on the part of the Government to carry some thing through this 
House and through the country with the largest measure of support. 
That does not mean that in any matter over which we may 
disagree violently we give up our opinions or surrender to anyone 
else’s judgment. No one expects any Member of this House to do that 
if he believes in something. But it is the essence of democratic 
procedure for us to debate and consider and try to convince each 

other and try to meet each others points, but somethings giving up 

sometime so as to arrive at a decision which can be enforced 

with the largest measure of consent that is the procedure. I would 

submit to the House, that we should follow in this important measure 
also. 

I do not wish the house to think in the slightest degree that we 
consider that this Hindu Code Bill is not of importance, because we 
do attach the greatest importance to it, as I said, not because of any 
particular clause or anything, but because of the basic approach to 
this vast problem in this country which is intimately allied to other 
problems, economic and social. We have achieved political freedom 
in this country, political independence. That is a stage in the journey 
and there are other stages, economic, social and others, and if society 
is to advance, there must be this integrated advance on all fronts. 
One advance on one front and being kept back on other fronts means 
functioning imperfectly, and also means that the first advance also 
is in danger. Therefore, we have to consider this matter in this spirit, 
how we should advance on all fronts, always keeping in view, of 
course, that the advance is co-ordinated and meets with the approval 
of the great majority of the population. I say this because, after all, 
we function as a democratic assembly answerable to the people of 
India, and we must carry them with us. Keeping that in view it is 
not good enough for us and for this House merely to be led. We have 
to lead and we have to give the lead, and in giving that lead we 
have to carry others with us, and we propose to give the lead in this 
and in other matters, but always carrying others with us. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4\V14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


764 


764 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


This, therefore, is the procedure that I have detailed, that is to say, 
that we may put an end to the present stage of consideration of this 
motion by adopting it, and then the House may permit Government to 
take those informal steps which I have indicated in regard to consultation 
about the various parts and clauses. That might be undertaken so 
that when the matter comes up again, as I hope, at the next session, 
it may have the support of a very great majority in this House and 
outside. 

*The Honourable Shri Satyanarayan Sinha (Minister of State for 
Parliamentary Affairs) : Sir, I move: 

“That the question be now put.” 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad ( West Bengal : Muslim): May I ask for a 
clarification ? 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think we need take any more time now, 
specially in view of the very frank statement made by the hon. the Leader 
of the House just now. I may remind hon. Members that this stage of 
the motion has been debated for full nine days and to-day is the tenth 
day. Thirty three speakers have taken part in it and we have devoted 
thirty hours and twenty eight minutes. I think the time devoted is 
sufficient and 

An Honourable Member : May I know 

Mr. Speaker : I am not bound to give any reasons when I accept 
a closure, but I think I should also explain what I feel about it. I 
am convinced from the statement just now made by the hon. the Prime 
Minister that everybody inside the House and outside the House is 
going to have a full chance of having a say with respect to the various 

provisions of the Bill. The present stage is the stage of general 

consideration and we are not discussing any particular clause of 
any particular item. It is possible that people may differ about details 
and yet so far as the generality of the Bill is concerned, there 
might be a great measure of agreement. If we were to continue 

our discussion at this stage, I am afraid our discussion is bound to be 
very vague, general and rambling; perhaps it will consist of repetitions 
also. The more important stage, therefore, is the clause by clause 

consideration of the Bill and before that stage comes, hon. Members 
will have every opportunity of considering all questions and discussing 
them with the Government and also other people outside the House. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VII, Part II, 19th December 1949, pp. 785-87. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


765 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 765 


Therefore, I think that proceeding with the further consideration of 
the Bill will mean practically a waste of time. I am therefore inclined 
to accept this closure and I would then call the Hon. Minister of Law 
to speak. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari (Assam : General): I would like to 
make a statement. 

Mr. Speaker : What statement is the hon. Member going to make? 
If I permit the hon. Member to make a statement, everybody will feel 
entitled to make a statement. The hon. Member will please resume his 
seat. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi ( U. P. General): I want to have an 
interpretation from you, Sir whether, after this motion is adopted at this 
stage, would it mean that the House would be committed to the principles 
of all the clauses of the Bill? 

Mr. Speaker : I will clarify the position. In fact, when the House 
accepted the motion for reference to Select Committee, it accepted the 
principle of the Bill. Now, in a Bill of this type, it is very difficult to 
decide what the principle is, because every clause may be made into a 
principle. I may make the position clear. Looking to the extent of the 
provisions of this Bill — its wide extent — it is clear that the only principle 
accepted by the House is that it is desirable to codify the Hindu Law 
and every provision of the Bill is open for discussion, alteration, change 
and all that sort of thing. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : Then we have no objection Sir. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : I want to make a suggestion to 
the House on this motion. Closure may be moved and accepted. I have 
no objection to that. I do not want any further discussion on that subject. 
As a matter of fact, in order to create an atmosphere of compromise, 
I have myself not spoken in opposition to it. What I want to suggest 
is that this motion may not be put to the vote now. We want to convince 
the opposition outside that a practical gain has been made by the 
announcement of the hon. the Prime Minister. 

Mr. Speaker : I think that after the statement of the hon. the Leader 
of the House as regards the procedure and what I have said as regards 
what is going to be binding and what is not going to be binding, there 
remains no doubt as to the effect of carrying this consideration motion. 
In fact, it is not desirable to keep that point open so that when the 
consideration is again taken up, there may be further discussions and 
further inducements to speeches. I will therefore put the motion to the 
House. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


766 


766 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Dr. P. S. Deshmukh ( C. P. and Berar : General) : On a point of 
order, Sir. We have all heard the excellent suggestion made by the hon. 
the Prime Minister and there is no doubt that the House is likely to 
accept it. My point of order is that the question before the House is 
a motion for consideration. The suggestion now made really means 
referring the Bill back to the Select Committee. 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : I put it to you, Sir, that this is circumventing 
the parliamentary procedure. The only procedure rightful and just, would 
be to commit the Bill to the Select Committee, either the same or an 
expanded committee. The suggestion made is against parliamentary 
procedure and should not be accepted. If the suggestion is acceptable 
to the House, I have not the slightest objection, but the regular procedure 
is to commit the Bill to the same Select Committee or a Select Committee, 
which may be enlarged. 

Mr. Speaker : I see the force of the Hon. Member’s objection from 
the procedural point of view, but what the hon. the Leader of the House 
has done is not to place any motion for further consideration before the 
House. He has merely explained his position. He has stated how the 
Government is going to act and how it will proceed with the consideration 
of the clauses of the Bill? There is no reference there for further reference 
to any formal Committee of this House. If such a motion were to be 
made, then of course I would have been glad to accept that point of 
order. At present there is no such motion before the House, and I think 
it is not against parliamentary procedure. On the contrary, even if it 
is a little different from the ordinary procedue, as, in my opinion 
democracy means a spirit of accommodation and give and take, we must 
evolve a new procedure. I will now put the motion to the House. 

The question is 

“That the question be now put.” 

The motion was negatived. 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar ( Minister of Law) : Sir, 
there are before the House in all three motions. Two of them are 
sponsored by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. One of them proposes a reference 
of the Bill to the Select Committee for further consideration. The second 
motion proposes that the Bill be circulated for eliciting further public 
opinion. In addition to them there is my motion before the House 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. VII, Part II, 19th December 1949, pp. 787-92. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


767 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 767 


which proposes consideration of the report of the Select Committee. I 
propose to say a few words with regard to the motions moved by 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. The one thing that I have noticed in the course 
of the debate which has ranged over nine days, is that it has had no 
support even from the opponents of the Bill. At the most, only two 
members out of the thirty three, who have taken part in this debate, 
have favoured his proposition. The rest of them have not supported him 
at all. Secondly it is quite clear to those who have followed his speech 
which was for more than six hours, that notwithstanding the fact that 
he was questioned from time to time while he was speaking to give us 
the reasons why this Bill should again be referred to the Select 
Committee or circulated to the public, he has in my judgment not 
succeeded in giving us any good ground for supporting his motions. I 
therefore, think that it is unnecessary for me to waste my time as well 
as the time of the House in dealing with his two motions. 

Now Sir, I come to my own motion. As you have said, there have been 
altogether thirty three speakers who have taken part in this debate. I 
would like to give to the House some idea of the measure of support 
and the measure of opposition exhibited by the members of the House 
to this measure. Out of the thirty three members who have taken part 
in this debate, something like twenty three have spoken in favour. Out 
of these twenty three, there were only two who have said that they were 
prepared to give only qualified support to this Bill. Three remained 
neutral; three were for circulation and four for the postponement of the 
consideration of the Bill. It is therefore, quite clear that a very large 
majority of the Members of this House are in favour of the Bill — as I 
said, as many as twenty-three. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : But does he know that thirty-four 
persons who wanted to oppose the Bill, whose names were given had 
no opportunity to speak? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am only making an 
analysis of the speeches of those who have spoken. (Interruption). 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Taking the matter a little 
further and analysing the stand taken by those who have opposed the 
measure in order to see which part of the Bill has been attacked, I find 
that in this Bill which seeks to codify the Hindu Law relating to 
eight matters, there are five to which there has been no opposition 
whatsoever. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


768 


768 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Because you didn’t allow us to 
speak. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I hope, Sir my friend will 
not interrupt. 

Mr. Speaker : The Hon. Member just now promised that he would 
not like to spoil the atmosphere of a compromise. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : He is not to speak now that was 
the term of the compromise. 

Mr. Speaker : Order order, No running commentary now. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, Sir, the Bill seeks 
to modify and codify the Hindu Law with regard to Marriage, Adoption, 
Guardianship, Joint Family Property, Women’s Property, Intestate 
Succession, Testamentary Succession and Maintenance. So far as Adoption 
is concerned, I have seen no opposition to this part of the Bill, nor to 
the part relating to Guardianship 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (East Punjab : General): I opposed 
some of the provisions relating to adoption and absence of provision for 
appointment of heirs. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Nor to Women’s Property, 
Testamentary Succession and Maintenance. The only parts of the Bill 
to which there has been some opposition are those which relate to 
Marriage, Joint Family Property and Intestate Succession. Even with 
regard to these parts of the Bill, the opposition is concentrated on one 
or two points. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : On a point of order, Sir, You 
yourself ruled that all these matters can be discussed when we come 
to amendments. 

Mr. Speaker : Will the hon. Member resume his seat ? I think 
Members have to be patient and must not interfere when other Members 
are putting forth their points of view. The hon. Minister must be allowed 
to go on uninterrupted, and if hon. Members have to say anything, they 
will have a chance later on when the bill comes in for discussion here. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : But, Sir if you don’t allow us 

Mr. Speaker : I do not propose to allow any interference at all. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : To explain the position . . . 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


769 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 769 


Mr. Speaker : Allowing to explain the position is again to go on 
replying at every sentence. I do not propose to allow anything of the 
kind. (Interruption). The hon. Member will not now interfere at all so 
that I may not be compelled to take a very serious notice of these 
interruptions or points of order or suggestions. But when I put the 
motion 

Shri H. V. Kamath (C. P. and Berar : General): Did you say, Sir, 
that the Bill would again come up for discussion? 

Mr. Speaker : The clauses will come up for discussion. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya (Madras : General): May I respectfully 
make a small suggestion? This is going to be discussed or not — the 
question of the consideration motion being accepted. Therefore, whatever 
statements are made by the hon. Minister in charge of the Bill, they 
will go unchallenged. And so long as they go unchallenged a vote cannot 
be correctly obtained. The hon. Mover has been absent for a number 
of hours and he is not posted with information as to what has been said 
or what has not been said. For instance he says that on the question 
of ‘Adoption’ there was no opposition and here is a gentleman who rises 
and says that he did oppose those provisions. I would therefore request 
that the hon. Minister will not make his reply controversial. 

Mr. Speaker : The point is as I have understood the hon. Minister 
that he is trying merely to summarise his point of view. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : No. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, Order. Let hon. Members not interfere. I believe 
he is perfectly entitled to lay before the House his point of view. It may 
be correct, it may not be correct. Therefore, when he is replying, his 
reply has to be heard for what it is worth. Hon. Members should not 
immediately get up and say “this statement is wrong” or “that statement 
is wrong” because we will then be drifting into a controversy. Let us 
hear him. And the best method of democracy is to be patient with the 
opponent. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : Can we not reply to the wrong 
statements made? 

Mr. Speaker : No reply now because the opposition will get their 
chance when the clause by clause reading comes in. 

Sjt. Rohini Kumar Chaudhari : He will also get a chance then. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


770 


770 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Speaker : If the hon. Member now interferes I am afraid I 
will have to take a very serious notice. There should be no interruption 
at all, no interference and no remarks. The hon. the Law Minister 
is entitled to proceed and give his own interpretation and his own 
reading of the facts as he thinks, are correct. We may not all agree 
with it (Interruption). Order order. No replies, no arguments now. 
I propose to allow no interruption. The hon. the Law Minister will 
go on. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, as I was saying, to 
five parts of the Bill there is practically no opposition. With regard 

to the three parts relating to Marriage, Joint Family Property and 

Intestate Succession, so far as I have been able to follow the attitude 
taken by those who have opposed this measure, I find that their 
opposition is concentrated on certain points and not to the whole of 
those parts. With regard to Marriage I find the Opposition is 

concentrated on the subject matter of Divorce. With regard to Joint 
Family again, the opposition seems to be concentrated on the rule 
of survivorship. And with regard to Intestate Succession the opposition 
seems to be concentrated on the daughter’s share. If I was therefore 
required to give a full reply to the debate and to the arguments 
advanced by those who have opposed the measure I would have 

concentrated myself upon these three matters, namely Divorce, the 
rule of survivorship and the brighter’s share. I might say that I had 
thoroughly prepared myself to defend the provisions contained in 
these three parts of the Bill. But in view of the statement made by 
hon. the Prime Minister, I think it is unnecessary to enter into any 
controversy now. I welcome the suggestion made by hon. the Prime 
Minister and I undertake to give the fullest trial to the suggestion 
that he has made. Consequently I do not propose to give a detailed 
reply on these matters at this stage. As you, Sir, have suggested I 
too would like to reserve my reply to a later stage. 

There is only one point which I think it is necessary for me to 
dwell upon in order that the House may realise the position in 
which the country finds itself. It will be noticed that the integration of 
India into one State and one Republic has brought within its territory 
a variety of Codes dealing with Hindu Law. There is the State of Baroda 
which has a Hindu Code which is different from the Hindu law as it 
is in operation in the provinces of India. That State has now become 
part and parcel of the Bombay Province. Similarly, Travancore and 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


771 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 771 


Cochin which were outside the territorial limits and the sovereignty 
of India as we knew under the Government of India Act, 1935, have 
become part and parcel of one India. Mysore which has also a Hindu 
Code of its own in the matter of women’s right to property, considerably 
different from the law prevalent in the Provinces of British India, 
has also become part and parcel of one India. Therefore, on the 26th 
of January, 1950, when the Republic will be inaugurated, we will be 
faced with a variety of systems of Hindu Law which we must do our 
best to co-ordinate. How would it be possible, for instance, for the 
Bombay Province to administer two systems of Hindu Law, one 
operative within that territory which is called Baroda and the other 
in the rest of the Province, when both territories have become 
integrated and part of one Province and one State? The same will 
be the case with the other territories. Supposing for instance, some 
of the parts of India which are under the sovereignty of the 
Portuguese or the French and which we hope to be able to recover 
under our dominion, also have different systems of Hindu Law, when 
they come in the same question will arise before us. What is to happen 
to the Law which the Hindus in Goa will be bringing with them? 
Are we going to allow them to retain the law which they will bring? 
Are we going to impose a Law which is in existence at present on 
them? Or are we going to evolve a system of Law which would be 
acceptable to both? The integration of India, therefore, has in a very 
pointed manner brought before us the problem of the codification and 
the modification of Hindu Law and what I want to suggest to the 
House is that this is a problem which could not be postponed nor 
could it be avoided if we want to bring about harmony among the 
variety of people who would be coming and becoming the citizens of 
the Indian Dominion. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Codification has been accepted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Then, Sir, I would like to 
draw the attention of the House to one other point which appears to 
me a very important one. The House, at any rate those who indulge 
in opposing the Bill, seem to have completely forgotten the provisions 
contained in the Indian Constitution. Article 15 of the Indian Constitution 
which we have passed says in definite and clear terms under Fundamental 
Rights : 

“The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only 

of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.” 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


772 


772 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Any one who has studied Hindu Law carefully will have to admit that 
apart from the many defects which the Hindu Law has, there are 
principles in the Hindu Law which discriminate between the Savarna 
castes and the Shudras. They also discriminate between a male Hindu 
and a female Hindu. 

Shri Mahavir Tyagi : And a Hindu and a Muslim also ! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is therefore quite clear 
that parts of Hindu Law will be in conflict with the provisions of the 
Constitution. But that is only an understatement. There is a further point 
to be considered; it is not that this limitation imposed by article 15 is 
going to apply to future laws that the Parliament or the State Legislatures 
may make. The Constitution has gone stage beyond and in article 13, 
which I should like to read to the House, it is provided that: 

“All laws in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution in the territory of India in so far as they are inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Part, shall to the extent of such inconsistency, 
be void.” 

Therefore, looking at the matter as a lawyer, I have not the least doubt 
about it that unless Hindu Law is not only codified but also modified 
so as to bring it in consonance with the provisions of article 15, parts 
of the Hindu Law will be declared to be void by the judiciary in view 
of article 13. Does the House desire that the Hindu Law should be 
exposed to judicial scrutiny in terms of article 13 of the Constitution 
and to have parts of Hindu Law declared, bit by bit, as and when matters 
are taken before the Court, as void, or would the House like to take 
the matter in its own hands and reform the Hindu Law so as to make 
it consistent with article 15 and not to expose it to the danger of having 
been declared void under article 13? If the House does not wish that 
the Hindu Law be broken bit by bit by the judiciary but that it becomes 
an integrated system consistent with our Constitution, then my submission 
is that it will be very wrong for this House to postpone the consideration 
of this matter. 

Sir, these, in my judgment are very important considerations, and in 
view of that the House could not afford to postpone or delay the 
consideration of this matter. I hope the House will therefore accept my 
motion and carry through the consideration stage of this Bill. 

Dr. B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya : Sir, may I ask for a clarification? 
Dr. Ambedkar has stated that all those provisions which are inconsistent 
with the particular article of the Constitution which he has quoted 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


773 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 773 


will become void. Is it his contention that on the 26th January when 
the new Constitution comes into force, and the article which he has 
quoted certainly come into force, on that day all this portion of the Hindu 
Law become void and there will be a vacuum left? Can a more 
unreasonable presumption be made ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. That is expressing hon. Member’s own 
opinion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I have exercised, if 
I may say so, a great deal of self-control with regard to my friend 
Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya. He would have heard me say, if I had said 
all that I wanted to say about it. 

Mr. Speaker : There are two amendments to the original 

proposition : That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the 
Hindu Law as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into 
consideration. I shall first put to the House the amendments. The first 
amendment is by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad asking for circulation for 
obtaining further opinion thereon by the end of 1949. It is too late to 
extend the date. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : May I explain the position, Sir ? 

Mr. Speaker : No. The question is: 

“That the Bill be circulated for the purpose of obtaining further opinion 
thereon by the end of 1949.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Speaker : Then the next amendment. The question is : 

“That the Bill be re-committed to the same Select Committee, to which 
it was sent, for a further report thereon with reference to the original 
Bill which was referred to it on the 9th April 1948.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : I claim a division, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : Very well. I find the ‘Ayes’ are five and the rest are 
‘Noes’. The motion is lost by a large majority. Now I will put the original 
motion. 

The question is : 

“That the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, 
as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Prof. Shibban Lai Saksena (U. P. : General): Sir, the ‘Noes’ have 
it. 

Mr. Speaker : I find their number is only six or seven. The majority 
of Members are for the motion. 


• • 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4\V14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


774 


774 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* HINDU MARRIAGES VALIDITY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

(Amendment of Section 2) 

Shri Himatsingka (West Bengal) : I beg to move for leave to 

introduce a Bill further to amend the Hindu Marriages Validity Act, 

1949 (amendment of section 2). 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“The leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend the 

Hindu Marriages Validity Act, 1949 ( Amendment of section 2).” 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Himatsingka : I introduce the Bill. 

**HINDU CODE 

Mr. Speaker : That brings us to the next item on the agenda, the 
motion of Dr. Ambedkar: Further consideration of the Bill to amend and 
codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, as reported by the Select 
Committee. 

Now, with reference to this there are a number of amendments. I will 
just call upon Members one by one. 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh): The House has been taken quite unaware 
on this matter. I feel that some time should be given to the Members. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. One at a time. Has the Hon. Law Minister 
anything to say ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : It might be taken. 

Mr. Speaker : There was some suggestion that Members are being 
taken by surprise. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It cannot be said because the Bill has been on the 
agenda for the last fortnight. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): But those who are most interested 
in taking up the Bill may have a grievance. Mrs. Renuka Ray is not 
here and many others who are particularly anxious to take it up. 

Mr. Speaker : What I was thinking about was, whatever the fate 
of the various amendments or adjournment motions, the Members who 
have tabled them are not in their seats. I was just considering as to 

*C.A. (Leg) D., Vol. VII, Part II, 12th December 1950, p. 1551. 

**C.A. (Leg) D., (IV) Vol. VII, Part II, 14th December 1950, pp. 1780-93. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


775 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 775 


whether it will be proper or fair on our part just to call them out when 
this business is being taken up in an unexpected manner. That is the 
only point which really worries me. I find that Mr. Rohini Kumar 
Chaudhari is present. I also notice that Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is here. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam): I would ask you to give us half an 
hour so that other Members may also be present. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us proceed. I will call upon Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): May I suggest that the discussion 
should begin with a statement from the Hon. the Law Minister who held 
a conference with various interests. He has circulated a short report of 
the discussions that took place in the conference, but I think all sides 
of the House will be glad to hear a fuller account of the conference from 
him and the resume of the amendments that he has proposed. I think 
that would be a more proper course and this in a sense will give Members 
some time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not know that I have anything more to add. 
I took particular care to submit a statement to you with a view to 
its being circulated to Members at the very commencement of this 
session, so that Members may have a full account of what happened. 
I am rather sorry that we were not able to take a verbatim record 
of the proceedings of the Conference on account of the fact that 
several Members spoke in several different languages. Some spoke 
in Hindi, some spoke in English, some spoke in Marathi, some spoke 
in Gujarati and some spoke even in Sanskrit. It was quite impossible 
to take down a verbatim record, and I think, some also spoke in Tamil 
language. It was, therefore, quite impossible to have any person as 
a stenographer to take down the verbatim record. Otherwise, I should 
have been very glad to do so. Consequently, I myself, according to 
my memory summarised the points that were put before the Conference 
for discussion, the points which I found had emerged in the course 
of the discussion that had taken place in this House, from different 
stands of the House. They were placed before them and they were 
invited to address the Conference and I subsequently found out what 
was the largest measure of agreement among the speakers who took 
part and in accordance with that, I have suggested certain amendments 
to the original Bill. 

You will also recall, Sir that in order to help the House. I have 
prepared two different texts of the Hindu Code, one in a serial order 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


776 


776 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


giving the original section and also the new amendments that I propose 
to incorporate, so that they may have a complete view. I have also 
prepared a second text book, so to say, which contains the original text 
of the Select Committee’s sections on the right-hand side and the new 
Code with the amendments on the left-hand side, so that whenever any 
amendment is moved not only the members will be able to find how the 
old clause reads but what the new clause also says. I think, I have done 
my level best to help the House to a proper understanding of the 
provisions of the Hindu Code as modified by the results of the informal 
committee. If any Hon. Member has any question to ask, I shall certainly 
be very glad to add or supplement whatever information I have given 
in that statement. 

Shri Jnani Ram (Bihar): The Hon. Law Minister has stated that this 
Bill will be discussed for a day or two and that it will be postponed. 

Mr. Speaker : We are not concerned with what happened at the party 
meeting. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : The Hon. Minister may be pleased to make 
a statement in connection with what was stated in the party meeting 
itself. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. The Party proceedings are not open here. 

Shri Sivan Pillay (Travancore-Cochin): May I know if the clause by 
clause discussion is to take place now and that the general discussion 
on the principles of the Bill over? 

Mr. Speaker : The Hon. Member has perhaps lost sight of the progress 
of the Bill. The consideration motion was adopted and now what remains 
to be done is to take the Bill clause by clause. I would put clause 2 
to the House, but before that, there are certain amendments or certain 
motions urging the adjournment of the debate. These being adjournment 
motions must have precedence and, therefore, I am calling upon 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, if he wishes, of course, to move his motion. 

The Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs (Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru) : One of the hon. Members put a certain question 
to me and I think it is fair to the house that I shall answer it, although 
you, Sir, were good enough to consider it as being not necessary. This 
Bill is obviously one which will normally take a long time of this House, 
if we go through it clause by clause. It is a contentious matter in 
which opinions differ. Nevertheless Government attach great 
importance to it and we do wish it to be taken up now, but we realize 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


777 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 777 


that it is in the nature of things, not possible to go through it during 
this session even if we take it from day to day. Therefore, Government 
propose, subject to your approval, Sir, that we might deal with the initial 
stage there are certain objections and if all those objections can be 
disposed of this way or that — so that the way may be clear and not 
otherwise take up the time of the House during the session. 

Mr. Speaker : Do I understand the position correctly that the 
amendments or motions by way of postponement should be disposed of 
first and that clause by clause consideration may be taken up later ? 

The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs (Shri Satya 
Narayan Sinha) : Yes. That is so. 

Mr. Speaker : In light of this, is it necessary to move any 
adjournment ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): No. 

Mr. Speaker : He may formally move without any speech, so that 
we may proceed with the other business. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: 

“That the debate on the Hindu Code Bill be adjourned to a special 
session of Parliament to be called for the purpose to enable Members to 
fully consider the Bill and the numerous Government amendments to the 
same.” 

I do not wish to move the other alternatives. 

Mr. Speaker : Is he particular for a special session ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I want to place certain views and leave 
the matter entirely to Government. It is not by way of opposition or 
obstruction. 

Mr. Speaker : The point is what should be the form of the motion. 
He wants postponement to the next session. That is the long and short 
of it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : In that case, I shall, with your permission, 
move the alternatives also. I beg to move : 

“That the debate on the Hindu Code Bill be adjourned till a date during 
the next Budget session.” 

and 

“That the debate on the Hindu Code Bill be adjourned to a date after 
the Budget session is over.” 

I am entirely in the hands of Government as to what form the motion 
should take. The Hon. Prime Minister has clarified the situation that 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


778 


778 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


we consider certain objections and later on at a suitable time we take 
up the clause by clause consideration. That entirely satisfies my point 
of view. It would be for the Government to consider and fix a suitable 
date or time. 

We no doubt technically accepted the principles of the Bill, but subject 
to a certain understanding. Though not incorporated in the proceedings, 
the Hon. Law Minister gave an undertaking that he will seek 
representative public opinion conversant with the Hindu Law, and 
suggest amendments to the Bill. As I have already submitted, though 
the first reading was passed, it was substantially subject to Government 
being able to find suitable amending formulae to be placed before the 
House, and which would be acceptable to both sides. I find, however, 
that a large number of amendments of a very important character have 
been tabled by the Hon. the Law Minister. I also find that a very large 
number of amendments have been tabled by the members. There are 
17 lists already before us and from the newspaper reports, I find that 
Government have decided to hold another final session for clause by 
clause consideration. There is every reason to suppose that if it were 
not so, many more amendments would have come and that is a matter 
for serious consideration. 

My point is this. These are very important matters. In clause by clause 
consideration, we must not lose sight of the fact that the House is very 
seriously divided in matters of detail. In these circumstances, it would 
be better, I submit, for Government to give the House sufficient time 
to consider, the amendments, and find out the points of agreement. The 
Hon. Law Minister said that he consulted a number of people ; but he 
did not, so far as I am aware, consult the different sections of the House 
which were opposed to the principles of the Bill. A number of Members 
opposed the first Reading who have not been consulted. 

Shri Tyagi : All of them were not Hindus. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : At least there was one who was not 
a Hindu, that is myself. The point is this. All these matters could 
not properly be discussed and decided upon on the floor of the House. 
They go to the fundamentals of the Bill. Each clause is practically 
a new and important subject. Each clause calls for a detailed 
consideration. Therefore, my submission is that the Government should 
give us time and should be willing to sit at a Round Table Conference 
to straighten out all these differences so that a Bill more acceptable 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


779 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 779 


to the House in general may be evolved. These things should not be 
allowed to be decided on the spur of the moment and on the floor of 
the House. 

Great things have happened meanwhile. The Indian States have been 
integrated. Their opinions were never taken. I believe agricultural land 
is now within the purview of the Bill. This creates another new situation. 
Therefore, in the light of important amendments coming from Government, 
and in view of the extension of the area geographically as well as to 
subjects. I think enough time should be given so that full consideration 
may be given to the Bill by members. There should be good machinery 
to settle these differences so that some agreed or some largely agreed 
formulae may be evolved. On a controversial legislation like this, we 
should be given sufficient time. I submit that the point of view I 
submitted during the first reading stage was fully justifed in view of 
the fact that at that time, the Hindu community’s attention was not 
sufficiently drawn to it. My objection has again been justified by the 
fact that Government, itself has come forward with a large number of 
substantial amendments. My task is done. I supposed at that time that 
I was doing a public duty in drawing attention to certain defects which 
would have otherwise escaped attention. What kind of law would suit 
this House and the Hindu community is really primarily a matter for 
the Hindus. I am not primarily interested in the exact form and shape 
in which the Hindu Code is to be passed. My position is merely to indicate 
certain practical considerations and suggest amendments. From these 
points of view, I think Government should consider the matter and let 
us know what they want to do, and I am ready to offer constructive 
help to the passage of the Bill. The exact shape which the disputed 
clauses will take is not a matter of much personal interest to me, though 
not a matter in which I have no concern at all. I submit that these are 
matters which would induce Government to give us sufficient time and 
devise a machinery to solve the differences of opinion and adopt a code 
which would be more or less acceptable generally to the House. That 
is all I have to submit. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : On a point of information, Sir. 
The hon. Member had two amendments, one for adjournment sine 
die and .... 

Mr. Speaker : I am not permitting that. 

I was just considering as to what would be the best form of the 
motion. One is for a special session, and the other is still a date during 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


780 


780 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the Budget Session ; the third is, sometime after the Budget Session 
is over. Shall we postpone till the next session ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I am entirely in the hands of Government. 

Mr. Speaker : “The usual amendment is of course till the next Session. 
Shall I say : “That the debate on the Hindu Code Bill be adjourned to 
a date during or after the next Budget Session ?” 

3 P.M. 

Dr. Ambedkar : So far as the objective is concerned, there is, of 
course, no dispute between Members of Government and others who are 
in perfect harmony with Government’s view on this subject, namely, that 
more time may be given to Members to study the Bill and to give their 
considered opinions. As the Prime Minister just now said, it is not the 
intention of Government to proceed seriatim with the consideration of 
the Bill, clause by clause. Therefore, my submission is this, that it should 
be left to Government to take up the Hindu Code Bill next session 
whenever they want to take it. They may have a special session, they 
may have a larger Budget session, so that part of it may be devoted 
to the Hindu Code Bill and part to the usual Budget discussion or it 
may call for some other session after the Budget Session. I do not want 
Government’s hands to be tied down by any particular motion. As I said, 
I do not propose to carry through this Bill during this session. It is quite 
impossible. And it might probably be quite unfair. All the same, I want 
to oppose the motion, because I do not want to postpone the consideration 
of the Bill as a result of the motion moved by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 
Government have given an assurance and Government will abide by it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not know why I should become the 
target of these oblique remarks. 

Mr. Speaker : Therefore, I need not seriously consider the form of 
the motion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : He may move all the motions and we shall negative 
them. 

Shri Tyagi : Or we may move the previous question and this question 
may be postponed. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think that is necessary. Well, supposing I 
say that the matter is adjourned and we take the next business ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I suggest that it would be very good, in my 
judgment, if you, after disposing of the motion by Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad .... 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


781 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 781 


Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Dispose of me! 

Dr. Ambedkar : If after disposing of it, you merely say that 
clause 2 stand part of the Bill. And then I myself will move that the 
further consideration of the Bill be now postponed. I am prepared to 
put the Hindu Code Bill at the bottom of Government’s agenda. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : I had tabled an amendment, though I cannot 
say exactly what it is, because I have not got the papers with me now. 
I was not prepared for this subject. But if I remember a right, my motion 
was that we may have a special session for the purpose of dealing with 
the Hindu Code Bill. My grievance against bringing this sort of discussion 
in the midst of a very busy session is that we cannot get proper 
opportunity to study the subject. Therefore, I want to have this question 
considered in a special session. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar (Madras) : After all, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad’s 
motion only asks that sufficient time should be allowed to Members. 
And the Prime Minister has also agreed to this. Therefore, I would 
request Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad not to press his motion, and now, in 
view of the Prime Minister’s statement, this may be adjourned to some 
day next session. And it is for Government to fix the date during 
the next session, or call for a special session immediately thereafter. 
Now that we agree that we should not take up the clause by clause 
consideration of the Bill, I think both sides are satisfied. Therefore, 
let the Prime Minister’s statement be accepted and Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad need not press his amendment. Therefore, this may be 
adjourned to some day next session and it will mean that the Prime 
Minister or Government will fix the date that is suitable and 
convenient. 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I again intervene ? I do not want a repetition 
of what has been taking place in this House. Every time this Bill 
comes in, some hon. Member takes it into his head to move a dilatory 
motion. Now this thing must stop. We have reached a stage when 
it is proper that the Bill should be taken up clause by clause, and 
therefore, in token of the fact that the House has consented to the 
consideration of the Bill, clause by clause, I would request you, that 
you should put clause 2 to the House ; and thereafter we may adjourn 
the discussion. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I think the object of these oblique remarks 
is my humble self. I can give even a fuller undertaking that I will not 
bring in any dilatory motion. 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


782 


782 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Speaker : But there are not only the positions stated by the Law 
Minister and Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, but there is also the difficulty of 
Mr. Chaudhari. Therefore, I think what I should do is this. I shall place 
the motions before the House and it can vote upon them. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : But I have to explain my motion, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member has already explained it. I don’t 
think any further time need be taken over this. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : May I tell Mr. Chaudhari that as the object 
of his motion is that this question should be adjourned to a special 
session, we will assume that it is defeated. It is impossible to have a 
special session. Anyway, let us leave the entire matter in the hands of 
Government. They may tag it on to the Budget session to fix some 
convenient time. Why should he commit to have a special session ? If 
government finds it necessary to have one, they may have one. It does 
not serve any purpose committing them to have a special session. 

Dr. Pattabhi (Madras) : The attitude of Government has more or less 
taken a change favourable to a more leisurely consideration of this 
subject. I do not want to dilate upon the subject at any great length. 
But I shall certainly object to the Hon. the Law Minister saying in a 
pedagogic manner that this kind of asking for adjournment will not be 
allowed. It must be allowed. It is the right of every member of this house 
to use all legitimate methods of opposition where there is an honest and 
sincere conviction on the side of opposition. I do not go the length of 
Balfour who said that it is the duty of the opposition to oppose the 
Government by all fair means if possible, and by all foul means, if 
necessary. But I will only say this much that if the Prime Minister in 
the abundance of his wisdom admitted that there are two schools of 
thought, and he has conceded the adjournment of the proposition very 
generously and very fairly, in view of that for the Hon. Law Minister 
to assume this professorial, pedagogic and pontifical attitude, is not 
desirable. It will only alienate attitudes that have almost been reconciled. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : And persons call up an opposition where 
there is none now! 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : I want to make it perfectly clear that 
I stand by every word that the Hon. Law Minister has said. The position 
is this. Everyone feels that there should be fuller time for the 
consideration of this question, and therefore we decided to suggest 
to the House that the clause by clause consideration might take place 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


783 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 783 


later. We should decide clearly the nature of the motion. If it is a dilatory 
motion and if the hon. Member wants the motion to be considered, let 
us consider it here and now. We are not going to postpone that motion. 
I do not want to prevent any motion. If we have a dilatory motion, it 
must be decided here and now. 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh) : We know that there are very 
emphatic differences of opinion on this point; that acute differences 
of opinion exist between different sections of this House. Our Prime 
Minister has taken the practical view, and as we have the right to 
expect always, he has given us a lead in this matter and has said 
that this is a controversial issue on which a great deal of time has, 
in the very nature of things, to be given. May I appeal that since 
the matter is to be postponed, since no practical purpose is going 
to be served by our continuing this debate today on any motion or 
on any section; since there is a very keen and definite difference of 
opinion on this issue; and since the question of the enactment of the 
Hindu Code itself will not in any way be advanced by its being taken 
up now, may I respectfully submit that no section, no viewpoint, will 
lose anything if we leave the matter where it stands, as the item 
is going to be postponed. If the intention were to take the Bill into 
consideration and make any real progress, I would have nothing to 
say because, then, every Member would have the opportunity of 
expressing his views, and then whatever the house decided in 

its collective wisdom, would come on the Statute Book. But, since, 

according to the course suggested, no real progress is going 
to be made, I suggest that the very great opposition, the very 
great anxiety which prevails in the country should not be worsened, 
should not be deepened. I know that one view unfortunately is 
that it does not matter what the country thinks on this matter. 
But there is the other view that every side of the question 
should be carefully considered and respected. I do not wish to go 
into that matter in detail now. But I most earnestly appeal to 

Government not to do an unnecessary thing which will serve no 
useful purpose, but which will, on the other hand, create still greater 
resentment and dissatisfaction in the country. I submit that if 
we are going to postpone this matter and I fully approve the 

proposal — we should do so wholeheartedly instead of saying that we 
are postponing and yet we are not postponing, we are not taking it 
up now and yet we are taking it up, we are not going on with it 
and yet we are going on with it. Therefore, if the matter is to be 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-L4W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


784 


784 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


postponed it should be postponed immediately as it is till such future 
date as Government may fix for it. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): I have not been able to follow the 
Hon. Law Minister’s proposal. Does he want the Chair to rule for all 
time to come that in this House no adjournment motion shall be brought 
forward ? It is a constitutional issue that is sought to be raised and 
it is for the Chair to rule. As I understand it, it is an absolute right 
of every Member of the House to bring forward an adjournment motion 
at any time. Of course it will be for the Chair to admit it or not. If 
the Chair thinks that it is a dilatory motion it will not grant permission. 
Even if the Chair rules that such a motion is admissible, then it will 
be for the House to discuss it and then accept it or reject it. But so 
far as the right of a Member is concerned, it is an absolute right and 
he can move an adjournment motion at any stage. If you put clause 2 
to the House and say that any time during the progress of the Bill there 
can be no postponement whatsoever, it is a constitutional issue. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That is subject to the speaker’s consent. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think I will express any opinion just at present 
as to whether in future any motion for adjournment can or would be 
allowed. That will depend upon the circumstances existing at the time 
such a motion is brought before the House. The Hon. Law Minister’s 
point seems to be that the House is — not constitutionally or legally but — 
morally committed to the position that no dilatory motions just with a 
view to obtain the postponement of the Bill should be brought forward 


Dr. Ambedkar : That is all. 

Mr. Speaker : That seems to be his only point. I do not think that 
he meant to fetter the constitutional rights of Members. I would, 
therefore suggest that instead of putting clause 2 to the House and then 
postponing the matter, let us adjourn straightaway without putting the 
motion on clause 2 of the Bill, with a declaration about our moral 
commitment that such a motion will not be brought forward just for the 
purpose of securing postponement and no other object. 

Some Hon. Members : No, no. 

Mr. Speaker : The point is very important one. While the Law 
Minister was making a statement to that effect, though I could see his 
point and the force of it, I myself am not expressing a final opinion. 
I am open to conviction. No one need think that it will be possible 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-14W14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


785 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 785 


to bar each and every Member of this House from bringing an adjournment 
motion, if one is inclined to do so. The Chair may refuse to put it on 
the ground that it is a dilatory motion but that will depend upon the 
circumstances then existing when such a motion is brought forward. 
From my point of view it really makes no difference whether clause 2 
is put and then the matter is adjourned. Therefore, as I said ; I would 
make a declaration about this moral binding on the part of the members 
of this House not to have any dilatory motion so far as this Bill is 
concerned and then adjourn the matter. I would therefore not like to 
have that constitutional issue raised again nor keep it alive for a second 
time as to whether such a motion could or could not be brought forward. 
I will proceed to adjourn the business and Government. . . . 

Dr. Ambedkar : Do these motions then stand out ? 

Mr. Speaker : These motions will fall through. 

Dr. Ambedkar : What is the fate of these motions ? 

Mr. Speaker : The members do not press the motions. If they had 
pressed their motions, then I was bound to put them to the House. 

Some Hon. Members : They have not said so. 

Mr. Speaker : I have asked them. 

Mr. R. K. Chaudhari : Because a moral question has been raised 
I would rather like to have my motion put to the House and the House 
will decide whether it is dilatory or not. 

Mr. Speaker : Then the position is quite clear. I will straightaway 
put it to the House and then we may proceed further. I am putting 
Mr. R. K. Chaudhari’s motion to the House now. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Sir, on a maturer and second consideration 
I, do not propose to press my motion. 

Mr. Speaker : So, since the consideration of the matter is now mature, 
let us proceed to postpone this and Government may fix a date .... 

Some Hon. Members : He should withdraw by leave of the House. 

Mr. Speaker : Our rule is when no motion is moved no leave is 
necessary. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras) : I want to know whether this 
adjournment motion is under consideration. 

Mr. Speaker : The whole thing falls through. The adjournment 
motions that they have tabled fall through. Nothing remains now. They 




D:\AMBEDKAR-13\VOL-lAW14-15 MK AMIT 21-10-2013>6-12-2013 S.K.- 11-12-2013 


786 


786 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


have been asked and they do not press them. As regards the others that 
have tabled similar motions they were not present when they were called 
upon to move. That is the position. Now the debate is being adjourned. 
It is not possible to bind all people for all time. If the circumstances 
arise we shall then meet them. 

Shri Tyagi : Only such persons who have moved .... 

Mr. Speaker : Unfortunately the hon. Member does not seem to have 
followed the discussion. No motion has been placed before the House by 
me. Unless I place a motion before the House there is no occasion for 
putting it to the vote of the House or even to withdraw it. 

Shri Tyagi : There is no moral obligation then ? 

Mr. Speaker : The moral obligation is there. 

Shri Tyagi : I would rather prefer to be immoral. 

Shrimati Durgabai : These motions were moved but not pressed. 

Mr. Speaker : These motions are not moved at all. I have not placed 
them before the House. 

Shrimati Durgabai : The hon. Member moved and then did not press 
his motion. 

Mr. Speaker : What difference does it make ? If he moves the motion 
and it is voted against, does it mean that no such motion can ever be 
brought again ? 

Shri Tyagi : Today only we are morally bound. 

Mr. Speaker : It is a moral binding for all time. Let there be no 
further discussion. We shall proceed to the next item of business. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal) : rose — 

Mr. Speaker : The matter is closed and there can be no further 
discussion. 




DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


PUBLISHED VOLUMES 

Vol. 1 

• Castes in India 

• Annihilation of Caste, Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province, Need for 
Checks and Balances 

• Thoughts on Linguistic States 

• Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah, Evidence before the Southborough Committee, 
Federation versus Freedom 

• Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It 

• States and Minorities 

• Small Holdings in India, Mr. Russell and the Reconstruction of Society 


Vol. 2 

• In the Bombay Legislature 

• With the Simon Commission 

• At the Round Table Conferences 

Vol. 3 

• Philosophy of Hinduism 

• India and Pre-Requisites of Communism 

• Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Ancient India 

• Buddha or Karl Marx 

• Schemes of Books 


Vol. 4 

• Riddles in Hinduism 


Vol. 5 

• Untouchables or the Children of India’s Ghetto and other Essays on 
Untouchables and Untouchability Social — Political — Religious 


Vol. 6 

• Administration and Finance of The East India Company, The Evolution 
of Provincial Finance in British India, The Problem of the Rupee [History 
of Indian Currency and Banking, Vol. 1] Miscellaneous Essays. 


Vol. 7 

Who were the Shudras ? 

• How they came to be the Fourth Varna in the Indo-Aryan Society ? 

The Untouchables 

• Who were They and Why They Became Untouchables ? 


Vol. 8 

• Reprint of Pakistan or the Partition of India 


Vol. 9 

• What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables ? Mr. Gandhi 
and the Emancipation of the Untouchables 


Vol. 10 

• Dr. Ambedkar as Member of the Governor-General’s Executive Council 
(1942-46) 


Vol. 11 

• The Buddha and his Dhamma 

Vol. 11-SUPPLEMENT 

• Pali and other Sources of the Buddha & his Dhamma with an Index 


Vol. 12 

• Ancient Indian Commerce, The Untouchables and the Pax Britannica, 
Lectures on the English Constitution, The Notes on Acts and Laws; 
Waiting for a Visa, Other Miscellaneous Essays 


Vol. 13 

Dr. AMBEDKAR 

• The Principal Architect of the Constitution of India 


Vol. 14 

Dr. Ambedkar and the Hindu Code Bill 
Part One 

• General Discussion on the Draft (17th November 1947 to 14th December 
1950) 

Part Two 

• Clause by Clause Discussion (5th February 1951 to 25th September 1951) 

Vol. 15 

• Dr. Ambedkar as free India’s first Law Minister and Member of Opposition 
in Indian Parliament (1947 to 1956) 

Vol. 16 

• Dr. B. R. Ambedkars 

(I) The Pali Grammar 

(II) The Pali Dictionary 

(A) Pali into English 

(B) Pali into English, Marathi, Hindi and Gujarathi 

(III) Bouddha Pooja Path 

Vol. 17 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and his Egalitarian Revolution 
Part One 

• Struggle for Human Rights 

Part Two 

• Socio-Political, Religious Activities 

Part Three 

• Speeches 


