z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


1 



Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 


Courtesy : Shant Swaroop Shant, Delhi 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


3 


Our Constitution must not be a dictatorship 
but must be a Constitution in which there is a 
parliamentary democracy, where Government is 
all the time on the anvil so to say, on its trial 
responsible to the people, responsible to the 
judiciary, then I have no hesitation in saying, that 
the principles emboded in the Constitution are as 
good as, if not better than the principles emboded 
in any other Constitution. 


Constituent Assembly Debates, 
Vol. 9, 17th September 1949, p. 1663 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


4 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


K$HIMRAO R.AmBEDKAR. 

M.A.PIi.O.D.8c.Bak-at-Law. 
Mimpr Lioiilatwe CoUMOIL.BoMBAV. 



DAMODAR HALL 
PAREL 
BOMBAY-12. 


J, 8 * ■ /fio 


& 


Jfc. ^ </ y — ^ 

_ , ~ _ / kki.M~.tlu. 

<£j fuJ^lujLtr^ <X-<£jrf*k» “7 7 

iL ^ r (r 

- , , - L P , i ^ ^ ^ A 2 ^/— 

^cLaiyl'l^J^ eXojyo- C.O ftriOF^^ fatrfj0cd- 

„ 1 /- cJ^~ 

o^L a^lu^o fc !c ^ vr 

Q w/\A 

Hki efcc. k J ^ t W- i ^ ^ ^ 

/rlc i3^4Cv cl^ju: " 

a ft T ^(aJ~ ktZAAsJ-' 

kAat^l. ty-jukJ' Ii(l4lg^ajl. . v, ~\ 

CAqulMjl^, UrUJL Ik~ C>i _ o <■■ )kit Cn/lL. Svoc^cx^o ^ (U-^' 

'Y^LU/VO ^ 


(Facsimile of Dr. Ambedkar’s letter to The Secretary, All India 
Depressed Classes Conference, Nagpur, dated 28 February 1930.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


6 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 


WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
VOL. 15 


(Sections I to VIII) 


Edited 

by 

Vasant Moon 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


8 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 15 


First Edition by EducationDepartment, Govt. ofMaharashtra : 26 January, 1997 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 

Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : ? 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


9 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 



Kumar i Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when 
these were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on 
the base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumari Selja) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


10 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


11 


CHIEF MINISTER 





MAHARASHTRA 


FOREWORD 

The present volume of the speeches and writings of 
Dr. Bahasaheb Ambedkar covers the period from his entry into 
the Constituent Assembly from the pre-partition Bengal till his 
death on 6 December 1 956. The first portion contains his speeches 
and writings as the Law Minister of Government of India and 
the last or the concluding portion contains speeches and writings 
when he was Opposition Member in the Parliament. Whether in 
the Government or in the opposition, his speeches and writings 
show continuity of his thought-processes and his deep dedication 
to the ideals of justice and fairplay. The subjects covered in the 
present volume are different and disparate. They appear relevant 
even to the present context and reflect Dr. Ambedkar’s insight 
into the nature of political and social processes. In the course of 
discussion on the Representation of the People’s Act, a member 
argued that he would allow a criminal to stand as a candidate 
since every adult has a right to vote and contest election. Dr. 
Ambedkar’s answer in general was that the electoral process 
depended upon the general improvement in the minds of our 
people as a whole and that there are certain moral principles 
which we must assert. He foresaw that such an elevation of moral 
sentiments could come some day. I may quote here comments of 
Dr. Ambedkar on qualifications of a candidate for political office. 

He said, “Now it seems to me that education can hardly 
be the sole qualification for membership of this House. If I 
may use the words of Buddha, he said that man requires two 
things. One is Gyan and the other is Sheel. Gyan without sheel 
is very dangerous : It must be accompanied by Sheel, by which 
we mean character, moral courage, ability to be independent 
of any kind of temptation, truthful to one’s ideals. I did not 
find any reference to the second qualification in the speeches. 
I have heard from Members who have supported Professor 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


12 


Shah. But even though I myself am very keen to see that no 
member enters this August Assembly, who does not possess 
Sheel in adequate degree, I find it extremely difficult to find 
any means or methods to ensure that valuable qualification.” 

Dr. Ambedkar pleads that while it is difficult to prescribe 
educational qualification for membership of Parliament, people 
should send good men of character. He says, “I have no doubt 
about it that if the political parties, for their own particular 
purposes do not attend to it, people are not going to allow 
persons who cannot discharge their functions properly in this 
House to be continued and returned forever. They want results, 
they want their welfare to be attended to, and I am sure about 
it that they will realise that the only instrumentality through 
which they can achieve this purpose is to send good men to 
this House. Therefore, I think the proper course is to leave the 
matter to the people”. 

The social reforms movement gained strength and 
undoubtedly brought about changes in the social structure, 
promoting in the process, equality and fraternity. The era of 
equality and fraternity was ushered in with the rise of the 
Maratha power under Shivaji, the Great who was accessible 
even to the lowest of the low from all sections of the society. 

Dr. Ambedkar was the product of the movement for social 
reforms in Maharashtra initiated by Mahatma Jyotiba Phule, 
Justice Ranade, Agarkar, Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj and 
Prabodhankar Thakre. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s speeches and writings in the present 
volume are indeed instructive and enlightening and trace 
the evolution of modern political institutions in the country. 
They truly represent a significant phase in the evolution of 
the Indian polity. 


January 26, 1997 



(MANOHAR JOSHI) 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


13 



MINISTER FOR HIGHER AND 


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 
Government of Maharashtra 
Mantralaya, Mumbai 400 032 


PREFACE 


I am indeed happy to see that the Government of 
Maharashtra has brought out the present volume consisting 
of speeches and writings of Dr. Ambedkar, both as Minister 
in the then Government of India and Member of Opposition 
later. These two roles show Dr. Ambedkar at different levels 
of our National life. He played both the roles with ease, grace 
and elegance of a consummate statesman who would see far 
into the future and suggest ways and means to shape the 
national character and political Institutions. His interest in 
the welfare of the common man was undiminished. In fact 
Dr. Ambedkar was a crusader with uncommon zeal for the 
interest of the common man. He was generous to Government 
of the day while in opposition when occasion demanded, while 
at the same time he did not hesitate to condemn what was 
obviously wrong. 

The history of a nation is written by the deeds of great 
men. An Institution is a long shadow of an individual who 
is a great visionary. Dr. Ambedkar was a visionary of this 
category, a champion of the common man with uncommon 
zeal for the interest of millions of men who keep the Indian 
democracy alive. 



January 26, 1997 


(DATTA RANE ) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd 


MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


14 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


15 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material 
Publication Committee 
Maharashtra State 

[Reconstituted vide G. R. No. DBA. 1095/(381/95)/ 
Samanvay, Higher and Technical Education and 
Employment Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai, 
dated 15th December 1995\ 


1. 

Hon’ble Shri Dattatraya Rane 
Education Minister ( Higher and 
Technical Education) 

. . . President 

2. 

Hon’ble Shri Anil Deshmukh 
Minister of State for Education 

. . . Member 

3. 

Shri R. S. Gavai 

. . . Member 

4. 

Shri Dadasaheb Rupawate 

. . . Member 

5. 

Shri Ramdas Athawale 

. . . Member 

6. 

Shri Prakash Ambedkar 

. . . Member 

7. 

Prof. N. D. Patil 

. . . Member 

8. 

Shri Shankarrao Kharat 

. . . Member 

9. 

Shri Daya Pawar (Expired on 20-9-1996). 

. . . Member 

10. 

Dr. Janardan Waghmare 

. . . Member 

11. 

Dr. Gangadhar Pantawane 

. . . Member 

12. 

Dr. Y. M. Pathan 

. . . Member 

13. 

Dr. Yashwant Manohar 

. . . Member 

14. 

Dr. M. D. Nalawade 

. . . Member 

15. 

Dr. Madhukar Kasare 

. . . Member 

16. 

Dr. Prabha Ganorkar 

. . . Member 

17. 

Dr. Sheshrao Meshram 

. . . Member 

18. 

Prof. Keshav Meshram 

. . . Member 

19. 

Prof. Ashok Godghate 

. . . Member 

20. 

Shri S. S. Rege 

. . . Member 

21. 

Shri Vishwas Patil 

. . . Member 

22. 

Shri Laxman Mane 

. . . Member 

23. 

Shri Waman Nimbalkar 

. . . Member 

24. 

Shri Ramesh Shinde 

. . . Member 

25. 

Shri T. M. Kamble 

. . . Member 

26. 

Secretary ( Higher and Technical Education). 

. . . Member 

27. 

Shri Vasant Moon 

. . . Member 


(Officer on Special Duty) 

Secretary 

28. 

Director of Education 
(Higher Education) 

. . . Convenor 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd 


MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


16 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


17 


EDITORIAL 

The present volume contains speeches and writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar for the period from 1947 to 1956. These speeches 
and writings show Dr. Ambedkar in different roles and his 
working at different levels, first in the Government and later 
as member of the opposition. However, there is continuity 
of thought and unity of approach in all that Dr. Ambedkar 
said, either in the Government or as member of opposition. 
One significant feature of the writings and speeches in this 
volume is that there is a thread of moral fervour and strident 
advocacy of public interest and suggestions for improving the 
social morality as part of the political process. The reader 
will notice how far-sighted Dr. Ambedkar was, when he 
spoke on the electoral reforms, election of candidates and 
question of qualifications and disqualifications. These issues 
are now in the forefront and the stuff of the banner lines of 
daily newspapers. Character was of supreme importance to 
Dr. Ambedkar. The character of political leadership is the sine- 
qua-non of the sane administration. The Government is the 
Trust created for the benefit of people. It is the contrivance 
devised by man to promote his happiness as a social being. 
Dr. Ambedkar has observed, “Gyan without Sheel is very 
dangerous; it must be accompanied by Sheel by which we 
mean character, moral courage, ability to be independent of 
any kind of temptation, truthful to one’s ideals. I did not find 
any reference to the second qualification in the speeches I 
have heard from members who have supported Professor Shah, 
even though I myself am very keen to see that no member 
enters this August Assembly, who does not possess Sheel in 
adequate degree”. 

The early 50’s immediately after the inauguration of the 
Constitution and the post-war reconstruction programmes 
taken up by the Government of India saw the emergence of 
the welfare State. Dr. Ambedkar deplores inadequate funds 
for welfare programmes. In fact, welfare of poorer sections 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


18 


of our society had not received adequate attention and priorities 
were not drawn up keeping in mind the social reality, according 
to Dr. Ambedkar. He had said, “No hungry man is going to 
be sympathetic to a critic who is going to tell, him, “My dear 
fellow, although I am in power, although I am in authority, 
although I possess all legal power to set matters right, you 
must not expect me to do a miracle because I have inherited 

a past which is very inglorious ” “If this Government 

will not produce results within a certain time, long before the 
people become so frustrated, so disgusted with Government as 
not to have any Government at all, a time will come when, I 
suppose, unless we in Parliament realise our responsibilities 
and shoulder the task of looking after the welfare and good of 
the people within a reasonable time, I have not the slightest 
doubt in my own mind that this Parliament will be treated 
by the public outside with utter contempt. It would be a thing 
not wanted at all”. 

It is indeed a refreshing thought how India would have 
emerged after 50 years, had a comprehensive programme of 
training in different skills been attempted and the pattern 
of education, particularly at the High School level redrawn 
keeping in view, the compulsions of technology and science. 

Dr. Ambedkar as member of opposition did not oppose 
Government he did not criticise the Treasury benches without 
reason. On the other hand when praise was due or when 
fairness or justice compelled appreciation, he did not withhold 
recognition. His praise and commendation of Shri C. D. 
Deshmukh shows his fairness as member of opposition. There 
is a lesson for present opposition members to be learnt from 
the speeches and writings printed in this volume. 

The writings and speeches in this volume show 
Dr. Ambedkar at different levels of life reacting to the social 
environment and trying to shape and influence thinking 
of those around him. Those were the days of the Indian 
politics dominated by idealists and visionaries. The names 
of the Members of Parliament who were contemporaries of 
Dr. Ambedkar are names of Great men striving to raise the 
moral and social level of the country and trying to justify their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


19 


new-found freedom. It was an age of opportunity for great 
experiments in social engineering via law and though 
Dr. Ambedkar felt constraints within the limits of law, 
expressed himself frankly and fairly on a variety of topics. 

Pragmatist in spirit and nationalist in outlook, interested 
in preserving the mosaic of unity in diversity i.e. India, 
Dr. Ambedkar’s thoughts on reorganisation of States are 
worthy of serious attention even today. 

The political unity of India was attained by a slow process 
of education, grafting of the common law in the Indian soil 
and the traditions of independent judiciary to correct abuses 
and excesses of the executive and the structure so laboriously 
built was required to be preserved and extended. 

The princely States which merged with the Indian Union 
were at different levels of social and political development. 
Promoting the process of social growth and integration of 
different areas was the prime task of the executive and the 
legislature. The speeches and writings in this volume thus 
provide material of historical interest and comments on the 
issues of the day by highly perceptive and cultivated mind 
soaked in the best intellectual tradition of the West and the 
ethos of the East like Dr. Ambedkar. It is hoped that the 
present volume will be useful to scholars and laymen alike. 

Dr. Ambedkar was fond of saying that “Consistency is 
the virtue of an ass” and apparently Dr. Ambedkar invites 
the charge of being inconsistent. This is more apparent than 
real. Dr. Ambedkar tried through his long years of struggle 
to improve the lot of the common man. He was the crusader 
of the common man. He was not reluctant to acknowledge 
the beneficient side of the British Parliamentary and Judicial 
Institutions and he believed in the rule of justice, equity and 
good conscience. In today’s India this has critical relevance. 

The work of editing of this volume has been made possible 
by the ready help, support and co-operation I have received: 

(1) from Professor Manohar Joshi, the Hon’ble the Chief 
Minister of Maharashtra whose encouragement has made this 
work possible; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


20 


(2) from Shri Dattatraya Rane, the Hon’ble Minister for 
Education of Maharashtra State, who took keen interest in 
expediting the project for being completed speedily; 

(3) from Shri Navjeevan Lakhanpal, the Principal Secretary, 
Higher and Technical Education, whose ready guidance and 
help enabled the Editor to resolve various administrative 
hurdles; 

(4) from Shri B. M. Ambhaikar, Retired Additional 
Municipal Commissioner, Mumbai Mahanagar Palika, whose 
personal interest and guidance has been of immense help to 
the Editor in the editing of the volume. 

Thanks are also due to: 

(1) Shri P. S. More, Director, Printing and Stationery 
and Shri P. L. Purkar, Deputy Director and also Shri P. J. 
Gosavi, Manager, Government Central Press, Government of 
Maharashtra, who have taken personal interest in expediting 
the printing of the volume carefully; 

(2) Shri J. M. Abhyankar, Deputy Director of Education, 
Brihan Mumbai and Shri E. M. Meshram, Junior 
Administrative Officer and the staff working under them for 
their assistance in administrative matters; 

(3) Shri D. S. Chavan, Librarian, Legislative Council 
Library, Mumbai for providing access to books; 

(4) The staff of this office which includes Shri Ravindra 
Sutar, Smt. Sumitra Nevrekar and Smt. Shalaka Tambe who 
assisted me in the whole process of collecting and editing and 
cheerfully scrutinised the material in the process of printing 
of this volume; and 

the members of the committee who stood by the Editor 
in every moment of this project and reposed their confidence 
in him and there are several well wishers and admirers of 
the Philosophy and spirit of Dr. Ambedkar who helped the 
Editor in various ways whose names are too many to be 
mentioned here. 



Mumbai: 

January 26, 1997 


(VASANT MOON) 
Editor. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013 


21 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Section I 
Section II 
Section III 
Section IV 
Section V 
Section VI 
Section VII 
Section VIII 
Anexure 
Index 


Pages 

1-48 

49-166 

167-250 

251-422 

423-704 

705-830 

831-983 

984-1094 

1095-1100 

1101-1110 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-01.indd 


MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013 


22 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


1 


SECTION I 

20th November 1947 
TO 

31st March 1949 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


2 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


3 


SECTION I 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Pages 

1 Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amendment Bill) ... 5 

2 Appointment of Statutory Law Revision Committee 7 

3 Indian Nursing Council Bill ... 16 

4 Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Bill ... 17-25 

5 Federal Court (Enlargement of Jurisdiction) Bill 26-37 

6 Provincial Insolvency (Amendment) Bill ... 38-45 

7 Resolution Re : Extension of period mentioned in 

Sections 2 and 3 of India Act 1946 as adapted ... 46-48 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


4 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


5 


( 1 ) 

* FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

Mr. Speaker: Motion moved. 

“That the Bill to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation 

Act, 1947, be taken into consideration.” 

What has the Law Member to say about the position 
regarding the expression ‘British India’? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): I thought I would speak when the amendment was 
being moved, in reply to it. If you so desire, I shall explain 
the position. 

Mr. Speaker: Yes, because it would save time. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, we have got 
what is called an Existing Laws Adaptation Order in which 
certain terms are defined. In that order the term ‘British 
India’ is defined and is defined to mean ‘all the Provinces of 
British India’. It is therefore open to the House to include 
in this particular Bill either of the two phrases which under 
the Adaptation Order mean the same thing. We could either 
use ‘British India’ or we could use ‘all the provinces of India’ 
which would mean one and the same thing. The question of 
these two alternatives and as to which of them we should 
adopt really has to be determined by the phraseology which 
has been used in the main Bill to which this Bill is merely 
an amendment. In the original Bill dealing with foreign 
exchange regulation, the term used is ‘British India’ and my 
submission is that if this amendment is to be intelligible 
it must use common phraseology which is ‘British India’. 

* Constituted Assembly (Legislative) Debates, hereinafter called C. A. (Leg.) 
D. Vol. I, 20th November 1947, p. 357. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There is nothing to be lost, everything to be gained, by using 
the same phraseology. The amendment which is tabled is 
purely sentimental in my judgment and wishes to avoid the 
word ‘British’ from the text of the law. 

Shri K. Santhanam (Madras : General): Not at all, 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: My submission 
is that in view of the necessity for uniformity between the 
main Act and the amending Act we should adopt the same 
pharaseology which has been used in the main Act. 

Mr. R. K. Sidhwa (C. P. and Berar : General): May I 
know whether there is any legal difficulty if the word ‘British’ 
is omitted? 

Mr. Speaker: That is exactly what the Law Member has 
pointed out. Without going into the merits of the case, and 
looking prima facie into what the Law Member has said, I 
shall curtail the discussion by saying that I refuse to give my 
leave to this amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


7 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


7 


( 2 ) 

* APPOINTMENT OF STATUTORY 
LAW REVISION COMMITTEE 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Mr. Chairman, I may at once say that the object of the 
Mover is quite laudable and that he has my full sympathy 
in the Motion that he has made. Sir, there is no doubt that 
periodical revisions of law in a modern society is an absolute 
necessity. When a popular Legislature engages itself in the 
task of legislation, touching every aspect of the society which 
it governs, there are bound to be created certain problems, 
which it is necessary for some expert legal body to examine 
and to rectify. First of all, it happens that a draftsman in 
order to put an idea in the form of a law suggests certain 
phraseology, which he thinks is appropriate and complete 
enough to embody the intention of the Legislature. In a certain 
stage the Judiciary and the Members of the profession find 
that the phraseology used by the draftsman is mistaken and 
does not carry the intent which the Legislature had. That 
problem therefore becomes a problem which somebody has 
got to look into and rectify to bring it in consonance with the 
original intention. It often happens that when a Legislature 
is engaged in of course of legislation over an extensive period 
certain inconsistencies unconciously creep in. It is not always 
possible either for the draftsman or for the legislature to 
examine every piece of legislation that is brought before 
it with a view to find out whether that piece of legislation 
is consistent with other legislation which has preceeded it. 
Therefore in course of time these inconsistencies accumulate. 
They trouble lawyers, they trouble judges and they also 
trouble the litigating public. It also often happens that in 
modern time when a legislature is so busy that it is unable 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 2nd December 1947, p. 1103-05. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to give the whole of its time to codifying the whole of 
the law on a particular subject it tries to discharge its 
4 00 m res P ons ibilities by undertaking what we call 
fragmentary and piecemeal legislation. This 
accumulation of piecemeal and fragmentary legislation again 
in course of time creates a problem. People cannot understand 
what the law is and consequently a problem of codifications 
arises. Therefore, it needs no special pleading to suggest that 
a Statute Law Revision Committee is necessary. I think the 
Government of India long ago accepted the necessity of having 
a Statute Law Revision Committee. In fact as soon as the 
Montagu-Chelmsford reforms came into operation and when 
it was found that there was a popular legislature and that 
popular legislature was more likely to undertake legislation of 
social reform than the previous legislatur had been likely to 
do, the Government of India pari passau and simultaneously 
with the introduction of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms 
introduced and established what was called a Statutory Law 
Revision Committee in 1921. Therefore there is no difficulty 
in my accepting the underlying purpose which my honourable 
Friend Sir Hari Singh Gour has in mind, namely, that there 
should be a Statute Law Revision Committee. The only point of 
difference between him and me is whether we should forthwith 
proceed to establish a Statute Law Revision Committee that 
he has in mind or whether we should leave the matter to 
Government to think about the most appropriate time and 
the most appropriate machinery which could carry out the 
purpose which both he and myself have in mind. 

In regard to the Statutory Law Revision Committee of 
the type that was set up in 1921, I should like to inform the 
House of the work that it did and whether it could not have 
done something better. The Statute Law Revision Committee 
was appointed in 1921 and lasted up to 1932, After 1932 it 
died ; whether it died a natural death or an unnatural death 
is not a matter which I propose to disquisition about. But I 
should like to tell the House that during these eleven years 
that the Committee was in session from time to time, the 
work that it did was the codification of the Merchant Shipping 
Act, the Criminal Tribes Act, the Indian Succession Act, the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


9 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 9 

Forests Act and the Tolls Act. Now, Sir, without any intention 
of casting any reflection upon the work of the Committee, I 
think it will be agreed that the production of five laws in 
a period of eleven years is certainly not an enormous piece 
of work which could be expected from a Committee of this 
kind. On the other hand when the Committee was dissolved 
and when the responsibility fell upon the Government of 
India to do the work which the Committee was appointed to 
do — if I may say so again without reflection on the work of 
the Committee or without trying to take any credit for the 
Legislative Department of the Government of India — the Acts 
produced after the Committee were the Sale of Goods Act, 
1930, the Partnership Act, 1932, Factories Act, 1934, Tariff 
Act, 1934, Petroleum Act, 1934, Insurance Act, 1938, Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1938 and Arbitration Act, 1940. Any one who 
knows these Acts will admit that each one of them is an 
enormous piece of legislation, The reason why the Statute 
Law Revision Committee failed to fulfil the promise which it 
was expected to fulfil was that there was a great defect in 
composition and constitution of the Committee. First of all, 
the Committee consisted of six members ; it was elected mostly 
from members of the legislatre. No doubt the members who 
were elected were elected purely on the basis of their legal 
knowledge and legal acumen, but in my judgment that was 
a pure accident. The Chairman of the Committee was the 
President of the Council of State. I fail to understand what 
virtue there was in appointing the President of the Council 
of State as Chairman of this Committee which, as all of us 
know, requires specialised legal knowledge. 

The second difficulty about the Committee was that its 
members were not paid members. I do not wish to suggest 
that if members are not paid they do not discharge the duty 
which all people are conscientiously required to do. But it 
did happen, and it is a fact, that the Committee met very 
seldom. The members of the Committee having been drawn 
from the legislature met only during the sessions, and when 
they were asked that now that they were present in Delhi 
they might devote some portion of their time to the discharge 
of their functions as members of the Statute Law Revision 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


10 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Committee, all of them pleaded that their legislative work 
was more important than the work of the committee. At the 
end of the sessions all of them naturally repaired to their 
homes in order to perform either their personal or their 
professional duties. The result was that the Committee was 
not able to devote all the time that it was expected to devote. 
Now obviously my Honourable friend Sir Hari Singh Gour 
will agree that if his purpose is to be carried out we must 
have an altogether different sort of Committee. It is no use 
having, a Committee of the sort that we had and which, for 
the reasons I have mentioned, did not fulfil the functions with 
which it was charged. 

Now, Sir, there are two ways, in my judgment of doing the 
thing. First of all we might have a permanent Commission 
sitting for no other purpose except that of revising and 
codifying the statute. Secondly, if it is to be a permanent body 
it undoubtedly must be a body of experts who know their 
job. And I think every one will agree that if experts are to 
be called away from their professions we must make it worth 
their while to come and serve on the Committee. Obviously 
it is a matter of cost. That being so, it is not possible for me 
to say off-hand that without examining the question of cost 
it will be possible for Government to say here and now that 
we shall agree to appoint a Statute Law Revision Committee 
of any sort that might be suggested either by Sir Hari Singh 
Gour or by any other member of the legislature. 

There is also another way of carrying the purpose into 
practice. That might be by the appointment of a small standing 
committee consisting of the Law Minister of the Government 
of India, a Judge of the Federal Court, the Advocate-General 
of India, one or two Judges of the High Courts in India and 
two or three eminent lawyers. The Committee might be asked 
to sit at stated periods of the year and a person from the 
Law Department of the Government of India may be deputed 
to act as a Secretary, to collect the information and to place 
it before the Committee for the Committee to take notice of 
what might be done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


11 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 11 

As I say these are various ways of carrying the purpose 
into effect. That as I said requires time and examination and 
it is not possible for the Government, besieged as it is with 
an infinity of problems of all kinds to find time for the work 
which it will have to do if I were to accept the resolution of 
Sir Hari Singh Gour with the immediacy with which I believe 
he has charged it. Therefore, what I would like to suggest is 
this : that Sir Hari Singh Gour would realise that so far as 
the ultimate purpose is concerned, there is no difference of 
opinion between me and him. Both of us are agreed that this 
is a matter which the Government of India ought to take into 
consideration. The only difference is when and how, and that 
is a matter on which he need not press the Government for 
the immediate issue. Therefore my suggestion is this that as 
I have given a reply which meets more than half the ground 
on which he stands, I think he will agree that it will be 
gracious on his part to withdraw it. 


* Mr. Chairman : Amendment (by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad) 
moved: 

“That in clause 2 of the Bill, in the proposed new section 
289B — 

(i) the word, figures, letters and brackets ‘57 & 58 Viet., c. 

60) be omitted; and 

(ii) the word, figures, letters, and brackets ‘(57 & 58 Viet., 
c. 60)’ be inserted in the margin.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): I should like to explain the position. I would say that 
the amendment has no substance in it. The identifying clause 
may either be in margin or may be in the context of the 
section itself. All that is necessary is that there should be 
some identification. Originally it is true that in all the Bills 
that we have presented to the Assembly, such identification 
references were in the margin. But recently the printers have 
adopted the method of giving the references in the very body 
of the section itself and the purpose is to economise paper. 
For instance, when you have to give the references in the 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 2nd December 1947, pp. 1199-1200. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

margin obviously you want to use a larger piece of paper. Since 
the war started this device was adopted just for the purpose 
of economising paper. I do not think there is any violation of 
the principles relating to drafting nor any violation of any law 
with regard to marginal notes. As a matter of fact marginal 
notes are unnecessary and need not be printed. 

Shri Suresh Chandra Majumdar (West Bengal: General): 
There is such a thing as “inner margin” note which does not 
waste paper. 


* Mr. Speaker: Amendment (by Shri M. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar) moved: 

“That in part (c) of clause 2 of the Bill, after the word 

‘Province’ wherever it occurs the words ‘or a State’ be inserted.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): 
As the amendment moved by my friend Mr. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar raises a question of law, it is only right and proper 
that I should take the responsibility upon myself to meet the 
point that arises out of his amendment. No one can deny that 
the object underlying the amendment of Mr. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar is a very laudable one. A Bill like this which deals 
with the nursing profession and tries to regularize and establish 
that profession on a footing which would gain the confidence of 
all those who take service from the nurses and that it should 
be extended to the whole of India. I say, is a very laudable 
thing. But unfortunately, situated as we are, and governed 
as we are by the Government of India Act, 1935, as adapted, 
I am afraid it will not be possible to accept his amendment 
because I have no doubt that his amendment would make the 
Bill ultra vires of the Legislature. Sir, to explain my point 
I should like to state to the House that for the moment the 
States are linked with the Union of India in two different ways. 
The one way by which they are linked is what is called the 
standstill agreement which has been made between the Union 
of India and the various Indian States. The second link by 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 9th December 1947, pp. 1480-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


13 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 13 

which the States are bound to the Indian Union are the 
Instruments of Accession. Now there is a fundamental 
difference between the two links. The standstill agreements 
are purely contractual. They preserve such agreements as 
existed between the old Government of India and the Indian 
States under paramountcy before the 15th of August 1947. 
As I said they are purely contractual. They do not confer any 
jurisdiction upon the Government of India to legislate either 
by way of altering those arrangements or making them the 
foundation of any law which would bind the Indian States. 
Therefore, so far as we are concerned, in the matter of 
making any law by this legislature which is intended to be 
applicable to the Indian States, it is quite clear to my mind 
that we cannot take our stand on the standstill agreement. 
We must therefore, rely upon the Instruments of Accession 
which is the only foundation which gives us legal jurisdiction 
to pass any law. My submission is this, that if you take the 
Instruments of Accession, the Instruments of Accession, as 
they stand now — and I shall presently explain to the House 
why I emphasize ‘as they stand now’ — this House has no 
jurisdiction. In the first place this legislation relates to entry 
No. 16 in the Concurrent field. It does not relate, so far as the 
matter under legislation is concerned, to the Federal List or 
to the Provincial List. It relates only to the Concurrent List. 
Now, as everybody is aware, the Instruments of Accession, 
whatever power they give to the Central Legislature to 
legislate, definitely exclude all items which are included in 
the Concurrent List. I should have thought that by that very 
proposition, that the Concurrent Lists are not covered by the 
Instruments of Accession, the jurisdiction of this House is 
completely ousted. The only thing therefore that we have to 
find out is whether the Instruments of Accession which have 
been passed by the different States in favour of the Union 
of India cover anything which relates or which is equivalent 
to entry No. 16 in the Concurrent List. Now, Sir, these 
Instruments of Accession were placed on the Table of the house, 
and anybody who has had the time to scrutinize them would 
have found that the States have acceded only in respect of 
three subjects, and none of the subjects can be so interpreted 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as to include an item like item No. 16 in the Concurrent List. 
Therefore, my submission is this, that even if we were to rely 
upon the Instruments of Accession, this House cannot derive 
any jurisdiction from those Instruments of Accession, My 
Honourable friend Mr. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar evidently 
realised this difficulty and put forth the proposition which he 
said was capable of being adopted by this House in order to 
extend the legislation to the Indian States. His proposition 
was this. There have been many pieces of legislation passed 
by this House which were limited in the first instance to 
certain areas, such as for instance a province or a district 
or any smaller area, and the Bill included a clause which 
enabled the executive, by a notification, to extend that 
particular legislation to other areas not originally included 
in the Bill. Now that proposition, so far as it applies to 
the provinces of British India, is perfectly sound. But if it 
were to be applied to the Indian States, it would be wholly 
unsound, and the reason is this. The analogy is absolutely 
false and not true. Now Sir, when we apply the legislation, 
which is originally in the Bill itself confined to a particular 
area, to another area not made subject to that at the time 
when the Bill was passed, the position is this, that the area 
over which the legislation is subsequently extended to is not 
subject to the jurisdiction of that legislation. If the legislature 
wanted in the very first instance to apply that law to that 
area, nothing in the constitution of this Government or in 
the powers of the legislature could prevent the legislature 
from doing so. So far as the States are concerned, we have 
jurisdiction over their territory with regard to three subjects 
only; we have not got full jurisdiction. We are not limiting our 
jurisdiction when we are legislating with respect to a State 
in respect of the three subjects ; we are in fact spending our 
legislative authority to the fullest extent that we have. The 
analogy, therefore, is not a correct analogy. So far as the 
Provinces are concerned, we have at the moment, when we 
are enacting the law, jurisdiction which we would exercise if 
we wanted to do so. That is not the case with regard to the 
Indian States. True enough, if a supplementary Instrument 
of Accession was passed we could get the jurisdiction 
necessary for the purpose of enacting the law; but what I 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


15 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 15 

would like to submit to my friend Mr. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar is that the law can never be hypothetical and a 
law can never be passed in anticipation of some jurisdiction 
being acquired. That is contrary to the principle of legislation. 
Law must be definite, law must be absolutely clear as to what 
it applies, to what it cannot apply. And therefore, unless 
and until we have with us a supplementary Instrument of 
Accession giving the Central Legislature the power to extend 
this legislation to the States, I am sure we could not anticipate 
that there might be an Instrument of Accession which the 
Governor-General might accept and then we might get a 
chance to extend this legislation. I am sure that is contrary to 
the principles of legislation. All that, therefore, we must hope 
for, for the moment, is to confine the Bill to the Provinces of 
British India, to hope that we will get similar Instruments 
of Accession — supplementary ones — from the Indian States, 
when we can by law either extend our legislation to the States 
or the States can pari passu along with this legislation have 
similar legislation in their own States and make the provisions 
of this law applicable to their territory. Sir, I therefore think 
that this amendment would make the Bill ultra vires and 
therefore could not be accepted. 

Mr. Speaker : The point has been cleared. Does the 
Honourable Member press his amendment now ? 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : I do not, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : Has the Honourable Member leave of the 
House to withdraw his amendment? 

The amendment was, by leave of the Assembly, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is: 

“That clause 2 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 3 ) 

INDIAN NURSING COUNCIL BILL 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The position is, as 
I said on the last occasion this legislation refers to entry No. 16 
in the Concurrent Legislative List. The executive authority 
with regard to the legislation framed under the Concurrent 
Legislative List does not vest in the Central Government. 
Rule making has been interpreted to be in exercise of the 
executive authority and the Central Government does not 
possess that executive authority and therefore, they cannot 
make the rules. The rules may be made by somebody else. 
If my Honourable friend objects to the President making the 
rule, he may suggest some other method to making them, 
though he certainly cannot make any amendment whereby 
the responsibility or the authority for making the rules shall 
be vested in the Central Legislature. Section 8(1) of the 
Government of India Act and section 49(2) of the Government 
of India Act of 1939 are quite clear on this point. 

Shri K. Santhanam : Here again, I find that it is rather a 
curious law that has been expounded the Central Government 
cannot make rules. A nominee of the Central Government 
can make rules but not the Central Government. The present 
proposal is that the President should be nominated by the 
Central Government and he may make rules. After all it 
is a Council of All India and I cannot see any authority in 
the Government of India to make rules. It is only so far 
as Provincial Councils are concerned that directions cannot 
be issued. I therefore think that the law as expounded is 
altogether wrong. The Central Government should have the 
power. I, therefore, suggest that the amendment should be 
accepted. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 8th December 1947, p. 1486. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


17 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


17 


( 4 ) 

* EXTRA PROVINCIAL JURISDICTION BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Mr. Speaker, I stand to make just a few observations 
in order to clear some of the doubts and suspicious which 
have been expressed by Members of the Assembly who have 
so far taken part in the debate. 

Sir, the one point which was made by the Honourable 
Mover of the amendment was that this Bill was reviving 
the jurisdiction of paramountcy which was abolished by 
the Indian Independence Act. Now, it is quite true that the 
Indian Independence Act releases the Indian States from all 
the obligations that were imposed upon them by virtue of 
paramountcy. But, I think, what that means is this, that the 
Dominion Government cannot as a succession State inherit 
the jurisdiction which arose out of paramountcy. It means 
nothing more than that ; it does not mean that any Indian 
State could not confer by an agreement upon the Dominion 
Government the rights and jurisdictions which were exercised 
by the British Government as against that Indian State. I 
think that point has been clearly lost sight of and I should 
like to repeat it again that what the Independence Act means 
is this; that the Dominion Government cannot be regarded 
as a succession State to the British Government in so far as 
Paramountcy is concerned. It certainly does not mean that 
if an Indian State chooses, for reasons which it thinks are 
imperative, to confer jurisdiction of the analogous type that 
arose out of Paramountcy upon the Dominion Government, 
there is anything either in the Government of India Act or 
in the Indian Independence Act to prevent that Indian State 
from doing so. I think that point has to be clearly borne in 
mind. When the question is raised as to which are the Indian 
States to which this particular Bill and its provisions would 


* C. A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 9th December 1947, pp. 1559-61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

apply, the answer to the question must be related to the 
Instruments of Accession which have been passed by the 
various Indian States in favour of the Dominion Government 
of India. Therefore, in order to understand what are the 
States to which this Bill applies, what we have to do is go to 
the Instruments of Accession and find out what is contained 
therein. As the House knows, so far as the accession of Indian 
States is concerned, they are divided into three categories: 
(1) fully jurisdictional States, (2) semi-jurisdictional States 
and (3) non-jurisdictional States. All the three classes of 
States have passed, barring a few exceptions here and there, 
Instruments of Accession in favour of the Indian Dominion. 
Now if Honourable members were to refer to the Instrument 
of Accession passed in Labour of the Dominion of India by 
States which fall in class (2) they will realise that their 
Instrument of Accession contains this very important clause 
which in order to remove all doubts and suspicious, I propose 
to read with your permission, Sir. This is the paragraph 1: 

“And I further declare that the Dominion of India may 
through such agency or agencies and in such manner as it 
thinks fit exercise in relation to the administration of the civil 
and criminal justice in this State all such powers, authority and 
jurisdiction as were at any time exercisable by His Majesty’s 
representative for the exercise of the functions of the Crown in 
its relation with the Indian States.” 

That, I submit is a very important clause in the Instrument 
of Accession passed by the semi-jurisdictional States. Now 
if my honourable friends will turn to the third category of 
States and read the Instrument of Accession passed by them, 
it reads as follows : 

“Whereas ... of the said State or Taluka, am desirous that the 
Dominion of India should exercise in relation to the said taluka 
or state all the powers and jurisdictions which were exerciseable 
before such attachment by His Majesty’s representative for the 
exercise of the functions of the Crown in its relation with the 
Indian States,” etc. 

This is a clause which finds a place in the Instruments of 
Accession of the States falling in the second category or the 
third category, it has not found a place in the Instruments 
of Accession passed by the States which fall in the first 
category, namely, fully jurisdictional States. Obviously two 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


19 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 19 

things follow from this. The first is that this Bill does not 
apply to those States whose Instrument of Accession does 
not contain this clause; secondly, that this applies only to 
those States whose Instrument of Accession contains such a 
clause and which have voluntarily granted to the Dominion 
Government the rights, whether they arose out of treaty or 
sufferance or usage, which were exercised by the British 
Government; they have transferred them voluntarly to the 
Indian Dominion, and they may do so in future. Now the 
point is that all that the Bill does is this that wherever any 
State has granted to the Dominion jurisdiction by virtue of 
its Instrument of Accession the Central Government will have 
the legal authority to exercise that jurisdiction. There is no 
case of usurpation at all; it is merely giving legal authority to 
rights and jurisdictions which have been voluntarily transferred 
by the Indian States to the Dominion of India. Therefore the 
first thing that I should like to emphasise is that there is no 
clandestine effort in the Bill to usurp any authority as against 
any Indian State which has not voluntarily surrendered its 
authority in this respect to the Dominion Government. I think 
that ought to put at rest all the doubts and suspicions which 
have been expressed in this House with regard to this Bill. 
And I do not think that if honourable Members bear in mind 
what I have stated there will be any necessity for very many 
of the amendments which I find on the order paper. 

I do not want to say anything more because that is all that 
I wanted to say but my honourable friend Mr. Santhanam 
while making his observations on the Bill said that there was 
an inconsistency in the position which I took yesterday and 
the position as it arises from this Bill. I think my honourable 
friend Mr. Santhanam must have completely misunderstood 
what I said yesterday. What I said then was that having 
regard to the fact that the Nursing Bill had reference to 
entry No. 16 in the concurrent legislative list there was never 
any possibility of the Dominion Government acquiring any 
jurisdiction because the Instruments of Accession and the 
Indian States have made it absolutely clear that if they at 
all join the Indian Union they will join it only with respect 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to list No. 1 which is a Federal List and that too with respect 
to some subjects only. Therefore my contention was that there 
was not even the remotest possibility, having regard to these 
circumstances, that the Indian Dominion should acquire any 
jurisdiction. And so any sort of legislation which he wanted 
to be introduced by his amendment to clause 1 would be 
purely speculative. Here so far as this Bill is concerned, 
there is nothing inherently impossible in the Indian Dominion 
acquiring further jurisdiction of an extra-provincial character, 
and therefore a legislation which looks in the application of 
this by anticipation would not be speculative because the 
possibility is always there. I therefore submit that there is 
no inconsistency in the two positions I have taken. 


* Mr. Speaker : I suppose the Honourable Member wishes 
to move the amendment at present. 

Shri Himmat Singh K. Maheshwari : Yes and I would 
be grateful for a reply to the point that I have raised. Sir, 
I move: 

“That in part (a) of clause 2 of the Bill for the words ‘treaty, 
grant, usage, sufferance or other lawful means’, the words ‘treaty 
or agreement’ be substituted.” 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“That in part (a) of clause 2 of the Bill, for the words ‘treaty, 
grant, usage, sufferance or other lawful means’, the words treaty 
or agreement be substituted.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Speaker, Sir 
the two amendments although they are set out under different 
headings are in substance one. The amendment No. 10 may be 
put as the result of amendment No. 9 and from that point of 
view, there is no difference between the two. The aim of both 
the Honourable Members who have tabled this amendment 
is to delete the word “grant, usage and sufferance”. I think 
that is what they want to do and in so far as that is their 
object, I have no doubt that the two amendments are one 
and the same. 


* C. A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 9th December 1947, pp. 1571-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


21 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 21 

Sir, I am sorry to say that I cannot accept this amendment 
and I am also sorry to say that the amendment has been 
based upon a misunderstanding. First of all, I should like to 
say with regard to the amendment moved by Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad that item (iii) in his amendment is entirely out of 
place. Tribal areas are part of British India or the Indian 
Dominion. Secondly there is no question of the Indian Dominion 
acquiring any extra territorial jurisdiction so far as the tribal 
areas are concerned. What does the honourable Member want 
to do ? The Honourable member, if I understood correctly, 
wants to say that whatever extra territorial jurisdiction 
which the Dominion of India can exercise must be relatable 
to the Instruments of Accession. I think that is the sum and 
substance of his position and he wants to make it clear that 
the jurisdiction which the Central Government may exercise 
under the provisions of this Act must be in turn sanctioned 
by the Instruments of Accession. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad : That is also conceded to by 
the Government. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Now, sir, does 
the Act do anything different from what my honourable 
Friend wants us to do in this Bill ? As I have stated, what 
the Instruments of Accession passed by the Indian States 
enable the Central Government to do is to exercise all such 
powers, authority and jurisdiction as were at any time 
exercisable by His Majesty’s representative for the exercise of 
the functions of the Crown in relation to the Indian States. 
That is what the Instruments of Accession passed by the 
Indian States empower the Central Government to do, to 
exercise all such powers, authority and jurisdiction as were at 
any time exercisable by His Majesty’s representative. Let us 
go back to the question and ask what are the powers which 
His Majesty s representative was exercising in relation to the 
functions of the Crown in relation to the Indian States. Any 
one who reads the Foreign Jurisdiction Act passed by the 
Indian Legislature where the powers, authority and jurisdiction 
which were exercised by the representatives of His Majesty 
exercising the functions of the Crown in relation to the States, 
are described in the very precise terms which are used in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

part (a) of clause 2, namely “treaty, grant, usage, sufferance or 
other lawful means”. These are exactly the words that occur 
in the Indian Foreign Jurisdiction Act and they are the words 
which we have adopted in our Act because the Instruments 
of Accession passed by the Indian States give all the power 
which His Majesty’s representative exercises in relation to the 
States and Paramountcy. Therefore, it seems to me purely 
tautological whether you say that you derive your powers from 
the Instruments of Accession or whether you say that you use 
the powers given to you by “treaty, usage, sufferance and so 
on” which were the modes by which power was acquired by 
the Paramount authority, I see no difference at all. It is one 
and the same and therefore, I submit that apart from the 
difficulty that I have pointed out that you cannot accept an 
amendment relating to the Tribal area, this amendment seems 
to be utterly based upon some confusion of understanding of 
the real position and seems to me to be tautologous and it is 
nothing more than what has already been done in the Bill. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar (Madras : General): 
My Honourable friend the Minister for Law referred to 
the Foreign Jurisdiction Act. I come much nearer to the 
Indian Independence Act itself. Under clause 7 of the 
Indian Independence Act to which reference is made in 
this amendment of my Honourable friend, the Mover of the 
amendment, paramountcy lapses. How is it that Paramountcy 
conferred under the second part of the Accession which the 
Honourable the Law Minister read, exercised ? I will read the 
relevant clause in the Indian Independence Act: 

“ and all powers, rights, authority or jurisdiction 

exercisable by His Majesty on that date in or in relation to 
Indian States by treaty, grant, usage, sufference or otherwise.” 

These are the very words that have been copied. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: This has now lapsed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


23 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 23 

* EXTRA PROVINCIAL JURISDICTION BILI ^contd. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): If this clause 6 had been described by a Member of 
the Legislature who is not a lawyer as an unusual thing, 
I would not have any complaint: But I think for a lawyer 
to get up and say that this clause is not only unusual and 
strange, but cuts at the very foundation in the judiciary, I 
cannot help expressing my surprise. Sir, as every lawyer 
knows, the law makes a distinction so far as right are 
concerned between two sets — political rights and rights which 
are justiciable. Justiciable rights must always be determined 
by a judicial decree founded upon evidence produced by the 
parties before the court. But the political right, and I shall 
presently explain what is meant by political right, is never 
submitted to a court in the ordinary sense of the word. Now 
rights, whether they are contractual or otherwise, between 
two states are never regarded as justiciable rights. They 
are always regarded as political rights : and that is the one 
reason why this clause has been introduced into this Bill. 
The extraterritorial jurisdiction which is being conferred by 
the Indian States upon the Indian Dominion is a matter 
between, two states, and not between two individuals; and 
being a matter between two states, obviously all the matters 
connected with that jurisdiction are political rights, and as 
such they cannot be left to the judiciary to determine. This 
clause, as I said, is in no sense an unusual one, for if my 
honourable Friend refers to the British Act, on which this one 
is modelled, and refers to clause 4, he will find, the language 
of clause 6, is absolutely the same as the language of clause 
4. Now, my honourable Friend also said that he was aware 
of certain provisions in the Evidence Act where a certificate 
given by a Secretary of a Department of the Government of 
India was said to be conclusive evidence of his authenticity, 
but it was never accepted as deciding the status of any 
particular individual. I am sure that he must have forgotten 
Section 86 of the Civil Procedure Code. If he refers to the Civil 
Procedure Code, Section 86, he will find therein a provision 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 9th December 1947, pp. 1580-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which is very much analogous to the provisions contained 
in clause 6 of this Bill. Section 86 of the Civil Procedure 
Code relates to a suit against an Indian Prince or a foreign 
Envoy or any such person occupying the capacity or status 
of a non-Indian citizen. It is provided by Section 86 of the 
Civil Procedure Code that no suit against an Indian Prince 
can proceed unless and until the party suing the Indian 
Prince secures the consent of the Secretary of State that he 
may be sued. The object underlying Section 86 is to give the 
Government of India an opportunity to express an opinion 
whether they regard the particular Prince who is sued, as 
entitled to the status of a sovereign Prince. If they think that 
he is entitled to the status of a sovereign Prince, we issue 
a certificate that he is a sovereign Prince, and the moment 
that certificate is issued the matter becomes a political matter 
and ceases to be justiciable in the ordinary sense and the suit 
falls through. There is nothing unusual in it. 

My honourable Friend wants me to state the reason for 
this somewhat anomalous position which the law recognises 
not only in this country but in every other country. I could 
state for his information the reason why this distinction is 
made. Sir, supposing the Department of a State upon the 
assumption that a particular Prince is a sovereign Prince 
deals with him on that basis, and suppose that if the question 
of his status was left to be decided by an ordinary court of 
law, where evidence was brought in, and the court came to 
the conclusion that he was not a Ruling Prince in the sense 
of a Sovereign Prince, what happens ? We have in a situation 
like this two conflicting decisions — one decision given by the 
judiciary and another decision given by the State and both are 
irreconcilable. In such a situation the execution of a decree 
becomes absolutely impossible. In England, as my honourable 
Friend knows, there is no such thing as an Evidence Act, 
but there is a very well-established rule which the British 
Judiciary has adopted that in matters of this sort where they 
are likely to come into conflict with the Political Department 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


25 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 25 

of the State, they shall not entertain a plea and give a 
judgment because after all the judgment on a decree of the 
Judiciary has to be executed by the Department of the State 
and they do not want themselves to be entangled with the 
State Department. That, I think, is a very salutary reason why 
the courts themselves have abnegated the right of exercising 
any jurisdiction in a matter which is likely to be political. 

I submit, therefore, that this clause, clause 6, is a very 
right clause, appropriate, and should remain in the Bill as it is. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is : 

“That clause 6 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

(Clause 6 was added to the Bill.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 5 ) 

FEDERAL COURT (ENLARGEMENT OF 
JURISDICTION) BILL 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Sir, I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide 
for the enlargement of the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal 
Court in Civil cases. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the 
enlargement of the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court 
in Civil cases.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


** FEDERAL COURT (ENLARGEMENT OF 
JURISDICTION) BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill to provide for the enlargement of the appellate 
jurisdiction of the Federal court in civil cases be taken into 
consideration.” 

The Federal Court as constituted under the Government 
of India Act as adapted, exercises three kinds of jurisdiction : 

(a) Original jurisdiction under section 204; 

(b) Appellate jurisdiction over High Courts under section 
205 ; and 

(c) Advisory jurisdiction under section 213. 

The present Bill is concerned only with the appellate 
jurisdiction of the Federal Court. As I said, the appellate 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 9th December 1947, p. 1546. 

** C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 11th December 1947, pp. 1708-11. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\vo!15-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


27 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 27 

jurisdiction of the Federal Court under Section 205 is a very 
limited jurisdiction. It is confined in the first place only to 
those cases in which the issue involved is the interpretation 
of the Constitution, that is to say, the interpretation of the 
Government of India Act, 1935. 

Secondly, this limited jurisdiction accrues to the Federal 
Court, only if the High Court, after deciding a case before it 
gives a certificate to the effect that a question regarding the 
interpretation of the Constitution is involved, 

It is only when these two conditions are satisfied, namely, 
that there exists an issue relating to the interpretation of the 
Constitution : and secondly, when the High Court has given a 
certificate that an appeal can go to the Federal Court under 
section 205. 

The result of this limitation is this. All other appeals from 
the High Court in which questions relating to the interpretation 
of laws, other than the Constitution or those in which the 
interpretation of the Constitution is involved but where the 
High Court has not given a certificate, go directly to the Privy 
Council without the intervention of the Federal Court. 

The object of this Bill is to prevent direct passage of 
appeals from the High Court to the Privy Council. In other 
words, the aim of the Bill is to make it compulsory that all 
civil appeals which arise from the judgment or decree of the 
High Court shall in the first instance go to the Federal Court. 

The method adopted by the Bill to achieve this object is 
as follows : 

What the Bill first does is to fix a day, which is the first 
of February, and which in the Bill is called “the appointed 
day”. The next thing that the Bill does is after the appointed 
day no appeals shall go to the Privy Council directly from 
the High court unless and until the appeal falls in a category 
of what is called “a pending appeal”. If an appeal on the 
first day of February can be described within the terms 
of this Bill as “a pending appeal” then the appeal shall 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be continued to be heard and decided by the Privy Council. 
But if on that day the appeal is not “a pending appeal” 
within the definition of this Bill, then the jurisdiction of 
the Federal Court extends to such an appeal as the Federal 
Court gets a right to hear and decide such an appeal. 

Section 7 of the Bill describes what is “a pending appeal”. 
Now for this purpose a rough and ready made rule has been 
adopted in the Bill. The rule is this : that if the records of 
an appeal are transmitted by the High Court to the Privy 
Council on the appointed day or before the appointed day, 
then the appeal is a pending appeal and the Privy Council 
continues to exercise its jurisdiction to hear such an appeal, 
although it is a direct appeal. 

If on the other hand the appeal is in such a state that the 
records have not been transmitted, then the appeal becomes 
automatically transferred so to say to the Federal Court and 
the Federal Court gets the right to hear the appeal. 

Appeals to the Privy Council go in two different ways. 
They go under what are called the provisions of the Civil 
12 Noon Procedure Code, Sections 109 and 110, which 
are called appeals by grants or they are appeals 
where the party have a right to appeal. In addition to that 
the Privy Council also has got the right to give special leave 
to appeal and when a party obtains special leave to appeal, 
such appeals also go to the Privy Council. Appeals which go 
to the Privy Council directly from the High Court on special 
leave being granted by the Privy Council, are also dealt with 
in Section 5 of the Bill. The provision there is this: 

“Every application to His Majesty in Council for special leave 
to appeal from a judgment to which this Act applies remaining 
undisposed of immediately before the appointed day shall on that 
day stand transferred to the Federal Court by virtue of this Act.” 

If it is disposed of, that is to say, if it rejected no further 
question arises. If it is admitted then the Privy Council will 
be competent to deal with it. But if the Privy Council has 
not passed any order, then such an appeal shall be deemed 
to be transferred to the Federal Court and the Federal Court 
will have the right to dispose of the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


29 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 29 

I should like to tell the House in very concrete terms what 
this Bill does and what it does not do. I have told the House 
what this Bill does. I will tell the House now what this Bill 
does not do. 

In the first place, it does not abolish appeals to the Privy 
Council in criminal matters. Criminal matters can still be 
entertained by the Privy Council from the Judgments of the 
High Courts. Secondly, it does not abolish appeals to the Privy 
Council from courts which are not high courts, that is to say, 
the courts of the Judicial Commissioner of Ajmer-Merwara 
or of Coorg. Thirdly, it does not abolish appeals to the Privy 
Council from the judgment of the Federal Court. 

The House would probably like to know why these 
deficiencies have been retained in the Bill and why we have 
not been in a position to provide in this Bill for the complete 
transfer in all cases, criminal or civil, from the High Court to 
the Federal Court and From the Federal Court to the Privy 
Council. The reasons are to be found in certain limitations 
from which the Dominion Legislature, i.e., the Constituent 
Assembly (Legislative) suffers. As members of the Assembly 
would realise we are exercising the powers for enlarging the 
jurisdiction of the Federal Court, which are given to us by 
Section 206 of the Government of India Act. If Honourable 
Members would refer to Section 206 they will see that it 
is a sort of section which gives constituent powers to this 
Assembly enabling it to alter the provisions of section 205 of 
the Government of India Act, 1935. Section 206 says : 

“(1) The Dominion Legislature may by Act provide that in 
such civil cases as may be specified in the Act an appeal shall 
lie to the Federal Court from a judgment, decree or final order 
of a High Court without any such certificate as aforesaid. 

(2) If the Dominion Legislature makes such provision as 
is mentioned in the last preceding sub-section consequential 
provision may also be made by Act of the Dominion Legislature 
for the abolition in whole or in part of direct appeals in civil 
cases from High Courts to His Majesty in Council, either with 
or without special leave.” 

Sub-section (3) requires the sanction of the Governor- 
General. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


30 


30 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Anybody who reads section 206 will find that although the 
power to amend and enlarge the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Court is given to this Assembly, it is limited in certain 
particulars. It is limited to civil cases. Therefore no provision 
can be made for the abolition of direct appeals in criminal 
matters. Secondly, it refers to direct appeals, that is to say 
appeals from the High Court to the Privy Council. The reason 
why we are not able to abolish appeals from the Federal Court 
to the Privy Council is because of the existence of Section 208 
in the Government of India Act. Section 208 says: (a) that an 
appeal will lie to His Majesty in council from a decision of 
the Federal Court, from any judgment of the Federal Court 
given in the exercise of its original jurisdiction in any dispute 
which concerns the interpretation of this Act and (b) in any 
other case, by leave of the Federal Court or of His Majesty in 
Council. What I wanted to tell the House was that if it was 
desirable to abolish all appeals to the Privy Council and to 
enlarge the jurisdiction of the Federal Court in as complete 
a manner as we want to do for that purpose we would have 
been required to hold a session of the Constituent Assembly 
and ask the Constituent Assembly to pass a Bill, which it 
can do, notwithstanding any limitation in the Government of 
India Act 1935, for the simple reason that the Constituent 
Assembly is a sovereign body and is not bound by the provisions 
of the Government of India Act, 1935. The position of this 
Legislature which is spoken of as the Dominion Legislature 
is very different. It is Governed by the Government of India 
Act of 1935 and therefore it must conform in anything that it 
wants to do to such provisions of the Act which permit it to 
do what it wants to do. As I said, the only permissive section 
which we have in the Government of India Act is Section 
206 and we have taken the fullest liberty of this section to 
enlarge the jurisdiction of the Federal Court to the fullest 
extent possible. The deficiencies in the Bill I do not think need 
worry any Members of the Legislature for the simple reason 
that this Act will be in operation only for a very short time. 
As soon as our constitution is framed and a passed by the 
Constituent Assembly, we shall then be in a position to make 
the amplest provision for the jurisdiction of the Federal Court 
and to abolish appeals to the Privy Council. For the moment 
I think the house must be satisfied with what is done under 
Section 206. Sir, I move. 


31 

31 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to provide for the enlargement of the appellate 
jurisdiction of the Federal Court in civil cases be taken into 
consideration.” 


z:\ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am grateful 
to the House for having expressed its general satisfaction 
with this Bill. I will, therefore, deal only with certain points 
of criticism which have been raised by certain Honourable 
Members who have taken part in this debate. The first point 
of criticism relates to what I might call a timidity for my not 
going the whole hog and abolishing appeals to the Privy Council 
and conferring the fullest jurisdiction on the Federal Court. I 
am told that I am making a sort of artificial distinction between 
this Legislature and the Constituent Assembly and that I am 
for no reason limiting the powers of this House. I am sure that 
that is criticism which, to put it mildly, is certainly far from 
valid. I cannot accept the proposition that this legislature as 
distinguished from the Constituent Assembly is a completely 
sovereign body, as complete as the Constituent Assembly itself. 
It is true that the same members who sit in this House sit in 
the Constituent Assembly, so that in regard to the personnel 
there is no distinction. But I have not the slightest doubt 
in my mind that so far as functions are concerned the two 
Assemblies are quite different. The function of the Constituent 
Assembly is to make the constitution and in making that 
constitution it is bound by nothing except by its own vote. 
So far as this Assembly is concerned, it is bound by the 
Government of India Act, 1935 ; that is the constitution which 
is binding upon this legislature. Except the British Parliament 
which has both sorts of powers, namely, ordinary legislative 
powers as well as constituent powers, I do not know of any 
Assembly anywhere which has got a written constitution which 
possesses powers to override a constitution which has created 
that particular legislature. I therefore submit that I am on 
perfectly strong and stable footing when I say that in carrying 


* C. A. (Leg.) D., Vol. Ill, 11th December 1947, pp. 1719-22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

out the provisions of this Bill we must be bound by the 
limitations that have been imposed upon this legislature by 
the Government of India Act, 1935 as adapted. 

I will now turn to the other criticism expression to which 
was given by my Honourable Friend Shri Alladi Krishnaswami 
Ayyar. With regard to his amendment I do not want to say that 
I regret that the amendment is something which I could not 
accept. All that I want to say is that according to my reading 
of the situation that amendment is probably unnecessary, 
and I will explain to him why I take that point of view. The 
ground that he urged for the amendment was that the Privy 
Council in a certain case decided in 1940 ( as reported in the 
Punjab Co-operative Bank versus Commissioner of Income- 
Tax) stated, according to him, that they would not entertain 
any point relating to the consideration of the constitution 
of the High Court had not given a certificate ; therefore the 
Privy Council said that they would have to send that case 
back to the High Court for a certificate. His argument was 
that the decision of the Privy council in this case may also 
be accepted by the Federal court as binding upon itself; and 
therefore, wherever there was no certificate given and the 
matter came up before the Privy Council — and as a matter of 
fact it was found that a question relating to the constitution 
did arise — the Privy. Council would find itself unable to deal 
with that appeal. I think that was the sum and substance 
of his argument. Now what I would like to point out is that 
I think he has read a little more into the judgment of the 
Privy Council than it really says. I will read a few lines 
from the judgment. They have laid down three propositions 
which they say would arise in the consideration of section 
205. the second proposition is the only one which is relevant 
to our purpose. 

“Secondly, if in the absence of a certificate it appears to 
the Board on an appeal that there is ground for thinking that 
that is a matter for the consideration of the High Court and 
that they ought to have given or ought to have withheld the 
certificate, the Board ought to decline to hear an appeal until 
the High Court had an opportunity of doing one or the other.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


33 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 33 

That is what the Privy Council have laid down, Now my 
submission is that this matter was as matter of fact considered 
by the department when this Bill was drafted, and it was felt 
that after all in the observations made by the Privy Council 
they have not said that they do not possess jurisdiction in a 
case of this kind. All that they have done is to lay down a 
sort of rule of prudence that if a case came in for which there 
was no certificate they would not deal with it directly — not 
they had no power to deal with it — but would send the case 
back to the High Court. Therefore, it does not mean that the 
Federal Court which under our Bill would be inhearing the 
jurisdiction of the Privy Council would have no jurisdiction 
because the Privy Council has laid down no such rule at all. 

My second submission is that assuming that the Privy 
Council’s dictum does go to the question of jurisdiction, is 
it necessary for us to presume that the Federal Court in 
exercising a new jurisdiction which we are giving to it would 
accept what has been laid down by the Privy Council ? The 
Federal Court would be free to give its own interpretation. 
It may say that notwithstanding that that certificate was not 
given, we shall entertain the question and decide it. 

Thirdly, the Privy Council has also got the power to give 
special leave and they may give special leave and get over the 
difficulty. What I am trying to do is to explain to the House 
that we did not incorporate the sort of provision which my 
Honourable friend Mr. Alladi Krishnaswami has tabled in his 
amendment. But if eminent lawyers in this House think that 
we ought not to leave this question in doubt, and I find that 
he is supported by my friend, Bakshi Tek Chand, I myself 
would raise no objection to the amendment if they insist that 
the amendment should be introduced in the Bill. 

Then the question was raised with regard to the Courts 
of the judicial Commissioners of Ajmer-Merwara and Coorg. 
It is quite true that it would be very anomalous that we 
should stop direct appeals from the High Court to the Privy 
Council and allow appeals from Judicial Commissioners to go 
to the Privy Council without the intervention of the Federal 
Court. The anomaly is patent and nobody can deny it. But the 
question is this : that unless and until we declare the Courts 
of the Judicial Commissioners as High Courts, we could not 
make this Bill binding upon them. Now I am told that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

question of the declaration of the Judicial Commissioners 
Courts as High Courts would involve certain administrative 
problems. For instance, all the provisions in the Government 
of India Act relating to High Courts would have to be applied 
to the Judicial Commissioners before they become High Courts. 
It seemed to me that might create complications and that 
is the principal reason why we did not think it advisable at 
this stage to extend the provisions of this Act to the Judicial 
Commissioners. After all, as I said, this Bill will be of a 
temporary duration. It may not be in operation for more than 
two or three months, and I do not think that within these 
two or three months any very large number of appeals from 
the Courts of the Judicial Commissioners are likely to come 
to the Privy Council. 

Therefore, I submit, rather than face the difficulties that 
may arise out of administrative considerations, it might be 
better for this House to suffer the anomaly and let the position 
stand as it is. 

With regard to the question of criminal appeals that matter 
has been fairly disposed of by my friend who spoke before 
me, and therefore I do not think it necessary for me to touch 
upon that matter at all. 

Mr. Speaker : I might just state what I was feeling 
about the amendment. In case the Honourable Law Minister 
is inclined to accept it, isn’t it likely that an objection might 
be raised about the competence of this Legislature inasmuch 
as the amendment uses the words “notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 205 of the Government of India Act”? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That also is a 
point. 

Mr. Speaker : So that will also have to be considered. 
The House will be rising and in the recess the Law Minister 
may consider this point. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, I will 
consider it. 


The Assembly then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two 
of the Clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


35 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 35 

The Assembly re-assembled after Lunch at half Past a of the 
Clock, Mr. Speaker (The Honourable Mr. G. V. Mavalankar) in 
the Chair. 


Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill to provide for the enlargement of the appellate 
jurisdiction of the Federal Court in civil cases be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, with regard to 
clause 3 I would like to move an amendment. I move: 

“That in clause 3 — 

(1) The word ‘and’ at the end of sub-clause (a) (ii) be omitted; 

(2) The following be inserted as sub-clause (b): 

*(b) in any such appeal as aforesaid, it shall be competent 
for the Federal Court is consider any question of the nature 
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 205 of the Government 
of India Act, 1935; and 

(3) The existing sub-clause (b) be re-lettered as s sub-clause (c).” 

Mr. Speaker : I suppose this is an agreed amendment. The 

Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved. 

“That in clause 3 — 

(1) The word ‘and’ at the end of sub-clause (a) (ii) be omitted; 

(2) The following be inserted as sub-clause (b): 

‘(b) in any such appeal as aforesaid, it shall be competent 
for the Federal Court to consider any question of the nature 
mentioned in sub-section ( 1 ) of section 205 of the Government 
of India Act, 1935’; and 

(3) The existing sub-clause (b) be re-lettered as sub-clause. (c).” 


* Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“That after clause 5 of the Bill, the following new clause be 
inserted, namely: 

‘5A. After the appointed day, any party to an appeal pending before 
His Majesty in Council, before that day, may apply to the Federal Court 
to withdraw the appeal to its own file, if the appeal 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 11th December 1947, p. 1725. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is one which it filed after the appointed day before the Federal 
Court it could have jurisdiction under this Act to entertain it; 
and the Federal Court may after notice to the other party to the 
appeal withdraw the appeal to its own file on such terms and 
conditions as it may deem fit’ 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I cannot 
accept this amendment. My honourable Friend has not defined 
what is a pending appeal. The Bill defines a pending appeal. 
An appeal where papers have been despatched is deemed to be 
a pending appeal under the Bill. After the papers have been 
despatched there is no provision in this Bill for withdrawal for 
the simple reason that it is presumed that when papers and 
documents have been despatched, the parties have incurred 
all liabilities for payment of such costs as may be involved in 
that appeal, and there is therefore no reason why the appeal 
should be transferred to the Federal Court with the obligation 
of a double expenditure once at the Privy Council end and once 
here: and I, therefore, think that we have to look at it purely 
from the point of view of the costs to the litigant. If sufficient 
costs have been incurred, then, I think it is not right that the 
appeal should be transferred to the Federal Court. No doubt 
here there is provision that the terms of such transfer and 
withdrawal may be prescribed by the Federal Court. But I 
think it would be putting an unnecessary obligation upon the 
parties which they may not voluntarily accept and I therefore 
think that the provisions contained in the Bill ought to be 
regarded as satisfactory at the present stage. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: I do not like to 
press my amendment. I do not want to divide the House on 
the matter. I consulted the Law Minister and I thought he 
consented. 

Mr. Speaker: Apart from this, I was feeling another 
difficulty, and that was as to whether the Federal Court 
could be treated as a court superior to the Privy Council for 
the purpose of withdrawal of an appeal that has been filed. 
It would have been another matter if the amendment had 
sought to compel the litigant himself, but that is a question 
of phraseology of the section. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


37 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 37 

Has the honourable Member leave of the House to withdraw 
his amendment? 

The amendment was, by leave of the Assembly, withdrawn. 
Clauses 6 to 8 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Speaker: Motion moved: 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 6 ) 

* PROVINCIAL INSOLVENCY (AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Minister for Law): 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Provincial Insolvency Act, 
1920, be continued.” 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Provincial Insolvency 
Act, 1920, be continued ” 

Shri Raj Krishna Bose (Orissa: General): I would like 
to know if this Bill also was referred to a Select Committee ? 

Mr. Speaker: It was only introduced. 

Shri K. Santhanam (Madras : General): It can be newly 
introduced. What is meant by ‘continuation’ ? Only if it has 
gone through the other stages of discussion or Select Committee 
there is a purpose in having a motion for its continuation. It 
can as well be newly introduced. 

Mr. Speaker: I would invite the Honourable Member’s 
attention to the provisions of sub-clause (2) of section 30 of 
the Government of India Act, 1935, as adapted : 

“A Bill which, immediately before the establishment of the 
Dominion, was pending at the Legislative Assembly of the Indian 
Legislature may, subject to any provision to the contrary which 
may be included in rules made by the Dominion Legislature 
under section 38 of this Act, be continued in the Dominion 
Legislature as if the proceedings take with reference to the Bill 
in the said Legislative Assembly had been taken in the Dominion 
Legislature.” 

So the time and expenditure incurred in the previous 
stages — publication etc. — are now dispensed with. That is the 
point in continuing the Bill. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D. Vol. I, 17th November 1947, pp. 40-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


39 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 39 

Shri M. S. Aney (Deccan and Madras States Group): May I 
know, whether, in view of the wording of the particular clause, 
just read out it if necessary that a motion for continuation 
should be made ? The rule permits the Government to continue 
the Bill and take it through further stages if it wants to do so. 
Is a separate motion for its continuation therefore necessary 
at all ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: If the motion 
for continuation is not made the Bill lapses. That means all 
the stages will have to be begun again. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal: Muslim): Sir, 
on this point of order the section which you were pleased to 
read says that a Bill which was pending in the Legislative 
Assembly ‘may be continued’. It is thus discretionary on the 
part of this House to continue or not to continue it. Therefore, 
a decision of the House is necessary. 

Mr. Speaker : That is exactly why the motion is brought. 
The question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Provincial Insolvency 

Act, 1920, be continued.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Mr. Speaker, Sir I move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Provincial Insolvency 
Act, 1920, be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Shri 
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar; Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Shrimati 
G. Durgabai, Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, Shri M. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, 
Shri Ram Sahai and the Mover, with instructions to report on or 
before the 16th March, 1948, and that the number of members 
whose presence shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the 
Committee shall be five.” 

Sir, in order to put the House in possession of the facts 
which have made it necessary for Government to introduce 
this measure I should like to make some preliminary 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 25th February 1948, pp. 1220-21 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

observations with regard to certain decisions which have 
necessitated the making of this provision. I think it would 
be enough if I began from 1924 when a case went up to the 
Privy Council which is known as Sat Narain versus Behari 
Lai. The facts of the case briefly were that a Hindu father 
had been adjudged insolvent. Now under section 17 of the 
Presidency Towns Insolvency Act the property of the insolvent 
becomes vested in the official Assignee from the date of the 
adjudication. The property of the Hindu father consists of two 
things : (i) his share in the joint family property, and (ii) his 
power to dispose of his sons property in the joint family for 
his personal debts provided that the debts were not incurred 
for an immoral purpose. The question that arose in that case 
before the Privy Council was whether the power of the father 
to dispose of property of the son is property within the meaning 
of section 2(e) of the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act. On that 
issue the Privy Council gave its decision to the effect that the 
power of the Hindu father to dispose of the property of his son 
in the joint family was not ‘property’ within the meaning of 
section 2(e) on the ground that section 2(e) contemplated that 
power which was absolute over property and power which was 
not absolute was not property. According to the Privy Council 
the power of the father to dispose of the sons’ property was 
not absolute because it was subject to the condition that the 
debts for which the property could be disposed of must not be 
immoral. On that ground they did not agree that the Official 
Assignee could become automatically vested under section 17 
with the property belonging to the son. In that particular care 
that decision of the Privy Council did not matter very much 
to the creditors, for the simple reason that the Presidency 
Towns Insolvency Act contains a separate section — section 
52 — which permits the Official Assignee and the creditors to 
pursue such property or such capacity to obtain the property 
of another person. Therefore although in that particular case 
the property did not automatically vest in the Official Assignee, 
yet the Official Assignee was free to pursue the property of 
the son which was liable under the rule of pious obligation 
to pay the debts of the father by separate proceedings; and 
I believe he did that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


41 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 41 

Now what happened was this. After that decision of the 
Privy Council the courts in India had occasions to interpret 
another Act which is called the Provincial Insolvency Act. As 
lawyer members of this House will remember, we have two 
separate statues dealing with insolvency, — one which deals 
with insolvency taking place within the towns, and the other 
with those in the mofussil. The Provincial Insolvency Act 
does not unfortunately contain a provision such as section 52 
which finds a place in the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act. 
Consequently when a similar question arose before the courts, 
namely, whether the property which a Hindu father could 
claim under his right or power to sell his son’s interest for 
the payment of his own debts could be interpreted as property 
and become vested in the Official Assignee, only that was 
property within the meaning of section 2(e). Unfortunately 
what has happened is that different courts have interpreted 
this section 2(e) of the Provincial Insolvency Act in different 
ways. It would be interesting to note that the Bombay High 
Court has held that though the property does not vest power 
is not property and therefore, it does vest; the Patna High 
Court also follows the Bombay High Court and so does the 
Allahabad and Nagpur High Courts. On the other hand when 
you come to Madras, one Bench of the Madras High Court has 
held that the property vests, while another Bench has held 
that it does not vest. And the same is the case in Calcutta 
where one Bench has held that the property does vest and 
another Bench has held that it does not vest. 

Now I think this matter should be put right. The Madras 
High Court in one of its decisions clearly gave an indication to 
the Government of India that it was high time that legislation 
was brought in to set aside this discrepancy in the decisions 
of the different High Courts. Unfortunately during the war 
such a piece of legislation could not be brought in because 
there was not enough time. Therefore, it is to set right this 
discrepancy and division of opinion in the different High Courts 
that this measure has been brought in. All that this measure 
does is to reproduce bodily section 52 from the Presidency 
Towns Insolvency Act and makes it a part of the Provinvcial 
Towns Insolvency Act as section 50-A. There is nothing more 
that the Bill seeks to do. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As the House is aware, there is also a measure for a 
similar purpose standing in the name of Shrimati Durgabai. 
Her measure differs from the Government measure in two 
particular respects. She wants to give retrospective effect 
to the measure; the Government Bill does not propose to 
do so. The other provision contained in the Bill of Shrimati 
Durgabai is that the law not only should declare that the 
power which the Hindu father has over the son’s interest in 
joint family property should be made clear as being available 
for distribution among the creditors, but that the power of 
disposal of the Manager also should be clearly stated. On 
that point all that I should like to say is this that I have not 
an empty mind but I have an open mind; and I am prepared 
to leave this matter to be decided by the Select Committee. 
Indeed one of the purposes or motives which have led me 
to move for reference to Select Committee was to enable the 
Select Committee to discuss these matters. 

I do not think there is anything more I need say in 
elucidation of the provisions of this Bill. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved. 


*Prof. N. G. Ranga : There is the question of the manager. 
My Honourable friend wants this power to be extended to 
the Manager also. Evidently she has in mind some of the big 
zamindars who get their properties managed by managers. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They are called 
‘Karta’. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga: It is bad enough to vest the power 
in the father but it is worse to vest it in the agent also. 

The Honouraable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No, no. It is 

wrong. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga: That is the answer given by lawyers. 
I am looking at it from the point of view of the debtors. They 
have as much right to be protected as the creditors. Creditors 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 25th February 1948, p. 1224. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


43 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 43 

are rich enough to engage these lawyers and get things done 
in their own way. I wish to suggest that the benefit of this 
Act should not be extended at all to these managers and it 
should not be given retrospective effect. This amendment may 
be passed but we should take care to see that the Law Minister 
comes forward at an early date with a suitable amendment 
in order to protect the interests of the sons also as against 
the vagaries of their own fathers. 


* Shri Biswanath Das : I have nothing to say about this 
particular Bill. In fact I have clearly stated that if the House 
comes to the conclusion that the Insolvency Act as it should 
stand then this Bill is a natural corollary to it. There is no 
denying that fact. Therefore, I have nothing more to say in 
the matter. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Amebkar: Mr. Speaker, Sir, 
I will begin with my answer to the point made by my friend 
who spoke last. If I understood him correctly his points were 
two. One was that this was purely a provincial matter and 
ought therefore, to be left to the Provincial Legislatures. 

Shri Biswanath Das : May I interrupt ‘my honourable 
Friend, Sir ? I stated clearly that it is in the Concurrent List 
and that as such the Central Government should have left it 
to the Provincial Government and the Provincial Legislatures. 
I know it is in the Concurrent List.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I was just going 
to say that. The reason why it was put in the Concurrent 
list is undoubtedly — and I do not think there can be any 
other reason — that in a matter of this sort there ought to be 
uniformity if the Centre decided there should be uniformity. 
Therefore it is the right of the Central Legislature to legislate 
on the subject. 

With regard to the question whether there should be an 
Insolvency Act or not I do not think that that can be point 
at issue on a matter of this sort. If my honourable Friend 
wants that there should be no insolvency legislation at all 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 25th February 1948, p. 1227-28. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the proper thing for him would be to bring in a resolution 
before the House and say that all laws relating to insolvency 
may be abolished. 

Shri Biswanath Das: May I state that I never said that 
the Insolvency Law is not necessary. All that I said is this 
law is unnecessary, undesirable and breeds immorality into 
society. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, therefore 
not necessary. However with regard to the point made by 
Dr. Punjabrao Deshmukh he is not here — I was somewhat 
surprised when he said that the Bill ought to be circulated. 
He has accepted a place on the Select Committee and I am 
sure about it that the two positions are quite inconsistent. I 
do not wish to say anything more about what he has said. 

With regard to the point Shrimati Durgabai, namely that 
the Bill should have retrospective effect, I was bound to make 
a reference to it because I had induced her to withdraw her 
own Bill on a promise that when I bring my Bill I will say 
something about her Bill also. But as to the substance of it, 
as I say I feel a certain amount of doubt and difficulty, and 
I cannot very readily say in this House that I shall accept 
the proposition that the Bill should have retrospective effect. 
In fact one of the friends on the bench there who spoke said 
something which has a great deal of force and we must be very 
careful in giving retrospective effect to a measure of this sort. 

Now coming to the point made by my friend Professor 
Ranga — he of course has the habit of entering into subjects 
which undoubtedly he himself will acknowledge are not his 
own — I am prepared to modify his argument and to give it 
some sort of a shape so that it might appear respectable. Now 
if I understand correctly, what he said was that there was a 
difference between the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act and 
the Provincial Insolvency Act, inasmuch as one contained a 
clause or a section like 6 and 52 while the other did not. 

One could infer from what he said that the legislature 
in passing the law had different intensions from the very 
beginning that while they intended that since interest must 
pass to the Official Assignee under section 52 when the father 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


45 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 45 

became insolvent, the legislature has no such intention when 
they passed the Provincial Insolvency Act. I think my friend 
Professor Ranga, not being a lawyer, has not understood the 
position correctly. If he refers to the definition of the term 
‘property’ to which I made reference, he will see that in 
both the laws, provincial as well as Presidency Towns, the 
definition of ‘property’ is just the same. There is no difference 
at all. In both cases the phraseology as property or power. 
The difference is that under section 52, the official assignee 
can pursue property, but somehow there being an omission in 
the Provincial Insolvency Act, he has no right to pursue that 
property. Therefore, there is no doubt about it that this must 
have been a very inadvertent omission. If the legislature did 
not intend that the father’s righ to dispose of the property of 
his son under the Provincial Insolvency Act should not accrue 
to the official assignee, the definition of the term ‘property’ 
in the Provincial Insolvency Act would be very different to 
what it is now, and therefore, I submit with all respect to 
my friend that his point really has no substance. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

That the Bill further to amend the Provincial Insolvency 
Act, 1920, be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Shri 
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Shrimati 
G. Durgabai, Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, Shri M. Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed, 

Shri Ram Sahai and the Mover, with instructions to report on or 
before the 16th March 1948, and that the number of members 
whose presence shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the 
Committee shall be five.” 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 7 ) 

^RESOLUTION RE. EXTENSION OF PERIOD 
MENTIONED IN SECTIONS 2 AND 3 OF INDIA 
(CENTRAL GOVERNMENT AND 
LEGISLATURE) ACT, 1946 AS ADAPTED. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Sir I move : 

“In persuance of the proviso to section 4 of the India (Central 
Government and Legislature) Act, 1946, as adapted by the India 
(Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, this Assembly hereby 
approves the extension of the period mentioned in sections 2 
and 3 of the said Act for a further period of twelve months 
commencing on the first day of April, 1948.” 

Now, Sir, it is not necessary for me to enter upon a 
very lengthy discussion in support of this resolution. It 
will suffice if I tell the House that the Central Legislature 
has passed various legislations imposing controls on 
commodities, requisitioning land, and so on, matters 
which are purely in the Provincial List. This power the 
Centre was able to exercise because of the proclamation 
of emergency which was issued by the Governor-General 
when the war broke out: and as the House knows, since 
the proclamation is issued by the Governor-General the 
Central Legislature gets the necessary power to make 
any order or to pass any law notwithstanding the fact 
that the subject falls in the Provincial Legislative List. 
It is also provided in the Government of India Act that 
this power of legislating upon provincial subjects would 
disappear six months after the Proclamation of emergency 
has been withdrawn. Now this power was exhausted in the 
year 1946. The Government of the day felt that although 
technically the emergency had disappeared, yet factually 
there did exist a certain urgency for the controls imposed 
by the Central Legislature to be continued. There was no 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. II, 25th February 1948, pp. 1228-29. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


47 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 47 

method by which the Central after the emergency had ended, 
could get the power to keep the controls alive and therefore, 
the Central Legislature approached the British Parliament 
which was then the only authority which could confer such 
power on the Central Legislature to make due provision in 
this matter, and Parliament, as the House will remember in 
1946 passed an Act called the India (Central Government 
and Legislature) Act, 1946. Section 2 of that Parliamentary 
statute permitted the Dominion Legislature make laws 
with regard to the matters which it had done during that 
emergency. But what the parliamentary Statute did was that 
it gave the power to the Central Legislature one year only 
in the first instance. 

Under the provisions of that Act, the Central Legislature 
passed Acts called the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) 
Act, 1946 and the Requisitioned Land (Continuance of 
Powers) Act, 1947. That law was passed in 1946. Under the 
Parliamentary Statute it continued in existence for one year ; 
that is up to 1947. 

Now, Section 4 of the Parliamentary Statute as I said 
provided that the Centre could exercise these powers for one 
year. It also provided that the power could be extended by 
another year if the Governor-General so certified. Consequently 
those two Acts to which I made reference were continued 
in existence by another year by the fiat of the Governor- 
General and we are now exercising those powers under that 
extension effected by the Governor-General. Now, under the 
extension effected by the Governor-General, these would 
continue up to 31st March 1948. The various Departments of 
the Government of India have been consulted in this matter 
in order to ascertain whether they could do without these 
controls after the 31st March 1948. I believe that almost all 
the Departments who are charged with the administrative 
control feel that they need at least one year more to continue 
these controls. 

As I said, section 4 of the Parliamentary Statute gave the 
power for one year in the first instance, in the second instance 
one year on the fiat of the Governor-General, and thereafter 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by a Resolution of this House. The position, therefore, is this, 
that unless this House passes a Resolution extending that 
power, these powers will come to an end on the 31st March 
1948. As the House will remember, I am only a Law Minister, 
I have no administrative responsibilities for the affairs of the 
Government of India, and I am therefore not in a position 
to answer any questions if they are asked as to whether in 
fact this extension is necessary, but I can tell the House 
that all the Departments are agreed that this extension is 
necessary, and I hope that the House will accept the view of 
the Departments of the Government of India and pass this 
Resolution. I have taken the precaution of calling my friend 
Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee to be by my side in order to 
reply any questions requiring detailed particulars with regard 
to the necessity of a provision of this sort. Sir I move. 

Mr. Speaker: Resolution moved: 

“In pursuance of the proviso to section 4 of the India (Central 
Government and Legislature) Act, 1946, as adapted by the India 
(Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, this Assembly hereby 
approves the extension of the period mentioned in sections 2 
and 3 of the said Act for a further period of twelve months 
commencing on the first day of April, 1948.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


49 


SECTION II 

3rd February 1950 

TO 

20th April 1950 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd 


MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


50 


BLANK 


z:\ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 51 

SECTION II 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PAGES 

8. Insolvency Law (Amendment) Bill ... 53-59 

9. Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill ... 60-62 

10. Escape of Mir Laik Ali from Custody ... 63-78 

11. Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification Bill ... 79-98 

12. Motion for Adjournment ... 99-100 

13. Societies Registration (Amendment) Bill ... 101-102 

14. Army Bill ... 103-110 

15. Part C States (Laws) Bill ... 111-122 

16. Representation of the People Bill ... 123-165 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd 


MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


52 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


53 


( 8 ) 

♦INSOLVENCY LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL 
The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the law relating to insolvency, 
be taken into consideration.” 

Sir, I should like to make a brief statement in order 
to enable the House to understand what exactly the Bill 
proposes to do. The law of Insolvency in India is contained 
4 00 P M m t wo different Acts: One is called the Provincial 
Insolvency Act and the other is called the 
Presidency-towns Insolvency Act. The present Bill contains, 
apart from the short title, six clauses which make amendments 
in the existing insolvency law. The amending clauses in this Bill 
fall into two categories: some make changes in the Presidency- 
towns Insolvency Act and the other propose changes in the 
Provincial Insolvency Act. Those that make changes in the 
Provincial Insolvency Act are four ; they range from clauses 3 
to 6 and there are two which relate to the Presidency-towns 
Insolvency Act. 

Taking into consideration clause 2, all that clause 2 does is 
to remove a difficulty which has been felt for a long time. In 
the existing law as embodied in section 12 of the Presidency- 
towns Insolvency Act, it is said that an insolvency petition 
must be filed within three months from the occurrence of 
the event which is recognised as the justifiable ground for 
the presentation of the petition. It often happens that the 
period of three months comes to an end when the courts 
are closed. Under the law as it sands, the creditor loses the 
opportunity of presenting a petition merely because when 
the court re-opens, it is more than three months since the 
occurrence of the event. Courts, of course, have taken different 


*Parliamentary Debates (Hereinafter called P.D.), Vol. 1, Part II, 3rd Feb. 
1950, pp. 185-93. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

views in this matter. The Madras and Calcutta High Courts 
have held that the period cannot be extended. The Allahabad 
High Court has held that the period can be extended. It is 
therefore felt that both for the purpose of removing what 
might be called and injustice, because, if the creditor is not 
able to present a petition within three months by reason of 
the fact that the court is closed, it is certainly not his fault, 
and secondly also in order to remove the conflict of decisions, 
it is proposed by this amendment that in any case where the 
period expires on a day when the court is closed, it shall be 
lawful to present a petition on the day on which the court 
reopens. 

Coming to clause 3, it amends section 21 of the Presidency- 
towns Insolvency Act. Section 21 deals with annulment 
of adjudication. Under section 21, although the power of 
annulment is given to the court, the matter is left within 
the discretion of the court. The words are, “the court may”. 
Then, this section 21 is contrary to section 35 of the Provincial 
Insolvency Act: because, under section 35 of the Provincial 
Insolvency Act, the power is obligatory and the wording is, “the 
court shall”. Similarly, it is found that the existing section 21 
is also to some extent inconsistent with its own section 13 sub- 
clause 4. Because, there it is stated that if the grounds exist 
for dismissing a petition, the court shall dismiss it. There is 
no reason why in the case of annulment the power should be 
discretionary and in the case of dismissal, the power should 
be compulsary. It is therefore felt that it would be desirable 
to bring the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act in conformity 
with the Provincial Insolvency law and use the word “shall” 
in the place of the word “may”. 

Then, I come to clause 4. Clause 4 makes an amendment 
to section 53 of the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act. Section 
53 deals with the rights of an execution creditor against the 
property of an insolvent, who has obtained a decree against 
the debator before he was adjudged insolvent. The question 
has arisen as to what should be the terminus, so to say, of 
the rights of the executing creditor : should the terminus be 
the presentation and admission of the petition of insolvency 
or should the terminus be the adjudication. It is felt that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


55 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 55 

proper terminus, the equitable terminus would be the 
admission of the petition ; because, admission of the petition 
means that there are other creditors who are also recognised 
as having a right to a share in the property of the debtor. 
It is therefore unreasonable to permit the prior executing 
debator to continue to appropriate the property until the date 
of adjudication. There may be a considerable time between 
the admission of the petition of insolvency and the actual 
adjudication by the court. Therefore, this section substitites 
the word “admission” for the word “adjudication”. 

Then, I come to clause 5. Clause 5 introduces a new section, 
section 101A in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act. The 
necessity for the introduction of this new section is this. As 
I just now stated, there is a provision for the annulment of 
adjudication. Now, the effect of the annulment of adjudication 
is that proceedings which by reason of adjudication are 
terminated or cannot be initiated, become open. What the 
section permits is that on annulment other persons who have 
a right to sue or proceed against the debtor will be free to so. 
The law of limitation comes in their way. As lawyer Members 
of the House would know, one of the principles of the law 
of limitation is that once limitation begins, it does not stop. 
Nothing can prevent limitation being suspended. Therefore 
what happens is this 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh): I could not follow. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot open a class now. 

The point is that as the right to sue begins long before the 
annulment by the time the annulment order is passed, the 
suit or the proceeding is time-barred. The question is raised 
whether this is a right thing to do, because if the proceedings 
or the right to sue is suspended, it is suspended not because 
of any fault on the part of the person who has this right to 
sue, but because the law says that when an adjudication is 
made all proceedings shall be suspended. Consequently, in 
order to remove this iniquity, what is proposed is this : That 
by this new section 101A, it will be open for the Court and 
for the party to have the time taken between adjudication 
and annulment excluded from the computation of the period 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the limitation laid down by the law, so that the right to 
sue may practically be deemed to have occurred when the 
annulment has taken place. Anyhow the period will not serve 
as an additional bar to any delay or lapses that might have 
occurred on the part of the person who has the right to sue. 

Now, clauses 6 is merely clause 2 of the Bill. All that 
it does is this, that it introduces the same proviso in the 
Provincial Insolvency Act, so that even under the Provincial 
Insolvency Act, if the period of three months for filling the 
petition falls on the day on which the Court is closed, it would 
be open for a party to file the petition on the day when the 
Court re-opens. 

Then, the last clause also amends the Provincial Insolvency 
Act. Under the present law, it is provided that along with the 
order of the adjudication, the Court also fixes the date for the 
discharge of the petitioner and he is required to appear on 
the day on which the date is fixed for his discharge. Now, the 
words are “He shall appear and the court, if he does not appear, 
shall” take a certain action, as stated therein. The section so 
far as the wording is concerned, is mandatory, but curiously 
enough the Courts have interpreted ‘shall’ as ‘may’ making it 
discretionary. It is felt that probably the Courts have really 
carried out the intention of the Legislature in treating ‘shall’ 
as ‘may’. Similarly, the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act has 
also the word ‘may’ and not ‘shall’. Therefore, this amendments 
proposes to accept the decision or the interpretation of the 
Court and substitute ‘may’ of ‘shall’. These are all the clauses 
in the Bill. 

I might say that these amendments are very much overdue. 
These amendments were suggested a long time ago, in fact 
before the War, but it was not possible to undertake any 
legislation while the war was there. Consequently, there has 
been this delay. I might tell the House that these amendments 
have been approved by the Provincial Governments and 
the Provincial Governments, have also stated that although 
the subject of insolvency falls in the Concurrent list, it is 
desirable these amendments should be made by a law made 
by Parliament, so that they may be uniform throughout the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


57 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 57 

country. That is the reason why this Bill has been brought 
forward. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the law relating to insolvency, 
be taken into consideration.” 


*Dr. Ambedkar: I am glad that my friend Shri Biswanath 
Das raised the points to which he made reference in the course 
of his speech. I should like to say that before bringing forth 
this Bill I myself was of the opinion that the time had come 
when these two enactments should be amalgamated into a 
single Act. The distinction which has been existing in our 
insolvency law between the Presidency towns and the other 
areas seems to me no longer justifiable. But I found that 
the amalgamation of the two Acts into one single enactment 
would take time and would also require special agency to be 
employed in the Law Department for the purpose of collating 
the sections. However, owing the financial stringency it was 
not possible for me to obtain the staff that was necessary to 
undertake this task in the expediency with which we intended 
to proceed. That was the reason why I kept back my original 
project of bringing forth a single enactment. I have, however, 
not abandoned that project and as soon a circumstances 
propitious to that purpose are available. I will certainly place 
a single, enactment before Parliament. 

With regard to the other question that he has raised, 
whether the jurisdiction in insolvency should be the District 
Court or Courts of small jurisdiction, as well as the other 
sections to which he made reference which according to him, are 
sections which are abused by the insolvent, I don’t think they 
are matters which can be debated on this particular occasion. 
The law of insolvency, as everyone knows, is a sort of legal 
relief against misfortune or mishap. It is quite possible that 
persons who ought not to get the benefit of the legal relief 
do get it, but that is a complaint which may not be made 
merely against the insolvency law — it can be made against 


* P. D., Vol. 1, Part II, 3rd February 1950, pp. 191-93. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

almost every law. It is never possible for the Legislature to 
enact a measure which will be so tight as to be completely 
fool-proof and knave-proof. There will always be available 
many crooks who will be able to find out ways and means of 
getting round the act and abusing it. However, there is not 
the slightest doubt about it that the intention of my friend 
Mr. Das, that we ought not to allow any loophole in a law 
of this kind which would enable undeserving persons to get 
the relief which the law intends to give only to the really 
unfortunate, is a praise worthy object and no doubt in future 
legislation it will be borne in mind. 

With regard to the points made by my friend 
Mr. Karunakara Menon, I think he has not followed what I 
stated in my opening remarks. He has forgotten that what 
we really are trying to do is to bring either the Provincial 
Law in conformity with the Presidency Law or to bring the 
Presidency law in conformity with the Provincial Law. We 
are not making any particular innovation which is not to be 
found in either of the two Acts. If he does not like the word 
“shall” which is introduced in some sections of the Provincial 
Act and wants “may”, then he shall also have to give his 
justification as to why the word “shall” should continue in the 
Provincial legislation. All that I have done is to bring the two 
in conformity so that there may be no obvious inconsistency 
in legislation in matters of this sort. If, as I have said, he 
has still any points of contention he can raise them when a 
new Bill consolidating the whole is brought before Legislature. 
For the moment these are only pressing amendments which 
both the Provincial Governments as well as, if I may say so, 
all the High Courts have accepted. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That the Bill further to amend the law relating to insolvency, 

be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

“That clauses 2 to 7 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


59 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 59 

Clauses 2 to 7 were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That in clause 1, for the figures ‘1949’ the figures ‘1950’ 
be substituted.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 1, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

'That the Preamable stand part of the Bill” 

The motion was negatived. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That for the existing Enacting Formula, the following be 
substituted : — 

‘Be it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That the Enacting Formula as amended stand part of the 
Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Enacting Formula, as amended, was added to the Bill. 
The Title was added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, he passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 9 ) 

‘CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the Criminal 
Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I introduce the Bill. 


^CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL 
The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Criminal Law Amendment 
Ordinance, 1944, be taken into consideration.” 

[Shrimati Durgabai in the Chair.] 

The object of this measure is to replace Ordinance No. Ill 
of 1950, which is called the Criminal Law Amendment 
Ordinance, 1950. This Ordinance No. Ill of 1950 was passed 
in order to add a new section 9A to the Original Ordinance 
XXXVIII of 1944. The history of this Ordinance No. XXXVIII of 
1944 may be helpful to hon. Members in order to understand 
why exactly the Ordinance III of 1950 was enacted. 

During the war the Government of India as well as 
the Government of the various Provinces had entrusted 
public property and public funds into the hands of certain 
persons such as contractors and officers of Government. It 
was found that some of these persons who were entrusted 
with Government property and funds had committed certain 
defalcations and consequently in order to try the delinquents 

* P. D. Vol. 2, Part II, 14th February 1950, p. 538. 

**Ibid, 28th February 1950, pp. 983-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


61 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 61 

Ordinance XXXVIII of 1944 was passed, which constituted 
special tribunals for trying these offenders. These tribunals 
were spread all over India in the different Provinces of 
United India before the Partition. These tribunals were given 
power to freeze the property of the delinquent by passing 
attachment orders and the courts so empowered were courts 
within whose jurisdiction the delinquents stayed or carried 
on business. 

After the Partition a peculiar situation arose, namely 
that the tribunals which passed the orders of attachment 
against the properties of the delinquents became part of 
Pakistan, whereas the property of the delinquents remained 
in India proper. This difficulty has to a large extent held 
up the work of carrying on these trials. It is therefore now 
proposed that the power of passing further orders with 
respect to property which has already been attached by 
courts (which unfortunately happen to be now in Pakistan) 
should be transferred to courts operating within the Indian 
Republic. Consequently it is thought desirable to add this 
section 9A which permits the courts within whose jurisdiction 
the offences are now being tried to exercise the power of 
passing orders regarding the property which is held by these 
deliquents. 

The Ordinance was promulgated because the matter was 
regarded as very urgent. As the power of continuing the 
Ordinance is of a limited duration it is necessary to revise 
the Ordinance before the expiry of time by this measure. 

Mr. Chairman: Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Criminal Law Amendment 

Ordinance, 1944, be taken into consideration.” 

Shri Himatsingka (West Bengal): On a point of 
information, may I know if the property that has been 
attached by an order of the court is now in Paksitan. If the 
property continues there 

Dr. Ambedkar: The property is here. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Criminal Law 

Amendment Ordinance, 1944, be taken into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


62 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

Mr. Chairman: There are no amendments. I will put the 
clauses. 

The question is: 

“That clauses 2 and 3 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That the Bill be passed.”. 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


63 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


63 


( 10 ) 

MOTION FOR ADJOURNMENT 

ESCAPE OF MIR LAIK ALI OF HYDERABAD 
FROM CUSTODY. 

* Mr. Speaker : May I ask who is the controlling authority 
or the directing authority, so far as the prosecution of Mir 
Laik Ali and others is concerned ? 

Sardar Patel: The final prosecution sanction is from the 
Nizam. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I do not know 
but the first impression which I have of this matter is this 
that Hyderabad is like any other State. There is no distinction 
between Hyderabad State under the Constitution in its relation 
to the Centre and, say, for instance Bombay in its relation 
to the Centre, which means that for subject matters set out 
in List II the responsibility is entirely of the State, while the 
responsibility, so far as subjects in List I are concerned, belong 
to the Centre. The same rule would apply to Hyderabad. That 
is to say that so far as the matter relating to the custody of 
Laik Ali is concerned, it is a matter of law and order which 
is undoubtedly under the Constitution a matter for local 
administration. On that footing, I submit that this is not 
a matter which constitutionally could be held to be under 
the control of the Central Government, but I should like 
to add one more remark, viz. that in view of the fact that 
there is no local legislature to which the local Ministry could 
be held to be responsible, it is possible — I speak subject to 
correction — that whatever action is being taken by the local 
administration is perhaps done under the power which the 
Constitution vests in the Central Government of direction and 
control over certain States. I am not yet aware as to what 


* P.D., Vol. 2, Part II, 7th March 1950, pp. 1179-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the position under that part of the Constitution is. But so 
far as the Constitution is concerned and the relation of 
Hyderabad State to the Centre is concerned, this, I submit, 
would be a matter falling within law and order which is 
absolutely a States subject. 


* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, I am 
grateful to you for the second opportunity which you have 
given to me to clarify and to explain further the points 
that were made by me as well as by other Members of 
this House in the course of the debate that took place 
yesterday on the adjournment motion. Since you have 
been good enough to point out to me, before I commenced 
my remarks, the difficulties which you feel, I will follow 
the line of points which you have to set out: I will first 
of all try and explain the Constitutional position of the 
States on the one hand and the Centre on the other and 
to what extent the States are free and independent of the 
Centre, to what extent they are under the subservience or 
surveillance or superintendence or control of the Centre. 

The first thing I would like to draw the attention of 
the House to is this that there is a certain amount of 
parallelism in the constitutional frame-up of the Central 
Government and of the States. For instance, with regard 
to the Central Government you have article 53 which 
says that the executive power of the Union shall be 
vested in the President. Corresponding to that article, you 
have article 154 which states that the executive power 
in the States shall be vested in the Governor or the 
Rajpramukh, as the case may be. Coming to the question 
of actual administration, article 74 of the Constitution 
provides that there shall be a Council of Minister to aid 
and advise the President in the matter of the exercise 
of the executive authority which is vested in him by the 
Constitution. Analogous to that article, we have also 


* P.D., Vol. 2, Part II, 8th March 1950, pp. 1236-44. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


65 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 65 

article 163 which relates to the States. It also is worded in 
the same language as article 74. It says that there shall also 
be a Council of Ministers to aid and advise the Governor in 
the carrying out of the administration which is vested in the 
Governor, or the Rajpramukh. Then we have another article, 79 
which vests the legislative power of the Centre in Parliament 
consisting of two Houses. Analogous to that, we have article 
168 constituting a legislature for the States in almost the 
same terms except for the fact that in some cases there are 
two Houses and in other cases there is one House. There is a 
further provision, namely, that where at the commencement of 
the Constitution there does not exist any popularly constituted 
legislature in any States, then the Rajpramukh of that State 
shall be deemd to be legally the legislature for that State. It 
will therefore be seen that the paraphernalia, so to say, of 
administration in accordance with the Constitution is parallel 
in both cases. Supplementing this by what I stated yesterday 
that the legislative authority of Parliament is primarily 
confined to subjects enumerated in List I, and the legislative 
authority of the States is confined to subjects mentioned in 
List II, with the further proposition — to which there can be 
no objection raised because it is a well-established judicial 
proposition — that the legislative authority is co-extensive 
with executive authority, it follows that so far as the States 
are concerned, primarily and fundamentally they occupy an 
independent position in the Constitution. That being so, it is 
quite clear that by the rule of comity and also by the rule 
governing responsibility, it would not be open to this House 
to discuss any matter, either in the form of legislation or in 
the form of administrative action, which has been taken by 
the State which lies within the ambit of subjects mentioned in 
List II. As I stated yesterday, so far as I can understand the 
subject-matter of the Adjournment Motion relates primarily to 
law and order. Law and order is a subject which is included 
in List II and therefore, it would not be open to this House 
to discuss such a question when the Legislature of the State 
is competent by the rule of the Constittuion to deal with it. 
That I think is a general proposition which must be accepted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I should like, if hon. Members want to see the thing in a 
clear light to ask them to compare the provisions of article 239 
with the provisions of the article to which I have referred in 
regard to the States. Article 239 refers to States in Part C ; 
they are what are called “Centrally Administered Areas”. 
The language of article 239 is absolutely different from the 
language of article 154. The language of article 154 is that 
the executive power, which also includes administration, vests 
in the Governor, while article 239 begins by saying that the 
States in Part C shall be administered by the President, which 
means “President on the advice of his Council of Ministers”, 
which in turn means that the responsibility for any matter of 
administration so far as States in Part C are concerned, directly 
falls upon Parliament and upon the Central Government. It is 
therefore open for any Member to discuss any matter relating 
to States in Part C on the floor of the House, which would 
not be the case so far as the other States are concerned. 

With regard to the States, I should also like to point out 
that although our Constitution divides the States in Part A 
and Part B for certain purposes, that is for the purposes to 
which I have referred, namely the frame of their constitution, 
the vesting of the executive authority, the authority to make 
law, and all that, they are on a parallel footing and there is 
complete parity. True enough that the Consitution contains an 
article, article 238, which applies with certain modifications, 
the articles which apply to States in Part A to States in 
Part B. But anyone who has the curiosity to examine the 
provisions of article 238 will find that the changes made 
in the articles which are applicable to States in Part A in 
their application to States in Part B are of a very minor 
character — substituting “Governor” for “Rajpramukh” etc. 
a sort of terminological difference. Beyond that there is no 
difference at all. Therefore, from that point of view, just as it 
would not be competent for this House to discuss any matter 
falling within the jurisdiction of States in Part A, it would 
also not fall within the jurisdiction of the House to discuss 
any matter relating to Part B States because both of them, 
as I said, are placed by the Constitution on the same footing. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


67 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 67 

At this stage I would like to endorse what the Hon. the 
Home Minister has said just now. The mere fact that the Nizam 
is a Rajpramukh, the mere fact that there is no legislature, 
the mere fact that certain officers have been lent by the Home 
Ministry to the Nizam for carrying on the administration of 
the State, would not alter the character of the Hyderabad 
State being exactly on the same footing as other States in 
Part B, which is the same thing as being equivalent to States 
in Part A. I shall have to say something at a later stage by 
way of a small qualification, but I should like to say that the 
mere fact that the officers have been lent would not alter the 
status and the character or position of the Hyderabad State 
within the field of the Constitution. 

Now, this is the general proposition, namely that the 
States in Part A as well as the States in Part B are free and 
independent of the Centre in the matter of executive authority, 
in the matter of legislative authority and in the mode and 
manner of administering the legislative and executive authority 
that they possess. This is the general proposition. The question 
that we have now to consider is the provision contained in 
article 371, and the question is: does the provision of this 
article make any change in the position of States in Part B ? 
Because, as everyone knows, article 371 applies only to States 
in Part B and does not apply to States in Part A. In the course 
of the debate yesterday, I found that one hon. Member said 
that the Central Government possess no authority to issue any 
directions to the States except under emergency provisions, 
which gave me the impression that in his view article 371 
could not be the foundation for the Ministry of States or the 
Government of India to issue directions to States in Part B. 
With all respect, I submit that I cannot accept that position. 
To explain the matter fully, the Centre has the power to issue 
352 directions under the Constitution to the various States, 
under four different articles. The first is article which is what 
is called an emergency article arising out of war or internal 
aggression and things of that sort. The second article which 
permits the Centre to issue directions to the States is article 360 
which deals with financial emergency; when the President is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

satisfied that the credit of the State is in jeopardy he can 
declare a state of financial emergency and under that article 
he can issue certain directions to the States. The third article 
is article 356 which is called a breakdown article. When the 
President finds that the Constitution in any particular State is 
not being carried on in accordance with the provisions contained 
therein, then also, the President issues certain directions to 
see that the Constitution is carried on in accordance with its 
provisions. 

Then comes the last Article, Article 371, which is the 
supervisory Article. It has to be understood that Articles 352, 
360 and 356 are, in a general sense, emergency articles, that is 
to say, they can be invoked for the purpose of giving directions 
to the States only when certain circumstances arise and the 
President is satisfied that those circumstances have arisen. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): May I ask the Hon. 
Minister of Law whether he has made this observations with 
reference to Article 371 also? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, I am taking it separately. I am 
trying to point out the distinction between the provisions 
contained in Article 371 on the one hand and Articles 352, 
360 and 356 on the other. As I said, these latter Articles are 
emergency Articles. They are not Articles which deal with 
normal administration in normal times. Circumstances must 
justify their invocation. The second thing with regard to them 
is that they apply to States in Part B to the same extent, in 
the same degree and in the same manner as they apply States 
in Part A, provided of course, that the emergency has arisen. 

Article 371 stands on a different footing. It does not 
require an emergency. It can be used in normal times. That 
is one feature of distinction. The other feature of distinction 
is that it applies only to States in Part B. It does not apply 
to States in Part A. Therfore, in my judgment it is not correct 
to say that the Central Government must use either Article 
352 which is an emergency Article, or Article 360, or Article 
356, to issue directions to States in Part B. {Pandit Kunzru : 
Hear, hear). Independently of these three Articles, the Centre 
has the power to issue directions to States in Part B under 
Article 371. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


69 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 69 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): And it is 
only transitional. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a different matter. The transition 
has not ended. The Article is in operation and we must 
therefore take it as it is. Therefore, in my judgment, Article 
371 does give the power to the Centre of issuing directions 
to States in Part B even though there is no emergency. It is 
an Article which is to be used in normal times. 

Now, Sir, the question you have been good enough to raise 
is one which if you will permit me, I would like to take up 
towards the close. In so far as Article 371 is concerned and in 
so far as a direction has been issued — I am using my language 
very deliberately — in so far as Article 371 is concerned and 
in so far as it has been used for the purpose of issuing a 
direction to the State Government, it seems to me that there 
is a possible basis for discussion of that matter by this House. 
That is my view of the matter. 

Now, I would like to take up 

Mr. Speaker: May I have clarification on one point at 
this stage? Will the failure to give direction 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am just coming to that. That is the very 
point I want to deal with, because that is a very important 
one, and we must be very clear about it. 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma: May I know what direction 
has been issued under Article 371 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. I am stating the 
position generally. My. Hon. colleague, the Home Minister 
will say what direction he has issued. I am not in charge of 
administration, and I have merely been asked to explain the 
legal position. 

Now, Sir, I was trying to find out whether there was any 
precedent in the past procedure of our Legislature which could 
help us to come to some definite conclusion on the issue before 
the House. I have examined the provisions of the Government 
of India Act, 1919, in order to find out whether there was any 
ruling which could furnish to us some kind of a precedent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As the House will remember, the scheme of the Government 
of India Act, 1919, was to divide, so far as the Provinces 
were concerned, the field of administration into two parts: 
the transferred part and the reserved part. The House will 
also remember that under the old Government of India Act 
the superintendence and control of the civil and military 
Government of India was vested in the Secretary of State 
in Council. It was also provided that the Governor-General 
in Council as well as the Governors would carry out their 
respective duties of administering this country, subject to 
the power of superintendence and control of the Secretary 
of State. When the field of administration was demarcated 
into the reserve and transferred sides in 1919, a rule was 
made that those subjects which were classified as ‘transferred 
subjects’ were not to be under the supervisory control either 
of the Secretary of State or of the Governor-General or of 
the Governor, because they were administered by Ministers 
who were responsible to the Legislature. Now, the question 
that arose under the provisions of the 1919 Act was this : 
whether it was possible for the Central Legislature to ask a 
question with regard to the administration in the Provinces. 
The researches that I have made — and I am grateful to the 
Secretariat of the Speaker for the help they have rendered 
me in this connection — show that the then President of 
the Assembly took the view that in so far as the question 
related to transferred subjects, he would not allow them, 
but if they referred to ‘reserved subjects’, he would allow 
them subjects to the sanction of the Governor-General. You 
will recollect that such sanction was necessary, because the 
Assembly worked under both Rules and Standing Orders. The 
Rules were made by the Governor-General, which sometimes 
restricted the scope of Standing Orders. Therefore, his 
permission was necessary. But the principle was conceded 
that in so far as the administration continued to be under 
the superintendence, direction and control of the Governors, 
of the Governor-General and ultimately of the Secretary of 
State, it was possible for a Member of the Central Legislature 
to ask a question relating to those subjects and the President, 
subject to other conditions being fulfilled, would admit that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


71 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 71 

question. That is one precedent. Of course, it must not be 
extended to a field which it did not cover. As I said, it extended 
only to questions and not to other matters. 

Now, I come to the Government of India Act, 1935. 
Probably, some Members of the House will remember that 
as soon as the Government of India Act, 1935, was passed, 
certain members of the House of Commons were considerably 
agitated as to their rights to ask questions to the Secretary 
of State in Parliament with regard to the administration of 
India and a question was put to the then Prime Minister, 
Mr. Chamberlain, in the year 1937. Mr. Chamberlain gave 
the reply to the effect that since the administration of the 
country was transferred to agencies in India and to that extent 
the Secretary of State ceased to possess to have any kind of 
responsibility for the actual administration, it would not be 
possible or permissible for Members of Parliament to put any 
questions to the Secretary of State on those matters. That 
matter was taken up in the Assembly here immediately after 
the interpellations had taken place in the House of Commons 
and a question was put by our old friend Mr. Pande, who 
was a well-known Member of this Assembly, to the then 
Law Member, Sir Nripendra Sarcar. I propose to read the 
answer which Sir Nripendra Sarcar gave, because it is a 
very illuminating reply and, in my judgment, supports the 
conclusion to which I have come and to which I have given 
expression just now 

The answer of Sir Nripendra Sarcar was this : 

“(a) The general position is that where the executive and 
legislative authority are vested under the Act in the provinces, 
it would not be appropriate for the Central Legislature to 
discuss those matters. There are likely, however, to be matters 
in which the Central Legislature may be properly interested, 
(e.g., a direction under sub-section (1) and (2) of section 126 of 
the Government of India Act) and thus the prevention of any 
encroachment on the provincial sphere may well be left to be 
regulated by the powers vested in the Hon. the President under 
Rule 7 of the Indian Legislative Rules in regard to questions 
and in the Governor-General under Rule 22 in regard to the 
Resolutions.” 

My submission is this : that the provisions contained in 
Article 371 are more or less analogous. I do not say they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are exactly alike to the provisions contained in Section 126 of 
the Government of India Act. The Act of 1935 vested power 
in the Governor-General. It says : 

“The executive authority of the Federation shall extend to 
the giving of such directions to a province as may appear to the 
Federal Government to be necessary for that purpose”. 

Further it says ; 

“The executive authority of the Federation shall also extend 
to the giving of directions to a province as to the carrying into 
execution thereunder any act of the Federal Legislature, etc.” 

As I said, Section 126 deals with power to give directions 
to the provinces. Similarly, Article 371 also gives power to 
Central Government to give directions. As interpreted by 
my predecessor Sir Nripendra Sarcar, on the basis of the 
discussions and clarifications that took place previously in the 
House of Commons, he came to the conclusion that a matter 
such as the one lying within the purview of section 126 could 
be discussed in this House. My submission, therefore, is that 
that opinion of his is a sound one. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): May I Sir, suggest 
to the Hon. the Law Minister to give us his opinion on Section 
126 of the Government of India Act vis-a-vis Articles 257(1) 
and 73(1) proviso of the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have not considered those sections. If 
at any other time the point is raised I would be prepared to 
clarify it. For the time being, it does not seem relevant to 
the subject we are discussing. 

Pandit Kunzru: Will the Hon. Law Minister read out 
Article 371 and tell us whether under it orders can be issued 
by the Government of India to Governments of the States only 
in regard to Central (Federal) subjects, or also in regard to 
subjects included in the State list? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is quite clear that Article 371 
contemplates issue of directions relating to matters lying 
within the purview of the State Legislature and the State 
Executive. It is really in relation to the administration of the 
States that Article 371 has been drafted. In my mind there 
is no doubt on the point at all. Now, Sir 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


73 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 73 

Pandit Kunzru: May I ask the Hon. the Law Minister 
how he then regards Article 371 as analogous to Section 126 
of the Government of India Act which restricted the executive 
authority of the Government of India to matters included in 
the Federal list ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think my hon. Friend has 
understood me. The point is this. Let me put it in a somewhat 
pointed manner. When one Government has the right to give 
directions to another, could such directions be the subject 
matter of discussion in an Assembly to which that particular 
Government is responsible ? That is the question. I am not 
using Section 126 for the larger issue. I am using it for the 
limited issue, namely, that wherever there is power to give 
direction, that power implies responsibility and wherever there 
is responsibility there must be discussion. That is my point. 

Now, Sir, you were good enough to ask me to explain 
what “general control” meant. Now, it seems to me that the 
words “general control” are used in order to include every 
matter of administration arising within that particular State. 
The direction need not be confined to any particular matter. 
Today the direction may be given with regard to the Police 
administration; tommorrow it may be given with regard to 
revenue administration; at a later stage it might be found 
necessary to issue a similar direction with regard to finance. 
“General control” means control extending over the whole field 
of administration. That is how I use the word general control. 

It would not be permissible for me, I suppose, to give the 
history as to how this Article came to be drafted. I would not 
ask your permission, nor if you give it would I use it. But I 
have a very clear picture in my mind as to what this Article 
was intended to cover. This Article does not take away the 
powers given to the State under the various Articles to which 
I have referred, namely, 154, 162, 163 and 168, the power 
of executive authority, of administration and of legislation. 
But in the interest of good Government it superimposed the 
authority of a direction given by the Centre in order that the 
levels of administration may not fall down. That. Sir, is the 
implication of Article 371. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. R. U. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): May I ask a question, 
Sir? Is it contended that when control has been exercised, or 
is being exercised, and directions have been given, Parliament 
is not competent to discuss the matter ? 

Mr. Speaker: He is advocating just the reverse. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, you referred to the question whether 
there is a Legislature or whether there is no Legislature is 
a matter which can be taken into consideration in coming to 
a conclusion. Theoretically, of course, no such consideration 
can be paid to the existence or non-existence of a Legislature, 
because the Constitution itself expressly says in Article 385 
that where there is no Legislature, the Rajpramukh shall be 
deemed to be the Legislature. But it may say so, this matter 
whether there is a local Legislature where the particular point 
could be agitated or not, was taken into consideration by your 
predecessor in dealing with questions during the last war. 
As you remember, Sir, in 1939 when the war was declared, 
the Congress party which was the governing party in the 
various provinces resigned on account of certain differences 
between the party and the Government, and consequently, 
section 93 was applied. Here certain Members asked certain 
questions with regard to the administration in the Provinces 
as conducted by the Governor and his Advisers. It was then 
held that it was right and permissible for Members of the 
Central Assembly to ask questions for information with 
regard to the administration in the Provinces where there 
was no Legislature functioning. I remember having read the 
proceedings, and much emphasis was laid on the fact — not 
on the legal fact, but as a de facto position — that since the 
people have no opportunity to ventilate there grivances 
before a properly constituted Legislative, that in itself was 
an additional ground for permitting questions being asked in 
the Central Legislature about provincial administrations. So 
technically it would not be right to take this into consideration 
because the Rajpramukh is the Legislature. But I say, 
technicalities in a matter of this sort, should not be allowed 
to come in, much as some hon. Members might like to. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


75 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 75 

Mr. Speaker: At this point, may I ask whether he would 
place question for information on the same footing as a 
discussion ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: As I said, the precedents which I have 
collected refer only to questions. According to Sir N. N. 
Sarcar which is the authority I have relied on, the matter, 
can be discussed, the propriety or otherwise of a direction 
can be discussed. It seems to me that as he has used the 
word “discussion” it would be large enough to include even 
an adjournment motion. 

Now, Sir, I come to the other question which you have 
been good enough to put to me, “What is the scope of article 
371 ?” Now, Sir, reading article 371, I should like to point 
out one important matter and it is this, that article does 
not cast upon the Government of India the duty of having 
general control. It is not an article which imposes a duty. It 
is an article which permits the Government of India to give 
directions. Now, Sir, this distinction which I am making is a 
very important distinction and it must be very clearly borne 
in mind. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): May I point out that 
the language used in Article 371 is — 

“ the Government of every State shall be under 

the general control etc, etc.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: ‘Shall be’ means what ? It is the duty 
of the State to be under. There is no duty on the Central 
Government. 

Shri Kamath: There is mutuality. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, no mutuality at all. 

Now, the position is this. That distinction is important 
from this point of view. When there is the duty cast to do a 
certain thing, then a motion of censure could be passed either 
upon the mis-performance of the duty or upon the failure to 
perform the duty. But if it is agreed that this article merely 
permits the Government of India, in the interest of better 
administration, to issue on certain occasions or in certain 
situations, certain directions telling the Provincial Government 
that they may do this or they may not do that, then I am 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sure about it that the only question that can arise for 
consideration is, what direction was given, whether the 
direction was proper, and whether any steps were taken to see 
that the directions were carried out. If the Central Government 
in its wisdom, in its discretion, felt that notwithstanding the 
fact that there were elements in the situation which called 
for the issue of an order, did not think it necessary, proper or 
wise to give a direction, then the Central Government could 
not be called to account for failure to do so. That, I submit, 
is a distinction which must be borne in mind. 

Pandit Kunzru: How does my friend come to that 
conclusion ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is how I read it. My friend, as I 
said, may read it differently ; I know, and people who are, if 
I may say so, more enthusiastic than cautious may probably 
like to give a more stretched meaning to this article. But 
looking at it from this point of view, from the fact that the 
Constitution has vested the States with the right to administer 
their affairs, and has only given what may be called in the 
case of States in Part B certain residuary powers to give 
directions on certain matters and on certain occasions, this 
power which may be exercised, as I said, under article 371 
must be of a very limited character. My submission, therefore, 
is that although as I read article 371, I cannot help accepting 
the conclusion that it does admit the possibility of discussing 
a matter relating to the administration of States in Part B, it 
must be of a very narrow character. That is all I have to say. 

The Minister of Transport and Railways (Shri 
Gopalaswami): I only want to refer to one particular point. 
If you are going to give a general ruling on the applicability 
of article 371, its interpretation and the admissibility of an 
adjournment motion, based upon that article, I should like you, 
Sir, to defer your ruling till other Members like me have put 
certain points before you. But if you are going to reject this 
motion on the short ground on which the Hon. Law Minister 
ended his speech, I need not waste the time of the House by 
puting these points before you. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


77 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 77 

Mr. Speaker: I will tell him what is passing in my 
mind. I do not propose to hurry up any decision. I have 
heard the Hon. Law Minister, I have heard his point of 
view, and if other Members are anxious to address on the 
purely constitutional aspect of it, without going into the 
merits, I am prepared to hear them; but that discussion 
should be of a very short duration. I have not yet made up 
my mind as to 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): Shall we do it today or on 
some other day? This question raises very important 

Mr. Speaker: I have not finished. The hon. Member 
will please let me finish first, and then he will see that I 
entirely agree with him, and that I am going to do what he 
wishes to be done. The point I was coming to is this. I am 
restricting myself only to the facts of the present case, and 
I want to know whether I have understood the Hon. Law 
Minister correctly. He has given his views on the wider issues 
about the scope and there might be, as he says, occasions 
when the Centre may exercise this power; but am I clear in 
understanding him this way that, supposing no directions 
are given by the Centre or no control is exercised, then the 
present motion would not be in order. Is that his conclusion? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is my view. 

Mr. Speaker: The other position I want to get clarified 
was about the words ‘general control’. He stated that the 
word ‘general’ means the control extending to the whole 
administration. 

Dr. Ambedkar: And not detailed control, not over day 
to day administration. 

Mr. Speaker: That is what I wanted to be clear about. 
Subject to the general policy laid down by the Centre, the 
States will have perfect autonomy. 

Dr. Ambedkar: But with the further fact that if the 
Government of India is satisfied that the directions are not 
carried out, then the other provisions will come into operation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: That is a different matter. But no question 
for a discussion can arise in this House unless the power in 
Article 371 is exercised by the Centre. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


79 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


79 


( 11 ) 

PARLIAMENT (PREVENTION OF 
DISQUALIFICATION) BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to make provision in regard to certain offices 
of profit under article 102 of the Constitution, be taken into 
consideration”. 

I do not think that it is necessary for me to make any 
long statement to enable the hon. Members to understand the 
provisions of this Bill. It is a very short one. It has only one 
clause but just to put hon. Members in a position to know 
exactly what is being done, I would like to say that article 
102 of the Constitution provides that certain persons shall 
be disqualified from being Members of Parliament. One of 
the disqualifications relates to holding of an office of profit 
under Government. So far as Ministers are concerned, they 
are exempted from the operation of article 102 by clause (2) 
of that article. We have however in the Government of India 
not only Ministers but also other categories of Ministers viz. 
Deputy Ministers and Ministers of State. These offices were 
created before the Constitution came into operation. Their 
occupants were entitled to hold office at the same time as 
Members of Parliament because during the period which 
intervened between the 15th August 1947 and the 26th 
January 1950 the Government of India Act 1935, as adapted, 
did not contain the provision to which I have made reference 
viz., holding of an office of profit as a disqualification. The 
situation has, of course, now altered by reason of the provision 
contained in Article 102 so that from the 26th January 1950 
Ministers of States and Deputy Ministers would have become 
disqualified from sitting in Parliament. In order to get over 
the difficulty the Government issued an Ordinance permitting 
them to sit in Parliament and to remove the disqualification 
they would have otherwise incurred. As hon. Members know, 
under the new Constitution, the life of an Ordinance is a very 


* P. D., Vol. 2, Part II, 9th March 1950, p. 1330. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

short one viz., six weeks from the re-assembly of Parliament. 
In this particular case Parliament assembled on the 28th 
January so that the Ordinance would expire on the 12th of 
this month. It is necessary that this Bill should be got through 
before the Ordinance ceases to have legal operation. The Bill 
seeks to include what I may say, clause (a) of Section 2 of the 
Ordinance, which referred to Deputy Ministers and Ministers 
of State. The present Bill does not propose to give effect to 
clause (b) of section 2 of the original Ordinance which made 
provision for part-time offices. Instead of that, the Bill seeks 
to include two more offices viz., Parliamentary Secretaries and 
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries. It is felt that although these 
offices are not in existence now and have not been created, 
it is quite possible that the Government of India may find it 
necessary to create them. It was therefore felt that it would 
be better to enlarge the scope of the Bill in order to include 
these offices as well. I do not think that any more argument 
is necessary to support the Bill and I hope the House will 
accept it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Motion moved. 


*Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to understand, whether 
my hon. Friend agrees to the proposal in the Bill that these 
two offices should be created and being created, they should 
be exempted from the provision enacted in article 102 of the 
Constitution ? Let us understand it very clearly and if my 
hon. friend is going to take the whole of the half hour, there 
is no use going any further. 

Shri Tyagi: If he is tired, he might go home. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I agree any length of time can be 
taken but so far as this Bill is concerned, it is a very small 
point. 


**Dr. Ambedkar: I only wanted to understand what 
exactly was the point my hon. friend was driving at and if 
he was going to take the whole of the half hour, it is much 
better to begin tomorrow and finish the Bill. 

*P. D., Vol. 2, Part II, 9th March 1950, p. 1334. 

**Ibid., p. 1334. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


81 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 81 

Shri Tyagi: When people are not quick to understand, 
I take time to make them understand. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): Do Government insist 
that the Bill should be passed today? 

Dr, Ambedkar: I am not saying so. It is only the Hon. 
Deputy Speaker who says, “let us sit for half an hour.” 

Pandit Kunzru: I think it will be a fruitless discussion 
and I venture to think that the discussion will end quicker 
if we adjourn till tomorrow. 


*Dr. Ambedkar: On the first point raised by my friend, 
Mr. Tyagi, as to whether there is at all any necessity for 
bringing in this measure, I think what has fallen from 
the Prime Minister should suffice, and I would only like 
to add this by way of clarification : Our real difficulty has 
arisen by reason of the fact that the definition Article, 
Article 366, does not define the word “Minister”. Therefore 
the word “Minister” is left to be interpreted in two ways, 
either in the larger sense which would include not only 
Members who are Ministers but also Members who are 
Deputy Ministers or Ministers of State. It would also include 
in the popular sense Parliamentary Secretaries and also 
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries. That is one interpretation 
which is perfectly possible, but it is also possible to put 
a narrow construction whereby Ministers would mean 
not Ministers including Deputy Ministers, Ministers of 
State, Parliamentary Secretaries or Parliamentary Under 
Secretaries, but only Members of the Cabinet. As the 
House knows that there is customarily — I am deliberately 
using the word ‘customarily’ — quite a distinction between 
Ministers who are Members of the Cabinet and Ministers 
who are not Members of the Cabinet, and it is quite 
possible for anybody, even for a Court, to put the narrower 
construction and confine the de jure interpretation of the 
word “Ministers” to Members of the Cabinet only, in which 
case undoubtedly 


*P. D., Vol. 2, Part II, 10th March 1950, pp. 1344-48. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Kunzru : Which Court is my hon. Friend referring 

to ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Any Court. I am coming to that also. I 
was only speaking generally. Any person may question that 
interpretation. If that interpretation is questioned, obviously, 
there would be difficulties. Therefore, it is by way of caution, 
by way of removing any kind of doubt or difficulty that this 
Bill has been brought in, and as I said, if the interpretation 
given by my friend, Mr. Tyagi, was upheld in a place where 
such question was likely to be raised, no one would be 
unhappy if it was then found that the Bill was unnecessary, 
but if unfortunately notwithstanding the great argument, the 
extensive argument, the original argument addressed by my 
friend, Mr. Tyagi, it was found that that construction was 
not the correct construction, then it would be obvious that 
the Parliament did wise in passing this Bill. Therefore so 
far as the exact provisions of the Bill are concerned, I think 
a cautious House ought to support them. I would not say 
anything more on that point. 

In regard to the other question, viz., disqualification 
incurred by Members of the House by reason of the fact that 
they are holding some kind of office which is outside the 
Ministerial offices 

Shri Sidhva: I mentioned Committees. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is why I said non-Ministerial offices. 
I am using the exact legal term. That question, I think, 
requires to be considered. That question was raised yesterday 
after Parliament rose, but unfortunately when I went to my 
room, I found that all the libraries were closed and I could 
not get the necessary books of reference which I wanted to 
consult, because I knew that this matter would be raised in 
the House and I thought that I should be prepared to give 
some kind of reply as far as I could under the circumstances. 
I have applied my mind to this matter and all I can say is 
that I have come to some tentative conclusion which I should 
like to present before the House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


83 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 83 

In the first place, I should, like to remove the sort of 
scare which has been raised by my friend, Mr. Sidhva, 
that any enemy of his might create trouble. I hope he has 
none. I think he is one who may be correctly described as 
Ajatashatru. Any how, our Constitution has made ample 
provision that matters of this sort relating to disqualification 
should not go to a Court. By Article 103 we have left 
the power to decide whether any particular Member of 
Parliament has incurred a disqualification by reason of 
accepting an office of profit or not, with the President. 
The President is the final authority. Under Article 103 the 
President has been released — very deliberately and very 
wisely — from acting on the advice of the Ministry, because 
it was felt that the Ministry might give an interested 
advice to the President. Therefore, in this particular case 
relating to disqualification arising out of holding an office 
of profit, the President is required to act on the advice of 
the Election Commissioner. 

Shri Kamath: What about clause (2) of Article 103 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. Article 103 is, 
so to say, an exception to article 74. Under Article 74 the 
President is required to accept the advice of the Ministers 
in all matters relating to legislation and administration. 
With regard to this, an exception has been made, and as 
I said, a deliberate exception has been made so that no 
political influence could be brought to bear on the decision 
of the question by the President. 

Shri Kamath: Which is the body which acts for the 
Election Commissioner now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: We are immediately constituting the 
office of the Election Commissioner, and I have no doubt 
about it that before any such question is presented to the 
President, the Election Commissioner will be there to deal 
with the matter. 

Shri Kamath: In this particular case, clause (2) of 
Article 103 which is mandatory has not been observed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Clause (2) says : 

“Before giving any decision on any such question, the President 
shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 
act according to such opinion.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No such question has been referred 
to the President. 

Shri Tyagi : rose — 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I cannot answer to all these petty 
questions which have no bearing on the question. My friend, 
Mr. Sidhva, had suggested to the House that any number 
of people could go to the High Court or the Supreme Court 
and obtain a decision. That procedure is barred under the 
Constitution. That matter is left entirely to the President. 

Now, I come to the other question which Mr. Sidhva very 
pointedly raised as to what would happen to Members of 
Parliament who have been appointed to various Committees. 
Would they incur disqualification or would they not incur 
disqualification ? Now, I have here before me an analysis of 
the various types of Committees on which Members might 
be invited to serve and where they might get some sort of 
remuneration or fee or something. The first is this : Membership 
of Committees or Commissions constituted by a resolution of 
Parliament or under rules made by Parliament, for instance, 
the Public Accounts Committee, the Estimates Committee, 
the Standing Committees attached to various Ministries etc. 
There might be various others, but the substantial point is 
that Committees are appointed by a resolution of Parliament 
or under the rules made by Parliament. I speak of course 
without any kind of dogmatism but I do not feel any doubt 
that the membership of any such committee would involve any 
disqualification, for the simple reason that the appointment is 
made by Parliament either by rules relating to any particular 
committee or generally by rules framed for the constitution 
of committees. 

The second class of membership relates to all corporate 
bodies constituted by an Act of Parliament, such as, for 
instance, where an Act provides for the election of Members 
by Parliament either from among its Members or from 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


85 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 85 

outsiders, for example the Indian Oilseeds Committee, the 
Indian Nursing Council, the Employees State Insurance 
Corporation or the Central Silk Board. Under the same 
category are also cases where such Members are appointed by 
the Central Government, such as, for instance, the Coal Mines 
Stowing Board, the Delhi Transport Authority and so on. I am 
only expressing here my tentative conclusions and it seems to 
me that under the first category where Parliament provides 
for the election to certain statutory bodies that could not be 
regarded as an appointment by Government and therefore 
membership of a committee like that, in my judgment, would 
not involve any disqualification. But with regard to the second 
category where such Members are appointed by the Central 
Government I feel a certain amount of doubt. I think that 
that probably might involve a certain disqualification, for the 
simple reason that although the bodies to which appointments 
are made are statutory bodies created by a law enacted by 
Parliament, yet the appointment is by Government. Therefore, 
that is one element to be taken into consideration in deciding 
whether the possible consequence may not be disqualification. 
It is possible to make a further distinction, namely, that a 
Member of Parliament appointed by Government to a statutory 
body such as under the Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) Act or 
the Delhi Transport Authority may be paid out of the funds 
belonging to that particular authority and not from funds 
belonging to Government; whether that would be a possible 
basis for distinction I have my doubts. I personally think 
that that would involve disqualification, because it may be 
regarded and interpreted as a fraud upon the Statute, by 
getting a Member of Parliament to be appointed but to be 
paid by somebody else. I think that is a case which must be 
excluded 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): It is not considered 
as falling into that Category. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know. My friend Mr. T.T. 
Krishnamachari will allow me to say that I have not slept 
the whole of last night. I have been reading Halsbury and 
a number of other books, as the subject is so complicated. 
Anson’s is the only book I have which could give some guidance 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and I shall pass it on to him. It was published in 1922 and 
probably it gives the best assistance in this matter. My 
hon. Friend will have his right to speak and here I am only 
expressing my tentative conclusion. 

Shri Kamath : The Hon. Minister will have good sleep 
to night. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): What is the position in 
regard to the All-India Nursing Council constituted under an 
Act of Parliament ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Probably that would not involve any 
disqualification. Now I come to membership of Advisory 
Councils or committees constituted under an Act of Parliament 
or appointed by a statutory corporation. Take for instance the 
Damodar Valley Corporation. As I said, I am not certain about 
it also. ( Interruption ) I am not advising any particular client. I 
am very sorry to say that, I am making a general statement. 
If the hon. lady is interested in the Nursing Council she had 
better go to a lawyer and obtain his advice. 

Shri Sidhva : That is not fair. 

Shrimati Durgabai : You said that Coal Mines Safety 
(Stowing) Act does not come under the disqualification 

Dr. Ambedkar : I looked it up overnight and found out 
what the provisions were. 

Then I come to membership of committees, Commissions 
or Councils or other similar bodies constituted by Government 
for specific purposes by resolution or order, for instance, 
membership of the Governing Body of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, membership of the Fiscal Commission, 
membership of the Government Trading Enquiry Committee 
(. Interruption ) I do not want to hide anything — membership of 
the Special Recruitment Board, representatives or delegates to 
United Nations Organisation or any international conference 
or association. I feel rather doubtful about membership of 
committees, commissions or councils or other similar bodies 
constituted by Government for a specified purpose by resolution 
or by order. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


87 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 87 

As I have stated my view is that in certain cases Members 
of Parliament would not be affected. In certain cases they 
might be affected. As my friend Prof. Ranga said — and I whole 
heartedly agree with him — this question of disqualification 
by reason of holding an office of profit is one of the most 
important matters. It has been and could be a tremendous 
influence for corruption and therefore we have to proceed 
very carefully in this matter. In England I do not know what 
they do but I have found that they have no general law as 
such. Whenever they make a law under which they create a 
particular office, in that very Act they provide whether the 
holder of that office shall be deemed to be disqualified for 
being a Member of Parliament, so that no general theory is 
there. Each case is dealt with particularly and Anson’s Vol. 
I gives quite a long list. There every Act is mentioned and 
the office it has created and whether the holder of that office 
under the particular Act shall continue . to be a Member of 
Parliament or not. I am afraid we have therefore to be very 
cautious. 

One thing I am prepared to admit, namely, that those 
Members who are already holding office, which, as I said, 
might lead to disqualification, if they have to give up their 
offices immediately, administrative difficulties might be 
created. The work might be held up and it might be possible 
and even desirable to have a short measure removing the 
disqualification from the holders of those offices for the 
present, so that we would get sufficient time later on to 
consider what general principles we should adopt. If there 
is a certain amount of delay in carrying out the suggestion 
which I have made, we can rectify it by passing an Indemnity 
Act, giving it retrospective effect, so that all those who are 
holding offices today need not be in danger of incurring 
any such disqualification. I do not think that we can really 
rush into this matter and have a general clause exempting 
anybody and everybody without either proper consideration 
or examination. I admit that if the disqualification applied 
without any qualification to Members who are working on 
various committees, some difficulties might be created. If the 
House so desires I would be quite prepared to consider a small 
measure of one clause and bring it before the House to give it 
retrospective effect and also to add to it an indemnity clause, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

so that if there is any lacuna in the legal position a Member 
will not be deemed to have vacated his seat. More than that 
I am afraid I cannot do at this stage. 

With regard to the omission of part-time offices from the 
Bill I think the reply that I have given, namely, that you have 
to be very cautious in extending the principle of exemption 
to holders of office, applies to them also. I may say that the 
original clause in the Ordinance was taken from the war- 
time Ordinance which was Ordinance LII of 1942. My friend 
Mr. Kamath will realize that it is perfectly legitimate to widen 
the principle in an emergency when there are so many offices 
to be filled and the number of men available is so few that we 
have necessarily to go to Parliament to pick up Members to 
officiate on those occasions. But what is necessary in wartime 
and in an emergency should not be applied in normal times. 
That was the consideration which prevailed upon me in deleting 
the clause which originally found its place in the Ordinance. 

Shri Kamath : Was it not the Law Ministry itself which 
drafted the Ordinance ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Law Ministry can forget and also be 
forgiven. The Law Minister is not omniscient. I live to learn, 
and if I can learn from my friend Mr. Kamath I shall be only 
too grateful. This is all that I have to say. 

Shri Kamath : rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We have only three minutes to 
adjourn for Lunch. I hope the hon. Member would not take 
more than three minutes. 

Shri Kamath : There are some legal and constitutional 
points which I have to make and I will take more than three 
minutes. 

At the outset may I make it clear that in my judgment — 
I have learnt a lot from Dr. Ambedkar during Constitution 
making and I have much more to learn from him ; I wish to 
reciprocate the compliment — there is no need to rush or hustle 
this Bill through, because even if this Bill were passed by 
this House before this midnight, that is, of the 10th, it will 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


89 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 89 

not, constitutionally speaking validate the membership of 
the Deputy Ministers and the Ministers of State; it will not 
remove the disqualification which they have incurred already. 

Dr. Ambedkar : With your permission, Sir, I would just 
like to mention that there is nothing original in this point. 
It is borrowed from the view of the Patna High Court. But I 
find both my friend Mr. Tyagi and Mr. Kamath are making 
this point. The President is not the court; the President may 
take a very different view from what the court may take. 


*Shri Kamath : The Constitution does not make that clear 
at all. It refers only to Cabinet Ministers, as Dr. Ambedkar 
said, and that was why the Ordinance was promulgated by 
the President. 

Sir, the next point is this. 

Some Hon. Members : It is time for the House to rise. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : hon. Members are giving him a 
little more time ? 

Shri Kamath : Because of the legal points in which my 
hon. Friend Dr. Ambedkar is interested 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am interested only in getting the Bill 
through. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House wants to rise evidently. 
The House stands adjourned till 2-30. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Half-Past Two 
of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled after Lunch at Half-Past Two of 
the Clock. 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair \ 

Shri Kamath : Sir, the Law Minister is not here. 

Shri Sidhva: The Minister of State for Parliamentary 
Affairs is there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes, 


*P.D., Vol. 2, Part II, 10th March 1950, pp. 1349-50. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath : Oh, the Law Minister has come. 

I am glad that my hon. friend has arrived in the nick 
of time. I am glad also that in the forenoon he admitted — 
casually, of course — that a mistake, constitutional though 
technical, had been committed in respect of this matter. 

Dr, Ambedkar : I have not admitted any such thing at all. 

Shri Kamath : He referred to the Patna High Court 
ruling and said that Mr. Tyagi and myself are taking a stand 
upon that ruling and that we need not go very deep into that 
aspect of the matter. He further went on to say that he is 
not interested in legal issues or legal points — he is interested 
in merely getting the Bill passed or rushed through, I do not 
remember what was the word he used. May I ask you, Sir, 
and the House, that if the Minister of Law is not interested 
in legal points who would be interested in legal points ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Leave that alone. 

Shri Kamath : Sir, that concerns the right of the Members 
of this House. The Minister of Law is there and he says that 
he is not interested in legal points. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am interested in the merits of the case. 

Shri Kamath: Sir, legal points to a Law Minister at 
least — if he means to be a Law Minister in truth, in fact 
and in earnest — must be as much a case of merit as of law. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What is the good of misunderstanding 
the Hon. the Law Minister ? He says, “So far as the law is 
concerned, leave it to me. Please tell me facts if there are any.” 


Shri Kamath : May I ask on a point of right as a Member 
of the House whether if a Minister takes a particular stand, a 
Member cannot raise a point of privilege of the House ? I do 
not know what the future has in store for him ; he perhaps 
is thinking of some other portfolio. I do not know anything 
about reshuffling of portfolios but there are lots of reports in 
the papers. But I feel that it should not have been stated in 
the House that a Minister of Law is not interested in legal 
points. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


91 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 91 

Dr. Ambedkar : Parliament is not a Court. 


Parliament (Prevention of disqualification) Bill 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker : Dr. Ambedkar. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I find that Members have really travelled 
ground which is far away from the main proposition embodied 
in this Bill. I have been asked to explain how this doubt 
arose. In whose mind did it arise first ? I have been asked to 
explain how is it that in no other country such as Australia 
or Canada is any such legislation found necessary ? 

Well, with regard to the first point, I have no hesitation 
in saying that I myself felt doubts. I admit that, because 
notwithstanding many allegations that have been made, I was 
to some extent responsible for the framing of the Constitution. 
I have no hesitation in saying that I do not know of any 
Constitution in the world which can be said to be proof against 
doubt or against any kind of wrong understanding. Otherwise, 
if every Constitution was proof against doubt that would not 
have been these voluminous decisions of the various Supreme 
Courts in the different countries. Therefore, if I felt even as 
Chairman of the Drafting Committee that there was doubt in 
this matter, I am not ashamed to acknowledge it and there is 
nothing cavalierly in my behaviour when I say there is some 
doubt in this matter. 

I shall explain why I felt there was doubt. My friend, 
Mr. Krishnamachari said that the phrase ‘Council of Ministers’ 
was taken really from the Government of India Act, 1935 
where the language used was ‘Council of Ministers’ and that 
language was evidently borrowed by the draftsmen of the 
1935 Act from the older Act where the words were ‘Executive 
Council’. Now, I felt that if anybody was to interpret the 
phrase ‘Council of Ministers’ he would, no doubt, be justified 
in taking into consideration the circumstances in which that 
phrase ‘Executive Council’ was used, and would be justified, 
in interpreting the intention of the phrase ‘Council of 


*P.D., Vol. 2, Part II, 10th March 1950, pp. 1360-64. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Ministers’ by reference to the ‘Executive Council’. Now, it is 
quite obvious that the ‘Executive Council’ meant only members 
of the Executive Council of the rank of Ministers, because 
at that time there did not exist any such category of people 
as we call now by the names Deputy Minister or Minister 
of State or Parliamentary Secretary or Parliamentary Under 
Secretary. These are offices which have been created long 
after the Government of India Act, 1935 in its original form 
ceased to be in existence. I, therefore, felt that probably as 
we had especially not defined the word ‘Minister’ or ‘Council 
of Ministers’ in the article dealing with definitions, it would 
be open to anybody to suggest that the ‘Council of Ministers’ 
was a phrase used on the same analogy as the ‘Executive 
Council’ and therefore it would be open for anybody to say 
that these officers were not intended to be included. 

That is the basis of the doubt which I felt, and I do not 
see any reason why Parliament should not be called upon to 
pass a law to place the matter beyond doubt. I do not think, 
therefore, that there is any unwarranted attempt on the 
part of the Government to force upon the Parliament a Bill 
the object of which is to remove doubt. I can point out many 
cases where Parliaments have passed Acts for the purpose of 
removing a doubt, and I do not think I am asking Parliament 
to enter upon any very extraordinary activity in doing the 
same with regard to this Bill. 

With regard to the point raised by my friend, Pandit 
Kunzru, as to how the Governments in Canada or Australia 
or other Dominions are carrying on their affairs without any 
such legislation as is proposed now, I really want to know from 
him whether he thinks that the Constitution of Australia or 
Canada does not contain any such provisions as is embodied 
in Article 102, laying down disqualifications on the ground of 
holding an office of profit. I have had time only to refer to the 
Australian Constitution and there is a definite section there 
that a person holding an office of profit under the Crown shall 
not be qualified for being a Member of Parliament. 

Pandit Kunzru : That is right. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


93 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 93 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not know whether he had had the 
time to examine any law made by the Australian Parliament 
to overcome any difficulties which undoubtedly must arise by 
reason of that particular section in the Australian Constitution. 
I have not had the time to examine it, but I just cannot 
understand how, if the Australian Parliament does permit 
its Members to hold offices of profit and at the same time 
sit in Parliament and be Members, they could have done so 
without some kind of legislation. As I said, I have not had the 
time to study this, but prima facie it seems to me one of the 
most impossible propositions that the Australian Parliament 
should be permitting its Members to sit in the Parliament, 
vote and take part in the proceedings and at the same time 
hold offices of profit, without a law such as the one proposed 
here, but I cannot say. 

Now, I come to another point and it is this. My friend, 
Mr. Kamath, among the various points that he was seeking to 
make which on account of my limited intelligence I could not 
unfortunately follow, made one point which, I think, I could 
follow and which, I think, requires some kind of explanation. 
He has said that the draft of the Bill brings in also a member 
of the Government of any State, and his contention was 
that the draft was clumsy. I think that if he had read the 
clause carefully and also referred to clause 1 of Article 102, 
would have seen that the language is not only necessary but 
perfectly justified. My friend will realise that clause 2 of the 
Bill deals with two cases, one for being chosen as a Member, 
and one for being a Member, that is to say, continuing to be 
a Member. Now, it is proposed that not only a person holding 
an office of profit under the Government of India should not 
be disqualified from standing as a Member of Parliament, 
but similarly a Minister of State or Deputy Minister or 
Parliamentary Secretary or Parliamentary Under- Secretary 
who is holding that office in a State, he also, if he wishes to 
stand in the general election for membership of Parliament, 
should not be disqualified by reason of the fact that he holds 
that office in the State. That is the reason why holding an 
office of profit in a State has also to be brought in because 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


94 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the object of the Bill is to free both categories of people, — 
Ministers of State or Deputy Ministers or Parliamentary 
Secretaries or Parliamentary Under Secretaries, whether 
they are in the Centre or whether they are in a State — from 
this embargo. That is the reason why the words “under 
the Government of India or the Government of any State” 
have been brought in. 

Shri Kamath : What about the point I raised ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am coming to that. 

The question may arise that if you permit the holder 
of an office mentioned in clause 2, in a State, to stand for 
election for Parliament, then he would also be entitled to 
continue to be a Member of Parliament after he is elected, 
because the words are “for being chosen, and for being”. My 
friend will see that that difficulty will absolutely disappear 
automatically by a constitutional provision contained in 
Article 101, because as soon as a Minister of State or 
a Deputy Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary or a 
Parliamentary Under-Secretary from a State is elected to 
Parliament, he will have to make his choice whether he 
would continue to be a Member of Parliament or whether 
he would continue to be a Member of the State Legislature. 
Consequently, although the provision is worded in this 
manner, it certainly would not create any kind of difficulty 
which he perhaps has in mind. 

Shri Kamath : Under the Constitution, is it possible for 
the States or even for the Centre to have Ministers of State 
or Deputy Ministers who are not members of the Legislature 
concerned ? A Minister could be a Minister without being 
a Member of the Legislature, but so far as I can interpret 
the Constitution, a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister 
cannot hold that office without at the same time being a 
Member of the Legislature. 

Dr. Ambedkar: For six months he can. So far as that 
drafting aspect is concerned, I think I have made the matter 
quite clear. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


95 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 95 

My friend, Mr. Krishnamachari, has been writing me on 
the point which I made that I have spent a great deal of time 
in studying this matter last night. I am sure about it that 
my labours would have been considerably shortened if the 
paper to which he referred just now viz., the Parliamentary 
paper, had been available to me. As I said, when I went, the 
Library was closed. I think that either the Library was closed 
or my friend ran away with the paper and did not allow me 
an opportunity of studying the paper. 

With regard to the comment made by my friend, Mr. 
Kamath, that I slipped when I said that some portion of the 
Bill viz., relating to Parliamentary Secretary and so on was 
a new thing and not contained in the original Ordinance, I 
do not think there is any ground for him to complain or any 
necessity for me to apologise. I quite agree that if a Member 
makes a slip, states wrong facts and these facts have the 
result of either misdirecting the House or misguiding it, there 
would undoubtedly be ground for doing so, but it was just a 
slip. Everybody knows that and I do not think therefore, that 
that was something which required complaint or comment. 
I can say that I have a less perfect memory than my friend, 
Mr. Kamath, has. I do not think that there is any point that 
has been left out by me without being answered. 

Pandit Kunzru : Will the Hon. Minister tell us whether 
the Ministers of State belong to the Council of Ministers or 
not and whether they are appointed by the President. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My hon. Friend asked me that question 
before. He knows very well, I think, that the position inside 
the Ministry is never regulated by law. It is always regulated 
by convention. It is the privilege of the Prime Minister to 
select any person to be a member of the Cabinet, although 
he may not be specifically designated as a Minister. It would 
be perfectly open to him to say “In my cabinet, I will include 
only certain Ministers. I will not include other Ministers but 
I would also include a Secretary of State or a Minister of 
State”. The internal arrangement of the Cabinet has always 
been, as the hon. Member knows, a matter of convention. If 
he wants I can state the position as it exists now but he must 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

understand that that is only for the time being. The present 
Prime Minister may after the method of working of the 
Cabinet or if a successor comes he may also adopt a different 
arrangement. There is therefore, no use 

Pandit Kunzru : May I interrupt my hon. friend ? Does 
he take the phrase “Council of Ministers” to be synonymous 
with the Cabinet ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not. As I said in my opening 
speech this morning this is a phrase which is capable of 
double interpretation. I have seen observations by writers 
on Constitutional Law, where they have stated that even 
Parliamentary Secretaries or Parliamentary Under-Secretaries 
are included in the term Minister. There are also other writers 
who maintain that Minister’ is a narrower term. Therefore, as 
I said, it is very difficult to satisfy anybody or give a correct 
answer. This is a fluid situation and must remain fluid : that 
is the important part. There is no use pinning me down to 
give my hon. Friend a clear picture of how the Ministers and 
the Parliamentary Secretaries, all of them stand together 
vis-a-vis each other. 

Pandit Kunzru : I am sorry I have failed to make myself 
understood. I am not criticising my hon. Friend. All that I 
am seeking to know is this. If the Council of Ministers does 
not mean the same thing as a Cabinet, then obviously it can 
be a wider body than the Cabinet 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Pandit Kunzru : and the Ministers of State and 

the Deputy Ministers can belong to it. No question therefore, 
arises with regard to their position. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I need not dilate upon this. The hon. 
Prime Minister in a most authoritative statement said that 
in his opinion the Council of Ministers included everybody. 

Shri T. Husain (Bihar): I want to ask one question. It is 
clear under the Constitution that a Minister can be a Minister 
for six months without being a Member of Parliament. That 
is mentioned in the Constitution itself. There is no such 
mention about the Minister of State or the Deputy Minister, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


97 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 97 

or the Parliamentary Secretary or the Parliamentary Under 
secretary. The Hon. the Law Minister told us just now that 
according to his reading of the Bill a Minister of State, a 
Deputy Minister, Parliamentary Secretary or Parliamentary 
under- Secretary can hold office for six months without being 
a Member of Parliament. I have read the Bill again and I do 
not understand how the Hon. Minister came to this conclusion. 
Would he explain ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is not absolutely germane to this 
Bill. The hon. Member may look into the matter at leisure. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Sir, one point may be made clear, which 
is on a matter of fact, viz., whether Deputy Ministers are 
appointed by the President. This is a matter of concrete fact 
and probably the Hon. Minister may be able to reply. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How is it necessary in this 
connection ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Surely, they are appointed by the 
President : who else call appoint ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill to make provision in regard to certain offices 

of profit under Article 102 of the Constitution, be taken into 

consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*Shri Tyagi : I beg to move: 

“That in the heading of clause 1, after the words ‘Short title’, 
the words ‘ and commencement’ be inserted.” 

It is a very simple amendment and I hope the Doctor will 
accept it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Perhaps what my friend Mr. Tyagi has 
noted is that there is no clause stating the commencement. 
Generally a Bill has a clause saying that the Bill comes into 
operation from such and such a date. This clause does not 
exist here, and he thinks there is a lacuna which ought to 
be filled. But may I submit that under the General Clauses 


*P.D., Vol. 2, part II, 10th March 1950, p. 1365. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Act, where a Bill does not contain such a clause it is presumed 
that it comes into operation immediately after the signature 
of the President. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He wants to push the date to 26th 
January, 1950. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is unnecessary so long as the Ordinance 
is there. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


99 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


99 


( 12 ) 

MOTION FOR ADJOURNMENT 

*Shri Gopalaswami : May I just point out that 
Mr. Chamberlain was not on a question of motion for 
adjournment of debate ? 

Pandit Kunzru : Well, I think Dr. Ambedkar relying 
on the reply given by Sir N. N. Sircar on the basis of 
Mr. Chamberlain’s reply came to the conclusion that in a 
matter like this there was no essential d iff erence between a 
demand for information and a demand for discussion. The word 
used by Sir N. N. Sircar in his reply was “discussion” and 
that is the word that my Hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar relied on. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I should like 
to say just one word with regard to the comment of my hon. 
friend on the reply given by Mr. Chamberlain and his attempt 
to establish a sort of analogy between the position which 
existed when that question was put and the position that will 
arise under article 371 of our Constitution. I should request 
him to bear in mind the essential distinction that exists 
between our Constitution now and the Government of India 
Act, 1935. That distinction is this, that while Parliament did 
enact the Act of 1935 and transferred certain responsibilities 
to the people of India, they never failed to emphasise time 
and over again, that the ultimate responsibility for the good 
Government in India rested with Parliament, and therefore, 
to the extent that the power was reserved of giving directions 
it was really responsible for maintaining good Government; 
while under our Constitution we have given over the power 
of maintaining good Government to our States and only in 
some cases we have reserved to the Centre certain powers of 
direction. That distinction has to be borne in mind. 


* P.D., Vol. 2, Part II, 14th March 1950, pp. 1512-13. . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


100 


100 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Kunzru : I entirely disagree with my hon. Friend 
Dr. Ambedkar, not with regard to the general point that he 
has raised, but with the construction that he has put on article 
371. As my hon. friend pointed out the other day, this article 
371 does not apply to States in Class A. It applies only to 
States in Class B, and why ? Why was this article 371 inserted 
in the Constitution with reference to States in Class B only ? 
It was inserted in order to ensure good Government there. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


101 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


101 


( 13 ) 

SOCIETIES REGISTRATION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

*Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): This is a Bill which 
I had moved during the last session. The Hon. the Law 
Minister (Dr. Ambedkar) told me that he would like to take 
the opnion of the States. I would, therefore, like to know, 
before I formally move this Bill, as to whether the Opinions 
of the provinces have been received. If not, I would like to 
have this Bill confined to the Centrally Administered Areas. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, in accordance 
with the promise that I gave when my friend Mr. Sidhva moved 
his Bill, that in view of the fact that this matter fell under the 
Concurrent List and according to the Standing Orders of the 
Government of India, it was necessary to consult the States 
before undertaking legislation, my Ministry had addressed a 
letter to the various provinces to ascertain their views with 
regard to the proposed enactment of a law as proposed by 
my friend Mr. Sidhva. I am sorry to say that on account of 
the pre-occupation of the various States, the replies of all of 
them have not been received as yet. I have received, however, 
replies from two States in Part A and some of the States in 
Part C. 

With regard to the States in Part A, I have received 
replies only from Madras and Punjab and I am sorry to say 
that both of them are opposed to the Centre meeting such a 
piece of legislation. The Madras Government have said that 
they themselves have under consideration an exhaustive and 
comprehensive piece of legislation to deal with the points 
raised in this particular Bill. The Punjab Government have 
said that they realised the necessity of having a penalty clause 
such as the one proposed by Mr. Sidhva, but they say that 


*P. D., Vol. 3, Part II, 25th March 1950, pp. 2115-16. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

they themselves have recently enacted a law imposing such 
a penalty and so far as that particular province is concerned, 
no such legislation is necessary. 

With regard to the States in Part C, the position that they 
have taken is this : that they have no such problem for the 
moment on hand. Some of them say that there are no such 
societies existing within their jurisdiction. Others have said 
that the law which my friend Mr. Sidhva seeks to amend has 
been very recently introduced within their area in the year 
1949. There are no societies and there is as yet no experience 
to suggest whether any societies have violated the provisions 
of the Bill. That is the position as revealed by the replies 
given by the various States to which this communication 
was addressed. Some of the other important States such as, 
for instance, Bombay, U.P. and Madhya Pradesh have not 
replied. This is a matter placed in the Concurrent List and 
it is desirable that we should have the reaction of most, or 
the majority of the States in Part A before the Centre can 
undertake this legislation. 

As I said last time, personally I do not think that any 
one could really dispute the position taken by my friend 
Mr. Sidhva that if the provisions of this Bill have to be 
effective, it is necessary to have some such penalty clause. I 
agree with him. But my point is this that it is desirable to 
carry the majority of the States in making this legislation 
and as they have not as yet replied, personally I would have 
very much preferred that this Bill was either withdrawn or 
held back on the assurance that the Centre will grapple with 
the situation as and when time and circumstances permit. 

Shri Sidhva: Sir, in view of the statement made by my 
friend Dr. Ambedkar that he is personally in favour of this 
Bill and that as this subject is in the Concurrent List he would 
like to have the opinion of all the important States, I would 
like to hold over this Bill. I cannot withdraw the Bill in any 
case. It is an important Bill. I know what is happening in 
the various societies. Therefore, I would request you to allow 
me to keep this Bill alive. I shall not move it now. 

Mr. Speaker: If no motion is made this time, it will 
automatically be kept alive under the rules. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


103 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


103 


( 14 ) 

ARMY BILL 

The Minister of Defence (Sardar Baldev Singh): I beg 
to move. 

“That the Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to 

the Government of the regular Army, as reported by the Select 

Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

*Mr. Speaker : Hon. Dr. Ambedkar. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : If other hon. 
Friends do not want to speak, I thought I would like to reply 
to the two points raised by my hon. friend Pandit Kunzru 
because they have a constitutional aspect. 

Mr. Speaker : I would give him precedence. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My. hon. Friend Pandit Kunzru, in the 
course of his speech on the motion, raised two points. As they 
refer to the constitutional aspect of the matter, I thought that 
it may be appropriate that I should deal with them rather 
than leave them to be dealt with by my hon. colleague.) 

The first point was that clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill were 
inappropriate in view of the fact that they made separate 
mention of the Forces in Part B States. I will take these two 
sections separately. 

With regard to section 4, I think my hon. friend will agree 
that under the scheme of this Act, there is a distinction to 
be made between what is known as the regular Army and 
Forces which do not form part of the regular Army. My friend 
will see that the regular Army is defined under item 21 of 
section 3 which deals with definitions. For instance, there are 
what are called Assam Rifles, Bhil Corps and several other 
units which may be mentioned as illustrations which do not 


*P.D., Vol. 4, Part II, 6th April 1950, pp. 2601-5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

form part of the regular Army. As the Act principally applies to 
the regular Army, it is necessary to provide for an eventuality 
where the provisions of this Act would have to be extended 
and applied to units which are not part of the regular Army. 
That is the purpose of section 4. Section 4 says 

Pandit Kunzru : Are these Forces Part B States Forces ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am coming separately to Part B States. 
So far as section 4 seeks to apply the provisions of this Act 
to units for the moment other than those referring to Part B 
States, I do not see that there can be any valid objection to 
the provisions contained in that particular section. 

With regard to section 5 which deals with Part B States, 
my hon. Friend’s contention was that this was inappropriate, 
and also the latter part of section 4 which made mention of 
Part B States. The answer to that question is this. My hon. 
Friend will remember that in the earlier part of the Constituent 
Assembly, the position was that the States in Part B which 
were then called Acceding States, had been given power to 
raise and to maintain independent Forces of their own. If he 
has got a copy of the original draft of the Constitution, he 
will see item 4 on page 189 and he will also find that I took 
objection to that provision. I did not want that any particular 
unit under the Union should have a right to raise and to 
maintain troops. I was glad that my contention prevailed, 
and that part of the entry was deleted. So that, the right to 
raise and maintain troops under the Constitution exclusively 
belongs to the Union. Although this position was accepted, it 
did not remove altogether the difficulty. 

As my hon. Friend well knows, there were certain 
covenants that were entered into between the Government 
of India and the various Indian States mentioned in Part B. 
One of the terms of the covenant was that the States which 
had certain Forces maintained and raised by them should be 
continued to be maintained by them and that what should be 
prevented was the raising of new troops. The existing units 
were to be continued. Then arose the question what is to 
happen to the existing units : were they to be independent 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


105 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 105 

or were they to be subordinate to the military authorities of the 
Government of India ? A compromise was entered into which 
is mentioned in article 259 to which he referred. Therein it 
is provided that although the troops already raised were to 
continue, they were to be subject to any law that Parliament 
might make. Now, it was possible for Parliament to make a 
law declaring that for all purposes the troops raised already 
by the States in Part B would be regarded as part of the 
regular Army of India. That is, of course, the intention. But, 
as I said, these matters were governed by the covenant. 
Although the Rajpramukhs who represent the States in Part B 
were prepared to accept the provisions contained in article 
259, that is to say, confer the power on Parliament to make 
such a law, they still desired that they should continue to 
be the Commanders-in- Chief of those Forces and that their 
position ought to be safe-guarded. These things arising out 
of the convenants which, as I said, had already been entered 
into and on the basis of which accession was made, had to 
be respected. I hope and trust that a time will come when 
the States would voluntarily agree to Parliament exercising 
complete jurisdiction, effecting complete assimilation between 
the Indian regular Army and the Forces raised by them. 
Therefore, what we have to do today is to effect a sort of a 
compromise. These sections 4 and 5 really represent the best 
compromise that we can make. 

Pandit Kunzru : If I may interrupt my hon. friend, 
he has dealt with a very wide question. My criticism was 
limited to one point only. Why has not the power conferred 
on Parliament by article 259 of the Constitution been used 
to extend the Army Act to Part B States Forces ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is what I am dealing with. 

Pandit Kunzru : I did not deal with the wider aspect of 
the problem on which my hon. friend has dwelt so far. 

Dr. Ambedkar : But, the wider aspect is the real aspect. 
The whole question is governed by the covenants which 
were entered into before the Constitution was made, unless, 
of course, my hon. Friend’s position is that covenant or no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

covenant, agreement or no agreement, understanding or no 
uderstanding, wherever Parliament has got power, Parliament 
should exercise it. That would be a different position. 

Pandit Kunzru : Surely my hon. friend knows that on the 
24th January the Unions of States and the State of Mysore 
3 00 P M ' ssuec ^ a proclamation accepting the Constitution and 
saying that the agreements that were inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Constitution were invlaid. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. That may be so. As I said we are 
following really an understanding. Before I go to that, I 
would like to draw his attention to the fact that he has not 
adverted to an important point of cluase 2, viz., part ( b ) of 
clause 2 which says: 

“persons belonging to the land forces of a Part B State, when 
such persons are attached to any body of the regular Army for 
service, or when the whole or a part of the said forces is acting 
with any body of the regular Army or is placed at the disposal 
of the Central Government in pursuance of a notification under 
section 5;” 

Therefore, it is not altogether as though this law places 
the Forces in States in Part B in a separate water-tight 
compartment. When the Central Government issues a 
notification under clause 5, then as soon as the notification 
is issued, this Act would apply to that part of the Army in 
Part B States automatically. He will also see that under 
clause 5 there is power given to the Central Government to 
see that any particular Part of the Forces in Part B shall for 
the purposes of this Act be treated as attached to the Indian 
Army. That also is a direct power of intervention so far as 
attachment of certain Forces is concerned. 

My friend asked why we have not taken direct action. The 
answer is, to my mind, obvious. He will realize that the Forces 
in States in Part B were raised under their own individual 
laws and were not raised under any Act of the Central 
Government. The condition on which enrolment was made in 
Part B States materially differed from the rules and conditions 
regarding enrolment of personnel to the Indian Regular Army. 
One important difference was this that the person enrolled in 
the Indian Regular Army was bound to save anywhere but 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


107 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 107 

with regard to a person enrolled in Forces belonging to the 
Part B States, such a conditon was not there. I think it is in 
everybody’s knowledge that their conditions of service were 
confined to their States and the widest circuit of their service 
was India. It was during the war that special provision was 
made when these troops were placed under the control of 
the Government of India with the condition that they may 
be used anywhere. It was the Government of India who bore 
the expenditure and sent them to battle-fields outside India. 
That being so, it does appear to be somewhat difficult, harsh 
and illegal even to compel a man who has been enrolled 
under different set of circumstances to come and be a part of 
the Regular Army. Consequently, the fact that we have had 
convenants with the States forces as to adopt what might be 
regarded as a via media and I do not think that from either 
point of view any objection could be raised to the provisions 
contained in clauses 4 and 5. 

Now, I come to the other point raised by him, viz., clause 
70 which deals with the authority of the Court Martial to try 
what are called civil offences. It is quite true that offences 
against civilians should be tried by civilian courts and not by 
military courts but there are considerations which weigh on 
the other side and which support the provisions contained in 
this Bill. Let me give first some of the difficulties which one 
has to face in deciding upon an issue of this sort. Suppose 
an offence is committed by a solider within the barracks 
where the army is stationed, which should be the forum, 
the Court Martial or the Ordinary Magistrate’s Court ? Let 
me point out another difficulty and it is this. An offence is 
committed against a civilian but that offence is such that 
while it involves the breach of an ordinary criminal law at 
the same time, it involves what is called a breach of the 
rules of discipline which every soldier must follow. What 
would be the appropriate forum in a case like this where the 
act committed by a soldier is equally an offence under the 
ordinary criminal law and is also a breach of discipline under 
the Army rules ? Take another illustration. Supposing an army 
is about to move from one place to another : every soldier 
belonging to that army must move. Then suppose we made 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


108 


108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a provision that every offence committed by a soldier must be 
tried by a civilan court. It might be that a recalcitrant solider 
who does not want to move with the troops to another station 
deliberately gets himself involved in some kind of a crime in 
order to stay back so that the civilian judge may try him. 
Should that be allowed ? If my friend himself were to exercise 
his mind on the subject he would find many other difficulties 
with which he would be confronted if he came to the dogmatic 
conclusion that all offences committed by a soldier against a 
civilian must be as a rule tried by a civilian court: 

Pandit Kunzru : That was not my contention. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Therefore, I say there can be no question 
of having any dogmatic opinion about this question. None 
can say that all such offences must be tried by the Military 
Court nor can anyone say that no such offence shall be tried 
by a civilian court. Consequently the Bill makes certain 
compromises which are in keeping with the necessities of the 
case. The trial of offences committed by a soldier which are 
to be tried by a military court are limited in number. They 
are murder, culpable homicide, etc. 

Pandit Kunzru : By a military court or a criminal court ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : By a criminal court. All others may be 
tried by court martial. 

In connection with this there are other provisions in the 
Bill which must also be taken into consideration. They are 
clauses 125, 126 and 127. The discretion or the jurisdiction 
of the courts martial to try offences which are left to them 
is not absolute but it is governed by the provisions to which 
I have referred, namely, the military court under clause 
125 may decide whether they want to try the offence. If the 
civil courts think that the offences should be tried by them 
they should under clause 126 obtain the permission of the 
Government of India and if the permission is granted they 
can proceed to try the offence. There is a further provision 
which in a sense is rather an extraordinary thing, namely, 
“Successive trial”. If it was found that the offence was a grave 
or serious one but the court martial which was permitted to 
try the offence let off the man with a light punishment, then 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


109 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 109 

subject to the permission granted by the Government of India, 
the man could be tried twice. Having regard to the difficulties 
mentioned, namely, of allowing civil courts to try all offences 
and having regard to the fact that there are the provisions 
contained in clauses 125 and 127, I do not envisage that 
there is likely to be far more cases which can be described 
as containing miscarriage of justice. I think we have taken 
enough precaution to prevent that sort of thing happening 
and therefore I submit, that having regard to these provisions 
and having regard to section 70 there can be no objection to 
this part of the Bill. 

I might also mention — I think reference was made to it by 
somebody — that clause 70 of this Bill is virtually a repetition 
of section 41 of the British Army Act. There also they have 
a similar provision. In the U.S.A. the provisions are more 
extensive. After all we have to look at this matter from the 
point of view of the offender, not so much from the point of 
view of the complainant. In all these cases the offender would 
be a solider and the question is whether the soldier who is 
accused of any particular offence and would have been tried 
by a civil court, if he had not been a soldier, would not get 
justice at the court martial. 

My friend said that the men who sit in the court martial 
are not trained lawyers. I do not know but I can say from 
my experience that I have met some Judge Advocates-General 
who were as good as the lawyers whom we meet in courts, if 
not better. However, after all a soldier cannot expect to get 
better justice for having committed civilian offences than he is 
ordinarily expected to get when he commits a military offence. 
If he gets the same justice as he gets in the civil courts I do 
not think there need be any cause for complaint. My friend 
need not have much confusion about it. I do not think that 
his criticism is well placed. 

Shri S. N. Sinha : What are those cases in which the 
criminal courts and court-martial have got concurrent 
jurisdiction ? Under clause 125 the choice has to be exercised. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot say. That requires some kind of 
exhaustive compilation. There are undoubtedly some offences 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which come under the jurisdiction of both military and civil 
courts. 

Shri S. N. Sinha : My contention was that clause 70 
of this Bill alone gives jurisdiction to the ordinary criminal 
courts in respect of specified cases. 

Pandit Kunzru : There is this doubt in the minds of many 
hon. Members. If my hon. Friend Dr. Ambedkar will turn to 
clause 125 he will find that the opening words are: “When 

a criminal court having jursidiction is of opinion ”. The 

question is what do the words “having jurisdiction” mean. Do 
they mean having jurisdiction under the ordinary criminal 
law of the land or jurisdiction under this Bill ? This is the 
question that troubles many hon. Members. If it is said that 
these words mean having jurisdiction under this Bill 

Dr. Ambedkar : Under the ordinary law. 

Pandit Kunzru : Then obviously clauses 69 debars the 
ordinary criminal courts from dealing with any criminal cases 
except those which fall under section 70. That is the real 
question. 

Dr. Ambedkar : “Civil offence” has been defined on page 2 
of the Bill as meaning “an offence which is triable by a criminal 
court” as distinct from a court martial. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


111 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


111 


( 15 ) 

PART C STATES (LAWS) BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for the extension of 
laws to certain Part C States. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the 

extension of laws to certain Part C States.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I introduce the Bill. 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to provide for the extension of laws to certain" 

Part C States, be taken into consideration.” 

It is perhaps necessary that I should offer to the House 
some explanation as to why this Bill is restricted to certain 
Part C States. The position is this, that we have altogether 
about ten Part C States mentioned in Schedule I of the 
Constitution. Those ten States fall into three groups. There 
are Coorg, Ajmer and Delhi which were Chief Commissioners’ 
Provinces now designated as Part C States, and which had 
come into existence long before the Constitution. Consequently, 
so far as these three States were concerned, the question of 
the extension of Central laws does not arise because they 
applied at the time when they were enacted. 

Then there is the second group of Part C States which are 
Bilaspur, Himachal Pradesh, Bhopal and Cutch. With regard 
to them, it was only last year that this Legislature passed a 
law extending the Central Acts to them. This Bill is confined 
to three Part C States, namely, Vindhya Pradesh, Tripura 

*P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 5th April 1950, p. 2551. 

**Ibid., 11th April 1950, pp. 2777-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and Manipur. They have to be separately dealt with because 
they came into existence as Part C States after the 1949 
Act was passed. Consequently, this measure is restircted to 
these three Part C States. I might mention that although 
all the laws that were extended to Part C States by the 
Act of 1949 are extended to Vindhya Pradesh and Tripura, 
some exceptions have been made with regard to the State of 
Manipur. All the laws that have been applied previously or 
are applied by the present measure to Vindhya Pradesh or 
Tripura are not applied proprio vigore to Manipur. It is said 
that Manipur is largely settled by what are called the tribal 
people whose civilisation and whose manners and modes of 
life are considerably different from those who are living in 
what is called the ‘settled area’. Consequently it would create 
a great deal of disturbance if all the enactments were extended 
to Manipur and therefore a Schedule has been added as to 
what enactments will not apply to Manipur. Similarly, while 
the Indian Penal Code is applied to Manipur, there are two 
sections of it which are sought to be applied, with a certain 
modification. 

I hope the House will see that there is nothing very 
complicated about this measure and accept it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to provide for the extension of laws to certain 

Part C States, be taken into consideration.” 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer) : I have to make a few 
observations in respect of this Bill. So far as the extension 
of any Central laws to the States referred to by the Hon. 
the Law Minister is concerned, I have got nothing to say. 
But there is one clause, namely, clause 2 in this Bill which 
lays down that it will be open to the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to extend any Provincial 
enactment to any of these States in Part C, subject to such 
modifications and restrictions as may be laid down in the 

notification I have not the least doubt that if all these 

extended laws are ever questioned before a competent legal 
authority, this legislation will not stand the scrutiny of the 
judicial court and will be declared null and void. I would, 
therefore, respectfully request the Hon. the Law Minister to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


113 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 113 

consider the legal position before proceeding further with this 
piece of legislation. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am glad my hon. Friend raised this 
question. I did not bother to it because I thought that 
the section was so simple that it should not require any 
explanation. However, now that the question is raised, I think it 
is desirable that I should explain the position. In going through 
the merits of this particular clause, there are certain aspects 
of the case which have to be taken into consideration. The 
first is this, that in most of the Part C States, except Coorg, 
there are no local legislatures which could be entrusted with 
the duty of passing such local laws as may be necessary for 
their local administration. It is, I think, equally clear and my 
hon. friend, himself admitted the matter that the only other 
alternative is for Parliament to sit here and to make detailed 
laws for the local administration of these Part C States, and 
the question that has to be considered is this, whether in view 
of the time which is available to Parliament — and every one 
knows how difficult it is for this Parliament to get through 
some of the most essential measures necessary for carrying 
on the Central Administration — to find time which could be 
devoted in a meticulous consideration of the details of a local 
legislation. We are, therefore, so to say between two difficulties ; 
one is that there is no local legislature and the other is that 
Parliament is not in a position to engage itself in passing 
local laws for Part C States. What is, therefore to be done in 
a situation of this sort ? The only thing that could be done 
seems to be to give the Government of India the power to 
extend certain laws made by Part A States or other Part C 
States to be applied to Part C States with such modifications 
as may be necessary by reason of local circumstances and 
local difficulty. I do not see that there is any other way open 
to provide for local legislation for Part C States. Of course, 
it would be possible for Parliament at some stage to create 
local legislative councils for Part C States and to endow these 
local legislative councils with the power to make laws for their 
local administration but so long as Parliament has not done 
it, I do not see that there is any via media except what is 
suggested in this particular Bill, and, therefore, apart from 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


114 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the question whether this is the proper mode of doing the 
legislative business which Part C States would be entitled to 
do, from a practical point of view, I do not see that there is 
any other method open. 

My friend put forth a point of criticism that this power 
has been exercised by the Centre without even consulting 
such local advisory bodies as exist in Part C States. I do not 
know much about that aspect of the matter, because as my 
hon. friend knows the administration of this particular matter 
rests with the Home Ministry and I have no doubt about it 
that the Home Ministry does consult these bodies. If they 
do not, I have no doubt that they will adopt the suggestion 
made by my hon. friend. 

Then, I come to the constitutional question which my 
hon. friend, has raised, namely, that this will be delegated 
legislation. Any application of any law made by Part A or 
Part B or Part C States extended to Pan C States would 
be a performance of what might be called a delegated 
legislation, the Parliament delegating the executive to apply 
that legislation. My hon. Friend referred to the decision of the 
Federal Court. No doubt there is the decision of the Federal 
Court. All I want to say is this, that we have not had as 
yet the decision of the Supreme Court; we are waiting for it, 
because, with all respect to the Federal Court, the view that 
the Government of India takes in this matter is that decision 
was not a correct decision, and with all respect to the Federal 
Authority, that is still the view that we hold. I might point 
out to my hon. friend that this activity of the Government of 
India to employ what is called delegated authority to legislate 
is not a new thing. It has been in existence practically from 
1912 and he will know that we have a law for the purpose 
of permitting the Central Government to extend the laws 
made in any part of India to the Province of Delhi with such 
modifications as the Central Government may make. From 
1912 up to the date of the decision of the Federal Court, there 
has not been in existence a single decision of any Court in 
India which has questioned the legality of that action taken 
by the Government of India. I might also tell my friend that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


115 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 115 

many cases have gone to the Privy Council from this country 
and the Privy Council itself has never questioned the validity 
of this. I, therefore, hope that when on a proper occasion the 
matter comes before the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court 
will de novo examine the position and, as I hold the view, the 
Supreme Court will not feel itself bound by the decision of the 
Federal Court, although a good many of the personnel of the 
Federal Court is the same as the personnel of the Supreme 
Court, but the court certainly is a different court. Therefore if 
my friend likes it, I do not mind saying that we are making 
a venture. We are hoping that the stand that we take and 
we have taken so far and which has not been questioned by 
any court during the last 25 years is the correct stand. If 
the Supreme Court when it comes to deal with the question 
comes to a decision different to what our point of view is 
we shall then consider the matter. For the moment it is our 
view that there is no objection to delegated legislation at all. 
Parliament is quite supreme either to legislate itself or to 
ask any other agent on its behalf to exercise that legislative 
power. I do not think that that matter can be questioned. I 
do not think that there is any other point raised by my friend 
which I have not dealt with. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is it open to the Parliament to say 
that the Government may pass such laws as are necessary ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : They can say so, that Government is left 
with the power to frame rules. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Can they give a blank cheque in 
regard to all the matters referred to in the list ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It may do so under proper safeguards. 
No Parliament will give a blank cheque to the executive : it 
can certainly ask the executive to fill in the blanks and I do 
not think there can be any difficulty about that. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): So far as the 
Constitution is concerned the only operative articles are 240 
and 242. We have made a special provisions in regard to 
Coorg. As you will see, Sir, Coorg has been taken out of the 
operation of the particular Bill before the House. So far as the 
Constitution is concerned there is no specific direction in this 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regard. So it is left practically to the free will and pleasure 
of the Parliament. The modus operandi to be followed is the 
only thing that can be under dispute, whether the modus 
operandi should be that all these enactments should form 
part of the schedule attached to this Bill, with such powers as 
we normally give to the executive by means of what is called 
delegated legislation, to make rules, etc. or the procedure 
that is now followed. As the Law Minister has mentioned, 
this procedure has been followed over a period of years and 
I am not sure, in the absence of any express instruction to 
the contrary in the Constitution, how this can be held to be 
void by any court. So far as delegated legislation is concerned 
the exact quantum, nature and extent of delegation is not 
defined by any legislature in the world. It varies from time to 
time. In the absence of any provision so far as Part C States 
are concerned which expressly prohibits enacting any type of 
law that Parliament likes and to delegate such powers as it 
wants to the Central Government, there could be no objection 
at the present stage to the Bill being passed by this House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The general laws are enacted in 
a Bill — and power is given to the Government to fill in the 
details and make the rules. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The provision in the Bill is that there are 
laws already existing on any subject. The laws are already 
existing in certain Provinces. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is it not for the Parliament to 
choose which law is to be applied ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : If Parliament wants it can do it but 
Parliament entrusts the power to the executive, which has 
to choose from the existing laws. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : The Committee on Ministers’ 
Powers which was constituted by the House of commons to 
go into this particularly vexed question, what was called Star 
Chamber Legislation, in the thirties, indicated that it would 
be preferable for the Government of the day to give an outline 
as to how far they are going to use the delegated power and 
that is why we are following so far as ordinary legislation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


117 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 117 

is concerned the practice of saying that without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing powers such and such shall be 
rule- making power of the Government. Therefore, there has 
been no express limitation to the extent and scope of delegated 
legislation in any legislature in the world so far as is known. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They have not even indicated the 
subjects here. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava : The Law Minister was pleased 
to remark that before the judgment of the Federal Court there 
was no decision laying down anything contrary to the practice 
prevalent. I would like to point out that the judgment of their 
Lordships of the Federal Court is itself based upon the Privy 
Council decision reported in 1945 Federal Law Journal, page 1. 
It is on the basis of that authority that the Federal Court 
has laid down the proposition. 

I would also like to know whether the matter is before the 
Supreme Court and whether a decision of the Federal Court 
does not bind this Government until and unless it has been 
superseded or set aside by the Supreme Court. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is there an appeal from the Federal 
Court to the Supreme Court ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. The Federal Court has ceased to exist. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar): Could the Hon. 
Minister cite the article of the Constitution in this regard ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Parliament has plenary powers. It 
can do anything with the legislative power that it possesses. It 
can use it itself or ask someone else to use it on its behalf in 
certain circumstances. There is no prohibition imposed on it. 

Shri Hossain Imam (Bihar): I should like to have some 
light thrown on the fact that this is not a peculiar situation 
that has arisen just now. The Chief Commissioners’ Provinces 
are administered by the Centre. We can extend the power of 
the Chief Commissioner by notification as was the practice 
in the past or it can be done by means of legislation as may 
be done now. But the question is who is to be empowered ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Are we going to empower the executive, judiciary or the Central 
Government ? The power should not be distributed between 
all the three. Sub-clause (3) of clause 3 says: 

“For the purpose of facilitating the application in the said 
States of any such Act or Ordinance as aforesaid, any court or 
other authority may construe the Act or Ordinance with such 
alteration not affecting the substance as may be necessary 
or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or other 
authority.” 

It shows that we have not made up our mind as to 
who is to have these powers. I can understand the Central 
Government being empowered during the interim period. Who 
is the authority 

Dr. Ambedkar : Any authority. It is an adaptation: it is 
not adoption. We have passed so many adaptation laws in 
this House. 

Shri Hossain Imam : This adaptation is done by the 
Central authority or the Legislature. Here the adaptation is 
left free to an unspecified number of people. The authority 
is nowhere defined in this legislation — whether it means the 
Chief Commissioner or the Chief Secretary 

Dr. Ambedkar : Whoever will have to administer the law 
will have to adapt it. 

Shri Hossain Imam : We are doing something to which 
we have not given proper consideration. The Bill has been 
introduced late in the session. It would be far better if the 
Government withdew the Bill now and have some kind of 
Ordinance after the session has ended, if they want to have 
something of this kind. Otherwise a well considered law should 
be brought forward in which every kind of power should be 
given. It would be better to have an Ordinance rather than 
a Bill of this nature, where there are loose ends. I would, 
therefore, request the Hon. Minister to reconsider the matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar : In view of the fact that my hon. Friend 
5 00 m P re P are d to permit Government to enact this 
^ measure in the form of an Ordinance, obviously, 
it means that he cannot have much objection to the merits 
of the thing. Otherwise, I do not see what objection he has 
for enacting this measure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


119 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 119 

Shri Hossain Imam : I was only suggesting. This 
Ordinance can last until six weeks 

Dr. Ambedkar : From the commencement of Parliament. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): Six weeks after the 
commencement of the next session of Parliament. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We do not know what will happen. I 
cannot say when Parliament will be called. We do not want 
to be left in the lurch after having made an Ordinance. 

Shri Kamath : How can that be ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This suggestion is a very impracticable 
suggestion. 

Besides, so far as this aspect is concerned, as I have said, 
we have got a precedent. We have got a similar law with 
regard to Delhi. We have got a similar law with regard to 
Ajmer-Merwara, the Ajmer-Merwara Extension Act of 1947. 
If these two Acts are not so bad as my friend tries to depict 
them, I cannot understand why there should be any objection 
to this measure. It may be, if there was time, I could suggest 
to the House that at a later stage the House may consider the 
procedure which has been recently adopted in the House of 
Commons which consists of having a Standing Committee of 
the House to examine such delegated legislation and to bring 
to the notice of Parliament whether the delegated legislation 
has either exceeded the original intention of Parliament or has 
departed from it or has affected any fundamental prinicple. 
This is a matter which we may take up independently. I 
cannot understand how now after long practice, anybody can 
object to what is called delegated legislation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill to provide for the extension of laws to certain 

Part C States, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Hossain Imam : May I ask the Hon. Minister to 
explain why — he has not explained in the Statement of Objects 
and Reasons — the age of consent has been reduced ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


120 


120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He has already stated. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The changes with regard to Manipur 
have been made as a result of a conference which was held 
between the representatives of the Home Department and 
the Chief Commissioner in Manipur. It was he who suggested 
that these changes must be made if the Central legislation 
is to be extended. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is a little premature to apply 
this section to these areas. 

Shri Hossain Imam : The age of consent has been reduced. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Possibly it goes back to the age 
of consent under the old law, and all these reforms are not 
sought to be extended to that area. 

Clauses 1 to 4 were added to the Bill. 

The Schedule was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Fromula were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move: 

“That the Bill, be passed.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved. 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Prof. Ranga (Madras): I am glad that the Hon. Minister 
has given us this information that in Parliament they have 
thought of the device of establishing a Standing Committee 
to study these things as and when they come up before them 
and advise Parliament, as a sort of a watchdog on behalf of 
Parliament. Unfortunately, the Hon. Minister has not given 
us any assurance that similar efforts would be made in this 
House. I do request him to take steps at the earliest possible 
opportunity to see that this Standing Committee does come 
to be established by our Government. 

Dr Ambedkar : I will bear that in mind. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

“That the Bill be passed” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


121 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 121 

The motion was adopted. 

The House then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the 
Clock on Wednesday, the 12th April, 1950. 


REPEALING AND AMENDING BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, may I 
have your permission to take my Bill out of turn ? They 
are very small ones. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to repeal certain amendments and to amend 

certain other enactments, be taken into consideration.” 

The purpose of the Bill which is brought in annually for 
the purpose of pruning the Statute-book of what is called 
the “dead wood” and of amending and making good certain 
errors discovered in certain enactments. I do not think it 
necessary for me to say anything more in support of the 
motion I make. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to repeal certain enactments and to 

amendments and to amend certain other enactments, be taken 

into consideration.” 

Shri Himatsingka (West Bengal) : What I would suggest 
to the Hon. Minister of Law is this. Would he please take 
steps to have all the laws that are in force printed in a book 
form so that one may follow what laws are in existence and 
what not? At present it is so very difficult. We are passing 
so many laws in a day that it is very difficult for anyone 
to know or find out what the law is. Therefore, will he take 
my suggestion into consideration and have the laws in force 
up to 1949 printed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is being done. 


*P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 11th April 1950, p. 2776. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

“That the Bill to repeal certain enactments and to amend 
certain other enactments, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 1 to 4 were aded to the Bill. 

The First and Second Schedules were added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move: 

“That the Bill be passed” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


123 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


123 


( 16 ) 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE BILL 

[ Mr. Speaker in the Chair ] 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): May I, Sir, with 
your permission make the motion that stands in my name 
in the Order Paper for today ? I could not do it this morning 
because printed copies of the Bill were not available in the 
morning. As the House takes objection to giving leave for 
introduction without copies of the Bill being there, I thought 
I should wait. 

Mr. Speaker : Yes ; he may make that motion. I was 
told that the matter was not to be taken up. That is why I 
passed over that. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Because, I said that printed copies were 
not available. 

I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for 
the allocation of seats in, and the delimitation of constituencies 
for the purpose of election to, the House of the People and 
the Legislatures of States, the qualification of voters at 
such elections, the preparation of electoral rolls and matters 
connected therewith. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the 
allocation of seats in, and the delimination of constituencies 
for the purpose of elections to, the House of the People and 
the Legislatures of States, the qualification of voters at such 
elections, the preparation of electoral rolls, and matters connected 
therewith.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I introduce the Bill. 


*P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 12th April 1950, pp. 2797-98. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE BILL — contd. 

*The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): I beg to move: 

“That the Bill to provide for the allocation of seats in, and 
the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections 
to, the House of the People and the Legislatures of States, the 
qualifications of voters at such elections, the preparation of 
electoral rolls, and matters connected therewith, be taken into 
consideration.” 

I do not propose to speak at this stage. By the end of the 
discussion I expect the Minister in charge will be present and 
he will then reply. If he is not present then I shall reply to 
the debate. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion moved. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): This is a very important Bill 
and may I suggest that it would help the discussion to a 
very great extent if the Hon. Minister in charge of the Bill 
elucidated certain points which are very necessary, so that 
we may not traverse unnecessary ground. The Hon. Minister, 
Dr. Ambedkar, has just come to the House. It was only 
because he was not here that Hon. Mr. Santhanam made 
the formal motion. If Dr. Ambedkar had been here he would 
certainly have made a very useful speech. I am prepared to 
speak after the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar has sopken. However, I 
leave it to the House. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, at the outset 
I must apologise to the House for my delay in reaching the 
House. I was told that the Insurance Bill would not be finished 
before 4-30 p.m. and that a message would be sent to me in 
my room 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): There are always 
surprises in life. 

Dr. Ambedkar : With regard to this Bill it is obvious 
that the Bill deals with four questions. Firstly, it deals with 
the allocation of seats for the House of the People among the 
different States. Secondly, it deals with the fixing of the total 
seats for the State Legislative Assembly. Thirdly, it deals with 


*P.D., Vol. 4, Part II, 18th April 1950, pp. 3000-6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


125 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 125 

the questions relating to the registration of voters for election 
to Parliament and election to State Assemblies. And fourthly, 
the Bill proposes to fix the composition of the State Legislative 
Councils and the registration of voters for the Councils. I 
propose to take each of these points and explain to the House 
what exactly the Bill does. 

First I propose to explain to the House the question of 
the allocation of Parliamentary seats among the States. The 
allocation proposed by the Bill is shown in the First Schedule. 
The House will recall that the Constitution lays down in 
article 81 the rules which have to be observed in the matter 
of distributing seats in Parliament among the different States. 
The rules to which I made reference are laid down in article 
81(l)(b) and 81(l)(c). The first rule which this article lays down 
is that the constituency shall be so determined that there 
shall be not less than one member for every 750,000 and not 
more than one for every 500,000 of the population. The second 
rule which this article lays down is that whatever standard 
figure is chosen between these two figures — the maximum 
and minimum — that standard figure, so far as the States in 
Parts A and B are concerned, shall be uniform throughout 
the territory of India. That is the general direction given by 
the Constitution which this Bill is bound to conform to. 

The standard figure adopted in this Bill for the purpose 
of allocating seats is one Member for every 720,000. It will 
be seen that this figure is in between 750,000 and 500,000. 
The seats for the different States are arrived at by dividing 
the total population of each State by this standard figure of 
720,000 and you get the total number of seats for each State 
set out in the First Schedule to this Bill. The total population 
is as estimated on the 1st March 1950 according to the order 
issued by the President under the appropriate article of the 
Constitution. I believe it is article 347 

Shri Bharati : Article 387. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I believe hon. Members have got the 
notification issued by the President in which the population 
of the various States as estimated has been shown 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Bharati : We have not a copy of it. When was it 
issued ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It was issued on the 17th April 1950. 

Shri Bharati : That was yesterday. We have not been 
supplied with a copy. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am very sorry. It is in the Gazette. 
We are in such a great hurry that long intervals are not 
permissible. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, the figures of 
population are essential for the Debate. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think they will be circulated. However, 


I shall read them out. 

Part A States 

Assam 

8.51 

million 

Bihar 

39.42 

” 

Bombay 

32.68 

j? 

Madhya Pradesh 

20.92 

j? 

Madras 

54.29 

” 

Orissa 

14.41 

55 

Punjab 

12.61 

” 

U.P. 

61.62 

55 

West Bengal 

24.32 

55 

I do not think I need trouble the House with the population 

figures for States in Part B and Part C. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan): We want them. 
Dr. Ambedkar : Then I will read them out. 


Part B States 

Hyderabad 

17.69 

million 

Jammu and Kashmir 

4.37 

55 

Madhya Bharat 

7.87 

55 

Mysore 

8.06 

55 

Patiala and East Punjab States Union 

3.32 

55 

Rajasthan 

14.69 

55 

Saurashtra 

3.96 

55 

Tr a vancor e - C ochin 

8.58 

55 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


127 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


127 


Part C States 


Ajmer 

Bhopal 

Bilaspur 

Coorg 

Delhi 

Himachal Pradesh 

Cutch 

Manipur 

Tripura 

Vindhya Pradesh 


0.73 million 

0.85 

0.13 

0.17 

1.51 

1.08 

0.55 

0.54 

0.58 

3.88 


That is the population as calculated on the 1st March 1950. 

Shri Kamath : What about the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have not got the figures here, and they 
do not form part of this scheme. 

Shri Bharati : Is any Member given to Aandamans in 
the Schedule ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, but that is a separate thing 
altogether. I am coming to that. 

I have given to the House the total population of the States 
in Part A, Part B and also in Part C. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): Are these based on the census 
of 1941? 

Dr. Ambedkar : They have been calculated for the purpose 
of this Schedule by the Census Commissioner who must be 
taken to be the final authority in this matter ; he has advised 
the Election Commissioner that these should be the standard 
figures that may be taken as the basis. 

Dr. Tek Chand : How have they been calculated ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is a very difficult thing to say now. 
They have been calculated in the manner prescribed in the 
Constitution (Determination of Population) Order, 1950, and 
the President has accepted them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


128 


128 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As I said, the First Schedule refers to the House of the 
People. The seats for the States in Part A and Part B have 
been calculated on the basis of one Member for every 720,000 
of the population. With regard to Part C, hon. Members will 
remember that the determination of the seats for States in 
Part C is set out in article 82. That article 82 practically 
leaves it to Parliament to decide it in the best manner it 
can without being bound by the two rules which have been 
laid down in article 81. Consequently, really speaking, this 
standard figure of 720,000 could not be made the basis for 
the allocation of seats to States in Part C because on that 
basis most of those States will not even get a single seat in 
Parliament. Consequently, what has been done is that they 
have been just given one seat for the purpose of securing their 
representation in Parliament without being bound down by 
any of the rules that have been laid down for States in Part 
A and Part B. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): But in cases where 
there is more than one seat ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. With regard to 
Delhi an exception has been made, namely, that Delhi has 
been given three seats. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: Why was this exception made ? 

Shri Bharati: Because it is the Capital. 

Dr. Ambedkar : One of the reasons is that Delhi has 
quite a big population as compared to the other States listed 
in Part C. The basis we have taken with regard Delhi is one 
seat for every 500,000 of the population, and therefore Delhi 
will have three seats. 

Capt. A. P. Singh (Vindhya Pradesh): Why has this 
standard of 500,000 not been taken as a basis in the case 
of Vindhya Pradesh ? Vindhya Pradesh has been given only 
five seats. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Vindhya Pradesh has a big population. 
What I say is this, that we are trying to upgrade where 
upgradation is necessary ; we are not trying to upgrade where 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


129 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 129 

on the population basis a State is getting representation ; and 
we are upgrading a great deal where a State is not getting 
any representation at all. It has really got to be done by 
equitable consideration and not by logic and not necessarily 
by population. 

Then I come to Kashmir. As the House will see, there is a 
special provision with regard to Kashmir and that provision 
differs in one important respect and that is that the Kashmir 
representatives will not be elected by the people. Now, the 
reason for making an exception in regard to Kashmir is this, 
namely, that Kashmir is a part of India in a very attenuated 
manner, so to say. The Article relating to Kashmir says that 
only Article 1 applies, that is to say, Kashmir is part of the 
territories of India. The application of the other provisions 
of the Constitution, that Article says, will depend upon the 
President, who may in consultation with the Government of 
Kashmir apply the rest of the Articles with such modifications 
and alterations as he may determine. As the honourable House 
may probably know, there has been already issued an order 
in regard to Kashmir in which the President has modified the 
Article providing for the representation of States in Parliament 
by stating that he shall nominate the represntatives of Kashmir 
in consultation with the Government of Kashmir. I think it was 
issued on the 26th January. That being so, there is really no 
room for this Parliament to make any provision with regard 
to the representation of Kashmir in Parliament in a manner 
different from what has been provided in the Bill. I think that 
nothing more is necessary for the purpose of elucidating how 
the First Schedule has been brought into being. 

I now come to the fixation of the total seats in the State 
Legislative Assemblies as has been shown in the Second 
Schedule. With regard to this matter also, we have had to 
conform to the provisions of Article 170. That Article lays down 
two rules. One rule is that there should be not more than 
one seat for every 75,000 of the population. The second rule 
is that the maximum number of seats of a State Legislative 
Assembly shall be 500 and the minimum shall be 60. In 
framing the Second Schedule, the following considerations 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


130 


130 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have been taken into account. The first consideration is that 
the total number of seats in any Legislative Assembly is not 
unduly large. The second consideration is that the total number 
of seats fixed for each State Legislative Assembly is an integral 
multiple of the State quota in Parliament. The reason for 
adopting this second rule that the one should form a sort of 
integral multiple of the other is because by doing so it would 
be easy to work out the provisions of Article 55. Hon. Members 
will appreciate that Article 55 provides that notwithstanding 
the fact that the total membership of the different Legislative 
Assemblies in the States may be different there shall be equal 
valuation of the votes cast in the Presidential election. Now, 
it is quite obvious that this equal valuation would become 
easier of calculation if we had the total seats in the Legislative 
Assembly of any State forming an integral multiple of the 
number of seats for that State in Parliament. That is why 
the seats have been allotted accordingly. It is, of course, to 
be remembered that the multiple is not the same in all the 
cases but the multiple is there. That is how the seats in the 
Second Schedule have been calculated. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Therefore, the State 
Assemblies have different numbers in different States. It is 
unlike the Parliament where you have a fixed number. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. The maximum is 500 and the 
minimum is 60, but different numbers may be fixed for different 
States. There is no uniformity prescribed in the Constitution. 
We have a wide limit within which we can fix different totals 
for different States. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Could we know what is the 
basis in the different States ? Say 100,000 voters per seat in 
Assam; 110,000 in Bihar; 120,000 in U.P. and so on? 

Dr. Ambedkar : After I finish my speech, if you put that 
point clearly to me, I shall be able to explain. So much for 
the fixation of seats in Parliament and in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the different States. 

Now, I come to registration of voters. The principles adopted 
for registration of voters for Parliamentary constituencies as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


131 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 131 

well as for State Legislative Assembly constituencies are 
the same. There is no difference. Consequently, I think that 
it would be enough if I explain the provisions relating to 
registration of voters for Parliamentary constituencies. The 
first principle is what is laid down in Clause 15 of the Bill 
which says that every constituency is to have an electoral 
roll on the basis of which election will be conducted. The 
preparation of an electoral roll is therefore an obligatory thing 
and a condition precedent for election. The second principle is 
that for being registered on an electoral roll a person should 
not suffer from the disqualifications mentioned in Clause 16. 
He should not be a person who is not a citizen of India; or 
a person who is of unsound mind or a person who is guilty 
of offences relating to corrupt practices and election offences, 
then, he becomes eligible for being enrolled or registered in 
that constituency. The next principle is that a voter can be 
registered and that, in one and not more than one constituency. 
Even in one constituency he is to be registered only once. 
Then we have what are called “conditions of registration”, 
which are laid down in Clause 19. One is that he must be 
ordinarily resident for not less than 180 days during what 
is called a “qualifying period”. Secondly, he must not be less 
than twenty-one years of age on the qualifying date. 

Now, with regard to qualifying date and qualifying period, 
I think it is necessary that I should make the position a 
little clearer. On reading the Bill, the House will realise 
that there are really two different provisions for qualifying 
period and qualifying date. There is one qualifying period 
and one qualifying date for the first electoral roll, and there 
is another provision for qualifying period and qualifying date 
for subsequent electoral rolls. 

Now, for the first electoral roll the qualifying period is from 
1st April 1947 to 31st March 1948. The qualifying date for 
the first electoral roll is the first day of January 1949. Now, 
these provisions which I have referred to with regard to the 
qualifying period and the qualifying date for the first electoral 
roll are really, so to say, beyond our control now, because 
they were fixed by the Constituent Assembly when it passed 
a resolution that the election should take place at a certain 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

period in the year 1950 and so on, and that accordingly 
preparation should be made for the registration of voters, 
and preparation of electoral roll. Now so much work has 
been done under the authority of the Resolution passed by 
the Constituent Assembly that it is not possible for us to 
make any change in the basis which was laid down by the 
Constitutent Assembly. But with regard to the subsequent 
electoral roll we have said that the qualifying period shall be 
the calendar year immediately preceding the first of March 
in each year and the qualifying date shall be 1st March in 
each year. 

Now with regard to the residential qualification, about 
which I know there has been a great deal of perturbance in 
the minds of Members, I should like to draw the attention 
of the House to clause 20 of the Bill which defines what is 
called “ordinarily resident”. I would not at this stage enter 
into any further discussion of the matter, but if a point is 
raised I shall be glad to give further explanation. In this very 
clause provision has been made to define or to specify what 
would be the constituency of any particular person employed 
in the armed forces. 

My attention is drawn to the fact that there is no provision 
made with regard to persons who have to change their 
residence by reason of the fact that they are serving in the 
State and the State either transfers them permanently from 
one area to another or sends them out of the country. It is 
perhaps necessary to make a provision to cover cases of this 
sort and I propose to move an amendment to add a sub-clause 
to clause 20 to deal with cases of this sort. 

Now there is one other provision with regard to the 
preparation of the electoral roll to which I would like to 
draw the attention of hon. Members. The first is this : that 
the existing roll which will now be prepared will be operative 
till the 30th of September 1952, that is to say, if any election 
takes place up to the 30th of September 1952 the electoral 
roll that would now be prepared will be regarded as operative, 
although it is probably a stale one — but there is no help to 
that. Subsequent electoral rolls however would be prepared 
every year and that will be seen from clauses 23 and 24. This 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


133 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 133 

point is important because it is generally agreed that an 
electoral roll should not be older than, say, for instance, six 
months, or three months from the date on which election takes 
place. Under the old English law there was a provision that 
electoral rolls should be prepared every six months. But they 
themselves found that this provision was so costly that they 
have now extended this period to twelve months. It is felt by 
the Government of India that in a vast electorate which we 
are likely to have under adult suffrage system, the cost of two 
revisions in one year would be enormous and consequently 
we have adopted the modest procedure of having only annual 
revisions of the electoral rolls. As I stated, these rules which 
apply to the electoral roll in Parliamentary constituencies are 
also made applicable to the preparation of electoral rolls, to 
the State Legislative Assemblies and to the State Councils 
and, therefore, I need not refer to them here at all. 

Then I come to the last part of the Bill which deals with 
the composition of the Upper Chambers in the provinces, 
hon. Members will remember that there was a considerable 
division of opinion as to whether there should be second 
chambers in the provinces or not. The Constituent Assembly 
left this matter to the choice of the representatives of the 
various provincial assemblies in the Constituent Assembly 
to decide for themselves as to whether they should have or 
should not have second chambers. Some Members decided 
that there should be upper chambers for their provinces and 
others decided to the contrary. Consequently, the Constitution 
makes provision for the upper chamber for those provinces or 
those States where their representatives agreed to have such 
upper chambers. Now the Constitution also lays down how 
the upper chamber is to be constituted — that will be found 
in article 171. There again, much of the composition of the 
upper chambers has really been laid down by the Constitution 
itself. It says that the maximum of total membership shall 
not exceed one-fourth of the total of the Lower House and 
the minimum shall not be less than forty. 

That is one priniciple that is laid down in article 171. The 
other principle that is laid down is that about the distribution 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the seats among the various constituent elements from which 
the Upper House is to be drawn. For instance, one-third are 
to be elected by municipalities, district boards and such other 
local bodies in the State as Parliament may by law specify. 
Further, one-twelfth are to be elected by persons residing in 
the State who have been at least three years graduates : then 
one-twelfth to be elected by teachers in educational institutions 
recognised by the State ; one-third by the Legislative Assembly 
itself; and the remainder to be nominated by the Governor 
amongst certain classes of persons who have been specified 
in clause (5) of article 171. Consequently very little really 
remains for Parliament to do. As a matter of fact, what 
remains for Parliament to do is to define what are the other 
local bodies which are to be selected for the purpose or being 
constituencies to send Members to this upper chamber. The 
second thing that is left to be defined is the equivalent of a 
graduate. When one is graduate of a University no question 
arises ; but there may be others who have not gone to the 
Universities and may have equivalent qualifications. What 
is that equivalent also remains to be determined. Thirdly, 
we have to define what is an educational institution which 
would qualify a teacher for being elector and also prescribe 
the registration of voters. 

The local bodies other than municipalties and district boards 
which are to participate in the elections are set down in the 
Fourth Schedule which hon. Members will find on page 10. 
This Schedule has been prepared in consultation with the 
various State Governments. Hon. Members will see that in all 
cases municipalties and district boards have been specified. 
In fact, we cannot go against that provision which is in the 
Constitution. It is only with regard to other bodies mentioned 
therein under each State that any question or argument can 
arise whether that particular body should or should not be 
included under the head “local authority” 

With regard to the question of finding the equivalent of 
a graduate and defining an educational institution which 
would qualify a teacher to vote, it is felt that the best thing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


135 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 135 

is that this matter should be left to be determined by the State 
Government in concurrence with the Election Commission. 
I do not think it would be possible for us right now or for 
the Centre to define for each particular State which person 
should be treated as a graduate although as a matter of fact 
in technical terms he is not a graduate. 

Shri A. P. Jain (Uttar Pradesh) : May I ask a question ? 
Will you recognize a person as a graduate under this law 
who is recognized by a State Public Service Commission or 
the Union Public Service Commission as a graduate ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The point is this that under the 
Constitution all electoral matters are really the concern of the 
Election Commission and if the Election Commission seeks the 
advice of the Public Service Commission or any other body in 
order that it may come to the right conclusion there will be 
nothing to prevent it from doing that. But the final authority 
will be that of the State Government in concurrence with the 
Election Commission. 

I do not think that there is any other point that requires 
to be elucidated. These are the general provisions of the Bill 
and I hope that the House will find that they are the most 
suitable under the circumstances. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri (Assam) : What about the displaced 
persons who have come to India now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : If you are raising the point I will explain 
it now. We have provided, as you will see in clause 20(6), that 
anybody who has come to India before the 25th July, 1949 
will be entitled to be registered as a voter in the constituency 
in which he resided on that date or in any other constituency 
which he may specify to be his constituency. 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : What about those who are 
coming now, in 1950 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That we cannot do, because under our 
Constitution a voter is required to be a citizen, and our 
citizenship clause defines citizenship as on the commencement. 
Unless we have a new citizenship law to regulate the position 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

those who have come after that date I am afraid they will 
have to go without the franchise. There is no help. 


* Shri M. A. Ayyangar : What I suggest, therefore, 

is that though formally a motion for reference to Select 
Committee has not been moved, we may sit around a table 
and consider whatever amendments have been suggested 
on their merits and incorporate them if necessary. We may 
adjourn and continue the proceedings tomorrow. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : May I explain 
a few things, Sir ? May I intervene in the debate to deal with 
this point about the Select Committee ? 

Mr. Speaker : Yes. I am not in touch with what happened 
during my absence from the Chair, but I have got a sufficiently 
fair idea of it from what the Hon. Deputy Speaker has said 
and from the reception of what he said just now. 

So, one could appreciate the demand for a Select Committee 
which means only an earnest and a pressing request for a 
quiet consideration of all the various provisions. That is what 
it really comes to. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no motion for a Select Committee. 


** Shri Santhanam : The Select Committee may consist 
of a fairly large number thirty or forty, of those people who 
are very keenly interested and who want to press certain 
amendments. Tomorrow we can discuss the Select Committee 
proposals. 

Mr. Speaker : Whether it is a formal, technical, Select 
Committee or an informal meeting of thirty, forty or fifty 
Members who want to have their full say in the matter, all 
that I am keen about is that, everybody should as far as 
possible be given an opportunity to express his own views 
and the difficulties he might be feeling. If that is done I think 

* P.D. Vol. 4, Part II, 19th April 1950, p. 3051. 

** Ibid, pp. 3052-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


137 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 137 

our object wil be served. I think we may adjourn just now 
and meet tomorrow at about 2-30. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I think it is desirable that I should 
state to the House exactly what a Select Committee will be 
able to do and what it will not be able to do. I think it will 
be wrong on my part to agree to any such motion leaving 
the House in darkness as to what is possible to be done by 
a Select Committee and what is not possible. I think my 
remarks might also enable the House to decide whether in 
view of the points that may remain open for discussion it is 
desirable to have a Select Committee. 

The first thing I am quite certain about is that the Select 
Committee will not be able to alter the provisions regarding 
qualifying period and qualifying date. I am quite certain in 
my mind that however desirable it may be, it would not be 
possible to do so, for the simple reason that we had taken 
a decision in the Constituent Assembly, as every Member of 
this House will remember, that the elections will take place 
at a certain time, and under that Resolution directions were 
issued to various States to prepare their electoral rolls. Most 
Members of the House must have noticed a statement which 
was recently published in the Statesman or the Hindustan 
Times stating the progress which the various States have made 
in the matter of the preparation of the electoral rolls. Now, 
those electoral rolls prepared by the various States were made 
on the basis of the qualifying period and the qualifying date. 

Obviously, unless the House comes to the conclusion that 
the labours which have been devoted by the various States 
to the preparation of the electoral roll ought to be thrown 
overboard ( Shri Sondhi : Who says that?) and that we should 
in this Bill fix a qualifying date and a qualifying period which 
would be much nearer the preparation of the electoral roll 
than the existing ones have been, it seems to me absolutley 
clear that it would not be possible for the Select Committee or 
for me to accept a new qualifying date and a new qualifying 
period. 

Shri Sondhi : Can we not have supplementary lists ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


138 


138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : This question was put to me in the 
morning. I was asked as to what would happen to those who 
come of age, that is to say, who become twenty one, after the 
present qualifying date. 

Shri Sondhi : What about those who have been left out ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am conscious of all that I have been 
saying. Please let me go on. 

I had the matter examined by the Election Commissioner 
and my Ministry. The question is as to how much labour would 
be involved in the preparation of the supplementary electoral 
roll which would contain the names of persons who have come 
of age after the qualifying date that we have fixed. I am told 
that the number would be quite enormous. It would involve 
new work. We would have to have new machinery in addition 
to the one that would be necessary to revise the rolls that 
have already been prepared. This additional burden would 
certainly have the effect of postponing the target dates for 
certain stages that we have fixed. Therefore, unless this House 
is prepared to accept the proposition that there need be no 
cancellation on the date mentioned by the Prime Minister, it 
would not be possible to undertake this piece of work. I want 
to make that point quite clear. Unless the Select Committee 
is prepared to take the responsibility of recommending to 
Government that the work that has already been done be 
thrown overboard and be deemed to be of no value and that 
additional work be taken up notwithstanding the cost and the 
impossibility of providing additional material, my submission 
to the House is that the Select Committee cannot alter these 
provisions. 

What are the other provisions in this Bill? The other 
provisions are only two. They are urgent matters and I have 
not seen any hon. Member making any kind of reference to 
them. One clause which is important and about which I myself 
feel that the Bill might do something more is with regard 
to delimitation of constituencies. Except one hon. Member, 
nobody had realized 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


139 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 139 

Some Hon. Members : We have not spoken as yet. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Notwithstanding the fact that so much 
heat and so much vehemence have been introduced in this 
debate 

Shri Sondhi : You will have more of it. 

Shri Kamath : You are adding to it. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. Let him go on. 

Dr. Ambedkar : In the Constitution, there is a provision 
that delimitation shall be undertaken by Parliament. That 
is there. In this Bill, what we have proposed is that this 
power which belongs to Parliament may be delegated to the 
President, and the President may, by order, prescribe what 
the constituencies are. It may be contended — and very rightly 
too — that this matter ought not to be left to the President 
but that this Parliament should engage itself in looking into 
every constituency that may be framed for the purpose of both 
the elections to the Parliament and to the State Legislatures. 
I do not deny the right, but the question is whether Parliament 
can and will be able to find the enormous time that will be 
necessary for scrutinising every constituency both for the 
Parliament and for the State Legislatures. 

Dr. Deshmukh : That is not the only course. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Please let me go on. 

Therefore, in this particular clause 13, the provision is 
made that although the President may, by order, prescribe 
and delimit constituencies he shall be bound to place the 
order of delimitation before the House. I may frankly state 
that even I am not satisfied with this provision, because 
I want Parliament to have a look into it. But nobody has 
suggested this. ( Interruption ). This is one point which the Select 
Committee may look into, I agree. But why go to the Select 
Committee for this kind of thing ? I have a solution. I have 
two alternatives. One is that clause 12 may be so amended 
that we can add that the order of delimitation made by the 
President should be placed before Parliament and if Parliament 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


140 


140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

does not make any alteration in it, then within a prescribed 
period it should become final. That is one alternative. The 
other alternative which I am prepared to propose is that when 
delimitation is undertaken, whoever delimits, there shall be 
associated with him a Committee composed of Members of 
this House or of the local State Legislature who are concerned 
with that particular constituency, so that they may be in a 
position to give their advice and their judgment to the officer 
who is engaged in delimitation. ( Shri Tyagi : That is a good 
idea.) If the House is agreeable to that, there is no need to 
refer this Bill to a Select Committee at all. 

Then, Sir, the other point that remains in the Bill is this. 
I do not think that I am accusing anybody in saying what I 
do, namely, that a large part of the heat and vehemence and 
the general plausible argument that have been engendered 
have been intended merely to cover a very small point, 
namely, that most hon. Members are interested in having 
the number of seats in the State Legislatures increased, but 
they have not had the courage to say so, except one or two. 
If hon. Members are only interested in this little point that 
the number for the U.P. should be increased by 15 or that 
the one for Mysore should be increased by 1 or that the one 
for Delhi should be increased by 2, I want to ask whether it 
is not a matter which we can deal with in this House ? Why 
bother with a Select Committee ? 

Shri Bhatt : You cannot deal with all the details. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are no details. I am myself 
moving certain amendment changing the figures in the total 
representation of the various States. If my hon. friends think 
that I am very miser and meagre and that I am not meeting 
their demands, well, they can move their amendments right 
here and the House may decide whether the figure that 
I suggest is the right figure or whether the figure that 
they suggest is the right figure. Why send it to the Select 
Committee ? Where is any other thing in this Bill, I want to 
know, which the Select Committee can deal with? This is a 
routine Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


141 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 141 

My hon. Friend Mr. Hossain Imam said that there were 
certain matters which were not included in this Bill. I think 
that he forgot what I had stated when I made my observation 
on the introduction of this Bill. I had stated then that this 
Bill deals with only one aspect of the election. The conduct of 
election as such is quite a different matter and will be dealt 
with by another Bill. Consequently, all those matters which 
appear to be absent here are not going to remain absent, 
because the elections cannot be completed and carried on 
unless the complementary part of the legislation is also put 
through. Therefore, my submission is that although there 
is no motion — and you said that a motion can very well be 
manufactured if one is wanted ; — quite true that it can be — 
but is there any necessity ? That is the point which I want 
the House to consider. These are the three points and I have 
the amendments ready with me. 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE BllA^concld. 

* Mr. Speaker : The House was proceeding yesterday with 
the consideration of the following motion : 

“That the Bill to provide for the allocation of seats in, and 
the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections 
to, the House of the People and the Legislatures of States, the 
qualifications of voters at such elections, the preparation of 
electoral rolls, and matters connected therewith, be taken into 
consideration.” 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Now that the Law 

Minister is here I hope he will place before you the facts as 
transpired this morning and then we may proceed to consider 
the Bill clause by clause. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I am sorry, Sir, 
that I was late. At your suggestion there was a meeting held 
this morning under the chairmanship of the Deputy Speaker of 
such Members of the House as were interested in this Bill and 
I am glad to say that we have unanimously accepted certain 
amendments to this Bill which I propose to move with your 
permission. I hope that there will be no further controversy 
or debate on the subject. 


* P.D. Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3057-58. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : I have not been accommodated. 
I agree with the amendments, but my points have not been 
accommodated and my amendment has not been accepted. 
Therefore, it was not ‘unanimous’. 

Mr. Speaker : Whatever the reasons, the conclusion seems 
to be unanimous. I shall put the conisderation motion to the 
House and then we can take the Bill clause by clause. I must 
congratulate the Members on the very happy end that has 
been brought about. The question is : 

“That the Bill to provide for the allocation of seats in, and 
the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections 
to, the House of the People and the Legislatures of States, the 
qualifications of voters at such elections, the preparation of 
electoral rolls, and matters connected therewith, be taken into 
consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : We may now proceed with the Bill clause 
by clause. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is an amendment to clause 13 and 
I would therefore like that clause to be held over because the 
amendment is being typed. 

Mr. Speaker : All right, I take it generally that the 
previous amendments tabled by hon. Members are all scrapped. 


* Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab) : Unfortunately we have not 
seen the wording of the amendments in respect of what we 
decided in the morning. There was only a general talk. And 
with regard to some of the clauses, for instance with regard 
to clause 6, there is still a great deal of controversy and there 
is no unanimity. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no controversy. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not at all want to exclude any 
amendment tabled. I was trying to clarify the position so that 
if there are no amendments I shall take those clauses together. 

Dr. Tek Chand : What are the new amendments ? Let us 
see them. Nobody has seen them. Without seeing them how 
can we pass them? 


*P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, p. 3058. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


143 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 143 

Dr. Ambedkar : I will read them. 

Mr, Speaker : Has the hon. Member, Dr. Tek Chand, 
any amendments to move? 

Dr. Tek Chand : We have sent an amendment to clause 6. 

Clauses 2 to 5 

Mr. Speaker : Is any hon. Member desirous of moving 
any amendment to any of the clauses 2 to 5 ? 

Some hon. Members : None. 

Clauses 2 to 5 were added to the Bill. 


*Shri Buragohain (Assam) : May I submit before the 
Hon. Minister replies 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not want any suggestions. 

Mr. Speaker : The better course will be to know the 
reactions of the Law Minister. 

Shri Buragohain : Sir, the case of the Tribals of Assam 
stands on a different footing. I have to 

Mr. Speaker : The better course will be to hear the 
Hon. Minister first. Do the hon. Members want me to place 
this amendment at this stage, or shall I place it later ? All 
right, I shall place it later. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I regret very much that I cannot 
accept either of the amendments moved by Mr. Jain or by 
Mr. J. R. Kapoor. But, I do want to remove any kind of 
suspicion that there might be in the mind of Mr. Jain or Mr. 
Kapoor or of any other Member of Parliament. It seems to 
me that they are under a misapprehension that by clause 
6 Parliament is going to be completely deprived of the right 
to determine what should be the nature of the constituency : 
whether it should be single-member constituency or plural 
member constituency; what should be the method of voting, 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, p. 3062. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

whether it should be distributive voting or one man one vote 
or cumulative voting or any other system. I have not the 
slightest intention to deprive Parliament of its right to have 
its determination upon that subject. In fact, as I said in my 
opening speech yesterday and according to the statement made 
yesterday by the Prime Minister, this Bill is not a complete 
Bill itself. This Bill is to be followed by another Bill which 
may be either called Conduct of Elections Bill or the Electoral 
Bill. In that Bill, matters relating to the constituencies, 
qualifications and disqualifications of candidates and matters 
relating to the voting system will be dealt with and it will be 
undoubtedly within the competence of Parliament to come to 
a decision when that Bill is placed before the House, as to 
what sort of system of constituency and voting they approve 
of. Therefore, there is no desire at all to oust the jurisdiction 
of Parliament at all. On the other hand, as my hon. friends 
will remember, I myself am anxious that at every stage 
in the delimitation of constituencies, Parliament should be 
associated. As they know, I am making a provision in clause 
13 that not only will the order of delimitation be placed 
before Parliament as an information, but also I am going to 
move an amendment that Parliament should have the right 
to make suggestions and modifications as it likes provided 
it wishes to do so within a stated priod of ten days or so. 
In addition to that, there is also going to be an amendment 
empowering the Speaker to appoint Committees of this House 
to be associated with the work of delimiting constituencies, 
the members to be drawn from that particular area. Having 
regard to the statement which I have made, I think it is clear 
that I have not the slightest desire to oust the jurisdiction 
of Parliament. I am providing for placing the Order of 
delimitation on the Table of the House with the right of the 
House to make any changes they may like and in addition 
there is a further provision that the Speaker will have the 
right to appoint Committees to be associated with the work 
of delimitation. I do not think that any Member have any 
doubt that we have the fullest desire to have Parliament’s 
decision on this matter. The only thing is that this Bill 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


145 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 145 

happens to come first when, as a matter of fact, that Bill 
might have come first. The point is that clause 6 of this Bill 
which provides for delimitation will certainly not come into 
operation until that other Bill has been passed. It is obviously 
so, because, we are now, as you know, amending section 21 
providing for a supplementary electoral roll which itself will 
take a pretty long time and give us sufficient opportunity to 
place that Bill before Parliament. 

Shri Sondhi : Why not delete the clause when it is not 
to come into operation. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It should not be deleted. 


*Shri Kesava Rao (Madras) : I have a little doubt 
regarding sub-clause (6) of clause 6. I am afraid the seats 
reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes will be 
determined by the President after consultation with the 
Election Commission. I am doubtful that the total number 
reserved is not stated anywhere. Even in the Parliament and 
in the Constituent Assembly it was many times stated that 
the number should be fixed. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is there in the Constitution according to 
the population. All that is necessary is to know the population. 
As regards delimitation I have my own doubts 

Mr. Speaker : Let not the hon. Member go into 
administrative details. All that the House can do is to decide 
the principles, leaving it to the authorities concerned to work 
them out in practice. But, I myself was feeling one doubt about 
Mr. A. P. Jain’s amendment and what was said by Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava. I am not conversant with the discussions 
in the Constituent Assembly nor with the discussions at 
the informal meeting this morning. As I understand it, all 
that the Members are anxious about is that, before any 
constituencies are fixed or delimitation is effected, this House 
must have an opportunity of examining it and expressing its 
views on that; because, it is not possible to have all these 


* P. D, Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3064-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

constituencies mentioned as an appendix or a schedule to an 
Act that the House might pass. As has been rightly pointed 
by Mr. Krishnamachari, all that the law is expected to do is 
to make a “provision” for such and such a thing. That does 
not necessarily mean that all the details must be settled 
here, in the House. The House may prescribe the legal 
machinery by which a certain thing can be done. My difficulty 
is that, I am not able fully to understand the point of view 
of those who object. The object of the House seems to be to 
have an opportunity to express its views. After all, any Bill 
that comes before the House even in the manner in which 
the hon. Member has suggested would be prepared by the 
executive and will come in a ready and cut and dried form. 
I see that Dr. Ambedkar proposes to move an amendment 
to clause 13, and hon. Members will note that according to 
that amendment, whatever is done by the President is subject 
to such modifications as the Parliament may make. It is, 
therefore, clear that whatever orders are passed are coming 
again before the House for its scrutiny and the Parliament 
will have a statutory right of suggesting modifications. It 
will not be a matter for which Governement may or may not 
find time, according to their sweet will. If any modification is 
suggested by any Member, that modification must come before 
the House and Government must find time for it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If you will permit me, Sit, I am going a 
step further. The Parliament cannot merely do this postmortem, 
so to say, at the fag end but what I am saying is that I shall 
bring in a Bill in which all these matters will be dealt with 
by law and Parliament will have an opportunity to express 
its opinion upon it. It is a much greater opportunity that I 
am proposing. Not having considered this matter properly 
and thorougly I am not in a position to commit myself one 
way or the other. But whatever the system of the electorate, 
whatever the basis of voting, whatever the qualifications or 
disqualifications of the candidates, all those matters will be 
dealt with by a Bill which Government will bring forward 
here long before the operation of clauses 5 and 6 will come 
about 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


147 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 147 

Mr. Speaker : Apart from that I was also pointing out 
that the House having got the right 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is in addition to what the House 
will do. I am doing something further than that. I am now 
introducing an amendment to clause 13 to enable you to 
appoint committees to work with the Election Commissioner 
in the matter of the determination of the constituencies. 
The further provision that I am making is this: that the 
constituencies as will be set out in the order will be as 
recommended by that Committee and not by the Election 
Commission. I am cutting out by an amendment the Election 
Commission. I am giving the Committee the direct authority 
to do it. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh) : Will the Committee be 
appointed or elected ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : In such manner as the Speaker may 
determine. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It may be that the 
Committee and the Election Commission may decide in regard 
to each State differently and may not arrive at a common 
basis. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As I said just now, I will bring in a 
Bill to determine these matters and when the Bill is passed, 
whatever law or whatever provision is made will be applied 
uniformly throughout India or differently in different States 
as Parliament chooses. 


*Dr. Ambedkar : I stand by the assurance that I have 
given that there will be a Bill. It will deal with both the 
aspects : (1) the nature of the constituencies — whether they 
are to be single-member or plural-member; and (2) what 
should be the system of voting. As I said, we shall also deal 
with the candidate, his qualifications and disqualifications. 
I have no desire in any way to take away the power of 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3068-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


148 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Parliament and if I may say so with all respect, I disagree with 
my hon. friend Mr. Santhanam who said that this was a matter 
entirely to be relegated to the Election Commission. The Election 
Commission is there merely to control and supervise the elections, 
but the delimitation of constituencies is a matter for Parliament. 

Mr. Speaker : Does Mr. Jain want me to put his amendment 
to the House ? 

Shri A. P. Jain : I just want ot say a few words. 

Mr. Speaker : I think we have had enough discussion. It 
will be a wrong procedure if I allow a person to speak over and 
over again on the same amendment. If he wishes me to put his 
amendment before the House, I shall do so. 

Shri A. P. Jain : No, Sir, I do not want it to be put to the 
vote of the House. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : In view of the assurance given by the Law 
Minister, I do not wish mine also to be placed before the House. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I have an amendment to clause 6. I 
beg to move : 

“In sub-clasue (2), omit ‘after consulting the Election Commission’.” 

So that the House will understand its significance, I shall 
read Clause 13. I have proposed an amendment to clause 13, 
which reads thus : 

For existing clause, substitute : 

“13, Procedure for making orders under sections 6, 9 and 11 . — 

(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, there 
shall be set up by the Speaker — 

(a) in respect of each Part A State and Part B State other 
than Jammu and Kashmir an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not less than three, and not more than 
seven Members of Parliament representing that State; 
and 

(. b ) in respect of each Part C State other than Bilaspur, Coorg 
and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, an Advisory 
Committee consisting of the Member or Members of 
Parliament representing that State. 

(2) The Election Commissions shall, in consultation with the 
Advisory Committee so set up in respect of each State, formulate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


149 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 149 

proposals as to the delimitation of constituencies in that 
State under sections 6, 9 and 11 or such of these sections 
as may be applicable and submit proposals to the President 
for making the orders under the said sections. 

(3) Every order made under section 6, section 9, section 11 
or section 12 shall be laid before Parliament as soon as 
may be after it is made, and shall be subject to such 
modifications as Parliament may make within twenty 
days from the date on which the order is so laid.” 

Now, the responsibility of finally determining the 
constituencies is cast upon these Committees and consequently 
it is the recommendation of the Committees that will become 
operative. That being so, the old provision which required 
consultation with the Election Commission is unnecessary. 
That is why I am omitting those clauses. 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“In sub-clause (2), omit ‘after consulting the Election 

Commission’,” 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) : On a point 
of clarification, Sir, the doubts raised by my hon. friend Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava that different Committees which the 
Hon. the Speaker may appoint consisting of three to seven 
Members may make different recomendations in regard to 
different States and therefore there may not be uniformity 
have not been answered. How is that contingency provided for? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The reply is very simple. The work of the 
Committees both in respect of Parliamentary constituencies 
and State Legislature constituencies will be governed by the 
law which, as I said, Parliament would be making hereafter. 
So, they would not be acting independently. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh) : Sir, when the Hon. 
the Law Minister moved to delete the words “Election 
Commission”, I felt very happy. But unfortunately they are 
coming in again by way of amendment to clause 13. I am in 
a very co-operative mood today and am prepared to take the 
most sympathetic view of the whole situation, but I would 
urge that the Election Commission should be absolutely kept 
apart from the work of the delimitation of constituencies. This 
is a body which has come into existence as a result of the 
Constitution and its functions have been determined by article 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


150 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

324 of the Constitution. So, there should be some 
amendment to say that the President shall bring into being 
such bodies as may be necessary for the delimitation of 
constituencies. The main idea is that the Election Commission 
should be the last body which should have anything directly 
to do with the delimitation of constituencies. 

Shri Kamath : In view of the fact that the work envisaged 
in this Bill has to be undertaken almost immediately, am I to 
understand that the purport of this amendment is to see that 
these Committees — Advisory or otherwise — will be constituted 
immediately ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. As soon as the other work is ready, 
they will be constituted. 

Mr. Speaker : Hon. Members will see that there must be 
set up some administrative machinery for making proposals, 
and that administrative machinery, so far as I see, is the 
Election Commission. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Otherwise, how can Members of the 
House delimit a constituency ? 

Mr, Speaker : I will invite the attention of the House to 
one thing more and that is this — that though the committees 
are advisory the amendment says “the Election Commission 
shall, in consultation with the advisory committees”, not after 
consultation. That is a big change. But whatever that may be, 
I put the amendment to the House. It has been sufficiently 
discussed. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Sir, I just want to bring 
to your notice that after the President has determined the 
Parliament is supposed to alter it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have said so many times that the 
President will not do anything except in accordance with the 
law which will be made. How many times am I to repeat it ? 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“In sub-clause (2) omit ‘after consulting the Election 

Commission’,” 

The motion was adopted, 

(Clause 6, as amended, was added to the Bill. — Ed.). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


151 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 151 

*Clauses 7 and 8 

Clauses 7 and 8 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 9 

(Delimitation of Assembly Constituencies.) 

Amendment made : 

“Omit ‘after consulting the Election Commission’.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Shri Tyagi : I beg to move : 

Add the proviso : 

“Provided that areas comprising a municipal board or a 

municipal corporation shall not be included in a constituency 

which comprises of rural areas. 

Sir, since the time this Bill has come before this House I 
have been striving my best to see that the rights and privileges 
which have so far been enjoyed by the rural areas may not 
be taken away from them. For the last thirty years and more 
rural areas have been having their separate constituencies in 
the Legislative Assemblies of the various States. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, may I point out, in order to curtail 
discussion, that this is a matter which could more appropriately 
be dealt with in the Bill which will be coming up before the 
House. I do not think that this is a matter which is germane 
to this particular Bill. 

Shri Tyagi : But then there would be no point in my 
bringing it up after the electoral rolls are prepared where 
rural areas are mixed up with urban areas. 

In the case of other hon. Members’ amendments the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar has given some assurance that they will be 
considered — but mine he has been opposing all along. For the 
last two days I have been trying my best to convince him of 
my view-point; but he has not given me a sympathetic hearing. 

Mr. Speaker : But this time he has shown sufficient 
sympathy by saying that the matter may be brought up at 
the time when the next Bill is taken up. 


*P.D.. Vol. 2, Part II, 20th April 1950, p. 3071. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* Clause 10 

Clause 10 was added to the Bill 

Clause 11 

(Delimitation of Council Constituencies) 

Amendment made : 

“Omit ‘after consulting the Election Commission’.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Clause, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 12 

(Power to alter or amend orders) 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I cannot understand what is 
the necessity for this clause, because over and above all these 
Advisory Committees this gives the President power to alter 
the whole thing after consulting the Election Commission. 
I want to understand the position. It runs counter to what 
we agreed to. 

Mr. Speaker : Perhaps, the idea is to vest the President 
with power to revise his own orders from time to time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Once the orders have been finalised by 
Parliament there will be no power to amend them. 

Mr. Speaker : But are the words “after consulting the 
Election Commission” necessary ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is before they have been finalised 
by Parliament. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : There will be this Advisory 
Committee. The Advisory Committee and the Election 
Commission will jointly send a prticular proposal to the 
President. The President accepts it and passes orders under 
clauses 6, 9 or 11. After that the election goes on. 

Dr. Ambedkar : After that the order is placed before 
Parliament. The recommendation is made by the Advisory 
Committee to the President. The President may make an 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, p. 3072-74. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


153 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 153 

order. After that the order is placed before Parliament. There 
is an interregnum. During the period if the President thinks 
that probably he has made an error he should have the power 
to alter or amend the order. 

Mr. Speaker : So, this power will not extend to alteration 
after the House approves. Then it is final. 

Clause was added to the Bill. 

Clause 13 

(Orders to be laid before Parliament ) 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

For existing clause, substitute : 

“13. Procedure for making orders under sections 6, 9 and 11 . — 

(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, 
there shall be set up by the Speaker — 

(a) in respect of each Part A State and Part B State other 
than Jammu and Kashmir, an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not less than three, and not more than 
seven, Members of Parliament representing that State ; 
and 

(b) in respect of each Part C State other than Bilaspur, 
Coorg and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, an 
Advisory Committee consisting of the Member or 
Members of Parliament representing that State. 

(2) The Election Commission shall, in consultation with the 
Advisory Committee so set up in respect of each State, 
formulate proposals as to the delimitation of constituencies 
in that State under sections 6, 9 and 11 or such of these 
sections as may be applicable and submit proposals to the 
President for making the Orders under the said sections. 

(3) Every Order made under section 6, section 9, section 11 or 
section 12 shall be laid before Parliament as soon as may be 
after it is made, and shall be subject to such modifications 
as Parliament may make within twenty days from the date 
on which the Order is so laid.” 

Mr. Speaker : I have just one doubt in sub-clause (3). The 
wording is “and shall be subject to such modifictions as Parliament 
may make within twenty days from the date on which the Order 
is so laid.” What is really intended, I think is that the motion 
for making amendments may be initiated within twenty days. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : It will be initiated long before so that the 
final order of Parliament shall be passed not after twenty days ; 
twenty days is the period that has been given. Government 
will no doubt initiate whatever changes are necessary. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not know. I thought that it would be 
a rather difficult matter. It is just possible that the House 
may be engaged with important business and it may not pass 
the necessary order before twenty days. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The House will then have to give 
precedence to this. 

Mr. Speaker : What I was considering about this was that 
we might say “and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make on a motion made within twenty days 
from the date on which the Order is so laid.” 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am prepared to accept it. 

An. hon. Member : Parliament may not be in session. 

Mr. Speaker : Therefore, what I was suggesting to the 
Law Minister was that twenty days will be counted from the 
time of laying it when the House is in session and the only 
condition should be that a motion is made within twenty days. 


* Shri Ramalingam Chettiar (Madras) : I have a little 
doubt as between clauses 12 and 13. Clause 12 says that the 
President may alter the order he has passed already. Clause 
13 says that it may be modified by the Parliament. In the 
interval what is going to happen ? Is the order passed by the 
President to be effective or is it to be only provisional. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is provisional because the final authoirty 
is with Parliament. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar : You do not say so. The 
section as it stands says that it is a final order subject to 
modification and not that it is a provisional order. The order 
becomes effective immediately it is passed. It may be modified 
by the Parliament afterwards. 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3074-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


155 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 155 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is a provisional order in the sense 
that if Parliament does not afterwards modify, it takes 
effect. But the ultimate power of enactment so to say is 
left to Parliament. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The point raised by 
my hon. friend Mr. Kamath was that as a matter of fact 
according to the Constitution the Election Commissioner is 
invested with certain powers and these powers do not deal 
with the delimiting of constituencies. It is the privilege of 
the Parliament alone to delimit constituencies. Now the 
Election Commissioner is put in a much better situation 
than even the Committee. He will only consult it and he 
has the right to formulate the proposals. 

Mr. Speaker : This is the same thing which was raised 
previously. When we discussed clause 6 the same point was 
raised and the position has been clarified already by the 
Hon. the Law Minister. Ultimately it is Parliament which 
is going to exercise this power. 

Dr. Ambedkar : All these are preliminary stages. Even 
the President’s order is a preliminary stage. 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member will see in the 
amendment the words “formulate proposals as to the 
delimitation of constituencies”. He is not given the power of 
determining. Another thing to remember is that, it is this 
Parliament that will deliberate and examine the proposals 
in respect of the delimitation. 


* Dr. Deshmukh : You might lay down any 

procedure by which the committees will be elected. But 
there should be some element of election in so far as these 
persons are concerned. The Chair should not be saddled 
with the responsibility of creating a body which is going 
to determine the constituencies. 


*P.D.. Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3076-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : May I know the reactions of the Hon. the 
Law Minister? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot accept any of these amendments. 


Sardar B. S. Mann : What about my amendment Sir ? 
What is the Hon’ble Minister’s reaction ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot accept it. 

Sardar B. S. Mann : Then I do not move it. 


Clause 20 

(Meaning of ‘ Ordinary resident’) 

* Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move: 

After sub-clause (3), insert : 

“(4) Any person holding any office in India declared by the 
President in consultation with the Election Commission to be 
an office to which the provisions of this sub -section apply, or 
any person who is employed under the Government of India in 
a post outside India, shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident 
during any period or on any date in the constituency in which, 
but for the holding of any such office or employment, he would 
have been ordinarily resident during that period or on that date.” 

and renumber the subsequent sub-clauses. 

In sub-clause (4), renumbered as sub-clause (5), — 

(i) after “sub-section (3)”, insert “or sub-section (4)” ; and 

(ii) after “Armed Forces” insert “or but for his holding any 
such office or being employed in any such post as is referred to 
in sub-section (4).” 

In sub-clause (5), renumbered as sub-clause (6), — 

(i) after “sub-section (3)”, insert “or sub-section (4)”; and 

(ii) for “sub-section (4)”, substitute “sub-section (5)”; 

This amendment is made for the purpose of removing some 
doubts that were expressed with regard to the application of 
the term “ordinarily resident” which occurs in clause 20, in 


* P. D„ Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3081-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


157 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 157 

its application to certain persons who may have temporarily 
left their places of ordinary residence and gone to stay 
somewhere else. It is felt necessary that such a provision 
ought to be inserted in this clause. This refers to persons 
who are sent outside India temporarily on official duty and 
in whose case it may be presumed that they have ceased to 
reside in the place of their ordinary residence. It is to prevent 
that kind of presumption being drawn in their case and to 
retain their right to be registered in the constituency in 
which they have been ordinarily residing that this provision 
is made. 

Similarly, this provision is also intended to apply to the 
case of Ministers, for instance, at the Centre who, having 
regard to the fact that they have accepted certain offices 
under the State, presumably intend to stay here during the 
term of their office which might be co-terminus with the 
term of Parliament itself, namely five years. There again, 
it might be presumed that they have ceased to reside in 
the place where they have been ordinarily residing. It is to 
cover that case also that it is felt that some such provision 
is necessary. 

It was also suggested to me that Members of Parliament 
as distinguished from office-holders, such as Ministers and 
so on, may be affected by the other presumption, namely 
that as they come here often they may also be deemed not 
to reside in the place where they are ordinarily resident. But 
on advice I feel that that presumption cannot be applied to 
them, for the reason that when a man temporarily for some 
specific reason leaves his ordinary place of residence and 
goes somewhere else, it cannot be presumed in law that he 
has abandoned his intention to revert to his original place 
of residence. Consequently, I don’t think that that provision 
is necessary in the case of Members of Parliament. In the 
other two cases it seems that it may be necessary and as a 
measure of precaution I propose to introduce this amendment. 

The motion was adopted: 

Clause, as amended, was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Clause 21 

(Meaning of ‘qualifying date ’ and ‘qualifying period’) 

* Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

For sub-clause (a), substitute : 

“(a) in the case of electoral rolls first prepared under this Act, 
shall be the first day of March 1950, and the period beginning 
on the first day of April 1947 and ending on the thirty-first day 
of December 1949, respectively; and” 

This is the result of the agreement that was reached this 
morning as regards the preparation of the electoral rolls and 
the qualifying period. 


Clause 27 

** Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I thought that I had this morning 
explained to the hon. Member who initiated this debate why 
clause 17 was not applied, but evidently he was very keen 
that his objections should be heard by the whole House. I do 
not deny him that privilege. 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu : On a point of order, Sir, is it 
in order to refer to what transpired at the meeting in the 
morning ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Certainly ; there is nothing secret about 
it. The committee was constituted by the Speaker himself. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is nothing secret about it. 
It is in order. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now, Sir, the point is this. No doubt 
we have initiated in clause 17 of the Bill a very important 
principle, namely, that one man shall be registered in 
one constituency and that he shall have one vote, but it 
must always be understood that the prinicple can be made 
applicable only in the case of constituencies of the same 
class, that is to say, territorial constituencies. Now, the 
constituencies which we propose to form under clause 27 of 
this Bill are different classes of constituencies. They are not 
constituencies of the same class. A graduate constituency is a 


*P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, pp. 3082. 
**Ibid„ pp. 3084-87. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


159 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 159 

constituency of a different class. A teachers’ constituency is a 
constituency of a different class. Similarly, the local authorities’ 
constituency is a different class of constituency. Consequently, 
there does not seem to be any very great anomaly if the name 
of a person is included in the electoral rolls of different classes 
of constituencies. Besides, I am really bound to say this : I 
cannot understand why Members of Parliament are so much 
exercised over the constitution of the Upper Chamber. 

It is an utterly effected body — not even an ornamental one. 
It has no power — not even power of revision. It is not a body 
with co-equal authority with the Lower Chamber. 
5-00 p.m. s ome provinces desired that they should have 
them. They were probably under the impression that their 
Second Chamber would be a Second Chamber more or less 
on the same pattern of the Chamber here, which would have 
the authority to hold up, if not financial legislation, at least 
ordinary legislation. But even that power is not there and I 
do not understand why Members of Parliament, even for the 
sake of merely maintaining some theoretical principle bother 
their head about a constitutional body which I say is of no 
value and no consequence. 

Clause 27 was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 28 and 29 

Dr. Ambedkar : I had assured my friend Pandit Thakur 
Das Bhargava that I would make a statement on the point in 
which he is interested and I do now say that we shall take 
every care to see that the existing electoral rolls are revised 
and any omissions or additions that are necessary will be made. 

Clauses 28 and 29 were added to the Bill. 

New Clause 30 
Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

After clause 29, add : 

“30. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred . — No civil court shall 
have jurisdiction — 

(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any 
person is or is not entitled to be registered in a electoral 
roll for a constituency; or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) to question the legality of any action taken by or under 
the authority of an Electoral Registration Officer, or of 
any decision given by any authority appointed under the 
Act for the revision of any such roll.” 

This is a usual clause and was omitted inadvertently. 

The motion was adopted. 

New clause 30 was added to the Bill. 

Schedules 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

(i) In the First schedule, — 

(a) for the entries under the heading “Part C States” 
substitute : 


“1. 

Ajmer 

2 

2. 

Bhopal 

2 

3. 

Bilaspur 

1 

4. 

Coorg 

1 

5. 

Delhi 

4 

6. 

Himachal Pradesh 

3 

7. 

Kutch 

2 

8. 

Manipur 

2 

9. 

Tripura 

2 

10. 

Vindhya Pradesh 

6 

11. 

Andaman and Nicobar Islands . 

1” 


(b) against “Total”, for “488” substitute “496”. 

(ii) In the Second Schedule, in column 2, for existing entries, 
substitute : 

“108 

339 

315 

232 

375 

140 

126 

430 

238 

175 

99 

99 

60 

160 

60 

108” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


161 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


161 


(iii) In the Third Schedule, in column 2 to 7, against “Bihar”, 
“ Bombay”, “ Madras” and “ Uttar Pradesh”, for existing entries, 
substitute : 

“72 

24 

6 

6 

24 

12 ” 

(iv) For the Fourth Schedule, substitue: 

“THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[ See section 27(2) ] 

Local Authorities for purposes of elections to 
Legislative Councils 
Bihar 

1. Municipalities. 

2. District Boards. 

3. Cantonment Boards. 

4. Notified Area Committees. 

5. The Patna Administration Committee. 

Bomeay 

1. Municipalities. 

2. District Local Boards. 

3. Cantonment Boards. 

Madras 

1. Municipalities. 

2. District Boards. 

3. Cantonment Boards. 

4. Major Panchayats, that is to say, Panchayats notified by 
the State Government in the Official Gazette Panchayats which 
exercise jurisdiction over an area containing a population of not 
less than five thousand and whose income for the financial year 
immediately preceding the date of the notification was not less 
than ten thousand rupees. 

Punjab 

1. Municipalities. 

2. District Boards. 

3. Cantonment Boards. 

4. Small Town Committees. 

5. Notified Area Committees. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Uttar Pradesh 

1. Municipalities. 

2. District Boards. 

3 Cantonment Boards. 

4. Town Area Committees. 

5 Notified Area Committees. 

West Bengal 

1. Municipalities. 

2 District Boards. 

3. Cantonment Boards. 

4 Local Boards. 

Mysore 

1. Municipalities. 

2 District Boards.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendments moved. 


* Mr. Deputy Speaker: May I suggest one course ? Those 
who are satisfied with the number of seats allotted need not 
speak. We have got another Bill. Other hon. Members who 
have got any representation to make may make their points. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: I want to say a few words. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You have got four seats all right. 

Shri Gautam (Uttar Pradesh): I do not want to take much 
time of the House. I rise to oppose the amendment moved by 
Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor. I want to say that we the people 
of U.P. and the Government of U.P. are satisfied with the 
number 72 so far as the Upper House is concerned. We do 
not want any more and — 

Shri J. B. Kapoor: Does the hon. Member claim to be 
the sole representative of the U.P. both of Government and 
the people ? 

Shri Gautam : I know the mind of the Government and 
I am in a position to say that I know the mind of the people. 
I can claim that I represent the Congress organisation as a 
General Secretary and I can say that I do represent some 
people, at least, him. 


* D. Vol. 4, Part 11, 20th April 1950, pp. 3092-93. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


163 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 163 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: That is Jaspat Roy Kapoor ? 

Shri Gautam: If he is a Congress-man. 

Shri Tyagi: I am an Ex-General Secretary. 

Shri Gautam: Dr. Ambedkar has no personal axe of his 
own to grind. He is not interested in the U.P. At the request 
of some of us, he has reduced the number. He is neither in 
favour of 72 nor of 86. It is we who requested him and he has 
accepted our request. We are obliged to him for that. Therefore 
I oppose the amendment moved by Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor. 


*Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not think I can at this late 
stage enter into any elaborate arguments with regard to the 
various matters, constitutional or otherwise, which have been 
raised. I do not think we have violated the Constitution as 
my friend Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari supposes in giving the 
allotted seats mentioned in the First Schedule to Part C States. 
We are perfectly within our constitutional rights in allotting 
the seats in this schedule. With regard to the amendment of 
the Third Schedule my friend Pandit Kunzru would have seen 
that it is only in one case as a matter of fact that the total 
number is reduced and that is with regard to Uttar Pradesh. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Madras also. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I was coming to it. I am taking Uttar 
Pradesh for my observation. There I am confronted with the 
fact that the State Government is very chary of increasing the 
size of the Upper Chamber and sitting as we are at Delhi, I 
do not like to sit in judgment over the decision of the State 
Government as to what is the suitable number for their 
Upper Chamber. They have thought that 72 is the proper and 
sufficient number for their Upper Chamber and it is on that 
basis that I have reduced 86 to 72. With regard to the changes 
made in the total number of Bihar, Bombay and Madras, I 
might say that the proposition enunciated by Mr. Tyagi today 
in the informal meeting that the total number should be 
divisible by 12 did appeal to me and it is for that reason that 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part II, 20th April 1950, p. 3095-96. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I have fixed 72 in the case of Bihar, Bombay and Madras. It 
will be noticed that my amendment as a matter of fact while 
it decreases the total number for Madras by only 3, increase 
the quota for Bihar and Bombay. There could therefore be 
no complaint on that account. I was sorry to see that I could 
not apply the same principle to Punjab because it has only 
got a minimum. 

With regard to Bengal, it was felt that if the principle 
was applied viz., divisible by 12, the number would go down 
from 51 to 48 and it was felt that Bengal was a big enough 
State to have at least 51 and I have therefore not touched 
the figure of these two States. In other cases my friend 
Mr. Tyagi will see that I have really yielded to his principle. 

With regard to the question of extending the Fourth 
Schedule to Village Panchayats or the Headmen of the 
Panchayats, I am sorry to say that I am not able to accept 
that suggestion for the simple reason that it is felt, I am 
sure, in large sections of this House that to include Village 
Panchayats as bodies who would have the right to send their 
representatives would merely be the duplication of the same 
electorate because in view of the fact that we are going to have 
adult suffrage, practically every member of the Village Panchayat 
would also have a vote in the election of the Lower House of 
that State and therefore it would be a needless duplication 
and I am not therefore prepared to accept his suggestion. 

Shri Barman (West Bengal): What about the Members 
of the Municipalties and District Boards ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: They might be, I cannot help it but to 
extend it to Panchayats would be a complete duplication of 
the votes — a sort of double voting — and I am not prepared 
to accept it. I do not know whether there is any other point. 
For Madras it is only a reduction of 3. 

With regard to Delhi, whatever my friend may say, I have 
no doubt about it that the House has been more than generous. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: He himself is more than 
happy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


165 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 165 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is not only being correct but very 
considerate. 

Syed Nausherali: What about the Union Boards ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I quite see that the opinion of the Bengal 
Government and the view expressed by my two hon. friends 
today seem to differ. Some say the local board entry which 
has been suggested by the West Bengal Government should 
be retained and my two friends stated that it ought to be 
deleted and the entry of Union Boards should be there. 

Syed Nausherali: Both may be there. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall have to make some enquiries on 
this point. If I find that it is necessary to make a change it 
would not be difficult to bring in a small amendment to make 
the change. For the moment I must act upon advice which I 
think is reliable. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: What are the special reasons for 
increasing the number of seats of Bombay State from 66 to 72, 
when the next divisible number by 12 is 60. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is not a very wide difference. There is 
nothing sacred about one number or the other. All I want is 
divisibility by 12. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Bombay is a composite Province 
consisting of Gujaratis, Marathis and Karnataks. 

{The First, Second, Third and Fourth Schedules as amended 
were added to the Bill.) 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

{The motion moved hy Dr. Ambedkar was adopted). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd 


MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


166 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


167 


SECTION III 

1st August 1950 
TO 

22nd December 1950 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


z:\ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


SECTION III 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 


17. Dentists (Amendment) Bill 

18. Resolution Re-making of Laws by Parliament 

in State List 

19. Administration of Evacuee Property 

(Amendment) Bill 

20. Qualifications for Elections to Parliament and 

Legislature of States 

21. Coach-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) Bill 

22. Indian Tariff (Fourth Amendment) Bill 

23. Societies Registration (Amendment) Bill 

24. Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill 

25. Demand No. 13 — Ministry of Law 


Pages 

171-181 

182-183 

184-187 

188-192 

193-194 

195-200 

201-204 

205-248 

249-250 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


171 


(17) 

* DENTISTS (AMENDMENT) BILL. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): If the Hon. 
the Health Minister is ill, I am asked to take charge of 
this Bill and I, therefore, beg to move: 

“That the Bill to amend the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken 

into consideration.” 

The Bill is a very short one and it does not involve any 
controversial matters. The Dentists Act of 1948 came into 
force on the 29th of March 1948. It was made applicable 
to Part A, Part C and Part D States. Under Section 49 of 
that Act, it is provided that no person shall be entitled 
to practise dentistry after the 28th March 1950 unless 
his name appears on a register of dentists which the Act 
required should be prepared in accordance with the rules 
contained therein. It was hoped that that register would 
be ready by the 28th of March 1950. Consequently, the 
operative portions of this Act were so framed to come 
into operation on the 28th March 1950. Unfortunately, 
this expectation has not been fulfilled. It was roported 
from various States that the register would not be ready 
by the 28th March 1950 and consequently it became 
necessary to extend the period by one year in order to 
enable the States concerned to prepare the register. As 
the Parliament was not then sitting, Government issued 
an Ordinance giving effect to the necessary provision 
extending the period up to the 28th March 1951. This 
Bill is intended to convert the Ordinance into law. The 
main provision therefore, is to extend the period for the 
purpose of preparing the register. 

Advantage has been taken of the present occasion to amend 
the law in order to remove some of the difficulties which 
have been felt in giving effect to the original Act. Firstly, the 


* P. D. Vol. 4, Part II, 11th August 1950, pp. 841-43 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

original Act contained two provisions. One provision was not 
to allow any person who was not placed on the register to be 
employed in Government hospitals. Obviously, it was expected 
that this provision would become operative after the registers 
were ready. As the registers are not ready, persons who have 
not been placed on the register by reason — not of their not 
being qualified, but of the register not being ready — would 
become disabled from holding any office in Government 
hospitals. Therefore, it has become necessary to extend the 
period and permit such persons to hold office notwithstanding 
the fact that they are not placed on the register. 

Secondly, there is a Dental School in Bengal which used to 
grant Diplomas in Dentistry. At the time when the Act was 
passed there was a controversy as to whether the diplomas 
granted by this Dental School of Bengal should be recognised 
to enable persons holding the diploma to be placed on the 
register. It was felt that the diplomas granted by the Dental 
School of Bengal were not sufficiently qualified to place them 
on the register. There has been considerable agitation by 
persons holding the diploma granted by the Dental School of 
Bengal that this disability should be removed. A compromise 
has been suggested by the Government of West Bengal 
according to which persons who have received their diploma 
before the year 1940, subject to certain conditions, may be 
treated as persons qualified to be entered upon the register. 
That compromise is also given a place in this Bill. 

The Bill, therefore, contains three provisions : (1) to extend 
the period (2) to permit names of persons holding diplomas 
of the Dental School of Bengal in certain circumstances to be 
place on the Register and (3) to continue the employment of 
unregistered dentists in the Government hospitals till 1951 
until the register is prepared. 

This is all that the Bill contains and I hope that the House 
will not find any difficulty in giving its assent to the Bill 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to amend the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken 

into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


173 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 173 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): First of all I take strong 
exception to the issue of an ordinance when the House was 
sitting in the month of March. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The ordinance was issued some time in 
May. 


Clause 2 

* Dr. Ambedkar: I wish that the points that were raised by 
my hon. Friend Mr. Sidhva and Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava 
had been reserved by them to the time when their amendments 
were taken up. It becomes somewhat embarrassing to reply 
on matters which would, I have no doubt, be raised again 
when their amendments are moved. But, I cannot help now 
having to reply to the points raised by them; I shall do so 
rather briefly, because I know I shall have to say .... 

Mr. Speaker: I do not propose to allow any arguments 
on the amendments. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not going to move 
my amendment if my hon. friend does not accept it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Mr Sidhva has raised one or two points. 
The last point raised was why an Ordinance was made when 
the House was in session. The answer to that is two fold. 
The first is this. The first request that was made to the 
Government of India in the matter of extension of time for 
the preparation of the register came from the Government of 
Madras, and that too on or above the 15th of March 1950. 
That means that only 13 days had been left for the period for 
the preparation of the roll to expire. That is one reason. The 
second reason is that after the receipt of this letter from the 
Government of Madras, informing the Government of India 
that it was not possible for them to complete the Register, 
naturally it was necessary for the Government of India to 
find out from other States as to whether they were in a 
position to prepare their list by the date fixed, or whether 
they too wanted some extension. Naturally, there ensued 


* P. D. Vol. 4, Part II, 11th August 1950, pp. 856-62. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

correspondence between the Government of India and the 
various other States. 

They undoubtedly took time, and must make time, with the 
result that by the time the Government of India had received 
the replies and was able to assess whether an amendment in 
terms proposed by the Government of Madras was necessary, 
Parliament had been prorogued. That is the reason why the 
measure could not be brought up before the recess. 

The second point raised by my friend Mr. Sidhva was 
this that he did not see any reason why we should make a 
statutory provision for the recognition of certain qualifications 
granted by the Bengal Dental School. According to him that 
was a matter which by the Act is left to the Dental Council. 
Now, I think my friend Mr. Sidhva has missed one important 
point and it is this. The power to grant recognition vested 
in the Council relates to qualifications or degrees granted by 
schools in existence; but we are dealing with a matter in which 
degrees and diplomas have been granted by a body which has 
become defunct. Consequently, it is for the Government of the 
day to decide whether the degrees granted by a school giving 
tuition in dentistry were worthwhile recognition or not. It is 
not a matter which should be left to the Bengal Council under 
Section 10, sub-clause (2). The word is “grants” which means 
“is granting at present” and not diploma which have been 
granted before. That being so it cannot be a matter which could 
be left easily to be dealt with by the Dental Council under 
its power, and if we have to amend the Schedule, then that 
must be done by the law itself. That is why a legal provision 
is made in the Bill to cover that particular matter. 

Now, what I have said with regard to the Bengal Dental 
School also applies to what my friend Pandit Thakurdas 
Bhargava said on the very same question. 

I come now to the points raised by Mr. Kamath. The first 
point raised by him was more or less of a technical character. 
If I understood him correctly, he said that the law required 
that the Register should be ready on the 28th March, 1950, 
and that if a person was not on the Register, then under the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


175 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 175 

provisions of Sections 46 and 49, he incurs certain penalties, 
while the Ordinance which exempted the person concerned 
from these penalties came into operation on the 29th May 
1950. There is, therefore, a two months’ period in which a 
person not being on the Register and continuing to practise 
or holding office was liable to certain penalties. What is the 
position with regard to these persons ? I think my friend 
Mr. Kamath, if he had read clearly the terms of the amendment 
proposed in the bill itself, he would have seen that the 
provisions say that: 

“In sub-section (3) of section 46 and sub-section (1) of section 49 
of the said Act, for the words ‘two years’ the words ‘three years’ 
shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have been 
substituted.” 

Therefore, it is clear that that point has been adequately 
covered by the present clause. 

Shri Kamath : My point was that if during these two 
months, from March 29th to May 29, if a dentist had not been 
registered, then under the Act, and because the Ordinance 
had not come into force, how could mere executive instruction 
from the Government prevent a prosecution, or some other 
penalty being imposed on that dentist ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I quite agree that that could not have 
prevented prosecution. But fortunately no such case happened 
and it cannot happen now because the period is carried back 
to the original Act. 

Shri Kamath : But then, Sir, 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. The point is very clear. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My friend Mr. Kamath in dealing with 
the reasons as to why this Bill was brought in, has made, if 
I may say so, certain very serious allegations. The contention 
on behalf of the Government is that this Bill has become 
necessary by reason of the fact that the States which were 
required to carry out the provisions of preparing the list have 
not been able to do so. My friend suggests that there is another 
reason, and that reason is that there are certain British 
dentists working in this country who do not propose to become 
domiciled and get themselves registered, and that this Bill 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is intended to benefit them. Now, I first of all do not understand 
how an extension of one year is going to benefit a British 
dentist working here who has no intention of becoming a 
domicile of this country. I cannot understand it. But if my 
friend persists in making that suggestion, which I think is a 
very setious allegation against an hon. Member of Government, 
then it should be his duty when that Member returns, to 
specifically put the question and ask her reply, whether this 
was the real motive in bringing forward this particular Bill. I 
am unable to give any categorical answer; but I may say that 
I find it extremely difficult to believe that an hon. Member of 
Government should venture to bring forth such a Bill for no 
other purpose except the paltry purpose of benefiting one or 
two European dentists now in this country. It seems to me a 
most extravagant allegation. 

Shri Kamath : I did not say it is the only purpose, it may 
be one of the purposes. 

Mr. Speaker: But still, the suggestion is very uncharitable. 

Dr. Ambedkar : On that point also I would like to point 
out to him, in answer to a question that he asked, namely, 
to state the present position, that all the States, who were 
written to in order to find out how much time they would 
find it necessary to prepare the Register, have replied that 
they would require not less than one year. And the Bombay 
Government which may be given the credit of having a more 
efficient administrative machinery than others, insisted that 
they should have two years. I think that in itself would suffice 
to dismiss the suggestion made by my friend Mr. Kamath that 
this Bill was intended to protect some Britishers in this country. 

I do not think that there is any point which has been raised 
to which I have not adverted in the course of my reply. The 
Bill, as it is, is a very simple, non-controversial one. It has 
arisen not because of the fault of the Central Government 
but because of the other burdens carried on by the Provincial 
Governments, they could not find the time to bring a particular 
provision of the Act into operation. I do not know whether we 
can do nothing else except to help the Provincial Governments 
to give effect to this piece of legislation and bring the Dentists 
Act into operation as early as possible. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


177 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 177 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill to amend the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken 

into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 (Amendment of section 46 and section 49, Act 
XVI of 1948) 

Shri Kamath : I beg to move : 

“In clause 3, in the proposed amendment to sub-section (3) of 

section 46 and sub-section (1) of section 49 of the Dentists Act, 

1948, for ‘three years’, substitute ‘two years and six months’.” 

The present clause has been inserted so as to enable State 
Governments to complete their registers of dentists under 
sections 46 and 49 of the Act. This is a retroactive piece of 
legislation in as much as the words used in the clause are 
“and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.” I for 
one cannot see why for registering a few hundred dentists 
such a long period is necessary. I do not know how many 
dentists there are in all the States 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is a matter of opinion. My friend 
Mr. Kamath with his abundant energy and administrative 
experience no doubt thinks that six months would be more than 
enough for completing the register. That as I just now told the 
House, even a Government as efficient as the Government of 
Bombay asked for two years. I personally myself think that in 
view of the fact that the obligation of preparing the register 
rests upon the Provincial Governments, it is desirable that 
this House should follow what the Provincial Governments 
think is feasible in this matter. As a matter of fact we have 
curtailed the period to one year instead of the two years 
asked for by the Bombay Government. We have stuck to one 
year, which was the original proposal by the Government of 
Madras. I do not think it is possible for us with safety to 
curtail the period provided in this Bill. 

Shri Kamath : I take it that the Hon. Minister has no 
figures with him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : No figures. 

Mr. Speaker : If the registers are incomplete, how can 
he give the correct figures ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no register and who knows who 
is a dentist and who not. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“In clause 3, in the proposed amendment to sub-section (3) of 
section 46 and sub-section (1) of section 49 of the Dentists Act, 
1948, for ‘three years’, substitute ‘two years and six months’.” 

The motion was negatived. 


*Dr. Ambedkar : As my friend Mr. Sidhva, has said this 
amendment affects an important principle which underlies the 
provisions of this clause, namely that the registers should be 
operative on the same date throughout India. This is not a 
mere matter of academic interest.... 

Shri Sidhva : Is it laid down in the Act ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is why we have said three or 
two years throughout. Otherwise we would have prescribed 
different dates for different States. It is necessary and desirable 
to preserve the principle of uniformity. The House will see that 
it affects eligibility for holding posts. It cannot be said that 
a person is eligible for holding a post in a particular State 
and not eligible in another State, simply because the State 
has not been in a position to prepare the register. Therefore, 
I think as it is desirable to preserve the principle I cannot 
accept the amendment of Mr. Sidhva After all the difference 
is only a matter of six months. 

Shri Sidhva : I beg leave to withdraw my amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 3 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 


* P. D. Vol. 4, Part II, 11th August 1950, pp. 863-64. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


179 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 179 

Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 

* Clause 4 (Amendment of the Schedule, Act XVI of 1948) 

(Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair ) 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : My amendment reads as 
follows : 

In clause 4, for the proposed item (2A) of Part I of the 
Schedule to the Dentists Act, 1948, substitute : 

“(2A) Any other institution imparting education or giving 
practical training in dentistry which the Central Government may 
in consulation with the Central Council of Dentists, recognise 
for this purpose and on such conditions as the Government may 
deem fit to prescribe therefor.” 

I wish to confess that Dr. Ambedkar is a hard nut to crack 

I don’t want to make any aspersions on the institution. I 

don’t know what its standard is, I have no personal knowledge 
of it, and therefore I don’t want to damage the reputation of 
the institution. But as an enquiry is going on, I think that 
instead of committing the whole Parliament to recognising 
that institution, it is better that the Government had reserved 
the right in their own hands to decide.... 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are not affecting the institution in 
any way. We are dealing with the degrees granted by that 
institution in 1940 — eight years ago. 

Shri Tyagi : Dr. Ambedkar expects me to believe that 
the degrees of an institution may be recognised without the 
institution itself being recognised. The degrees of the Calcutta 
University granted in such-and-such a year may be recognised 
for purposes of the I.C.S. or I.A.S., but that does not mean 
that the Calcutta University is recognised! What an argument ! 
Here I am giving him more powers. What I am suggesting is 
that he may even recognise that institution. I want Government 
to have powers to recognise any institution 

Dr. Ambedkar : That powers exist in section 10(2). 


* P. D., Vol. 5, Part II, 11th August 1950, pp. 864-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-15\voll5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>26-11-2013 


180 


180 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I know the reaction of 
the Hon. Minister to this amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This clause is a clause which really 
gives effect to the suggestion made by the West Bengal 
Government. Personally I myself feel, however much 
sympathy I may have with my friend Mr. Bhargava, it 
involves the question of the assessment of the qualification 
of the dentist as distinguished from a person who makes a 
denture. I thought he was rather eloquent on the man who 
makes a denture. A person may make a denture without 
being a dentist. We are talking of a dentist, which is a 
very different profession. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : But he has got a 
degree of L.D.Sc. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The point is this. When the Act was 
passed, this institution was not deemed to be worthy of 
recognition. Subsequently there has been a considerable 
degree of agitation and the West Bengal Government 
decided to examine the position as to whether any of the 
persons qualified by tuition in this college were worthy of 
recognition. They came to the conclusion that before 1940 
the standard observed by this institution was something 
which could be considered for the purpose of recognition. 
But there again they said that although there was a 
standard maintained it was also known that many boys 
merely attended and filled in certain terms without learning 
anything. Therefore, the two additional qualifications were 
introduced that he should not only have obtained his 
diploma before 1940 but in the course of being a student in 
that college he should have filled in certain terms. It is to 
make the qualification a real one, worth of recognition, that 
these limitation were put in. I am personally prepared to 
place myself in the hands of the West Bengal Government 
who know the matter better, rather than substitute my 
own judgment, however great sympathy I may feel with 
the dentist themselves. 


* P. D., Vol. 5, Part II, 11th August 1950, pp. 867-68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


181 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 181 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Does the hon. Member want me 
to put his amendment to the House ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Yes, Sir, it may be put 
to the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 


*Dr. Ambedkar : I explained the position to you some 
time ago. The provision in Section 10(2) says ‘where the 
institution grants a qualification’ — but we are dealing with 
qualifications that have already been granted. The word there 
is ‘grant’, but here it is different. Therefore, this has to be 
dealt with by statute. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall now put the amendment 
to vote. 

The question is : 

“In clause 4, in the proposed item (2A) of Part I of the 

Schedule to the Dentists Act, 1948 omit all the words occurring 

after ‘March, 1940’.” 

The motion of Pandit Bhargava was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 4 stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 5 to 7 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*P.D., Vol. 5, Part II, 11th August 1950, p. 871. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 18 ) 

RESOLUTION RE : MAKING OF LAWS BY 
PARLIAMENT WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN 
MATTERS IN STATE LIST FOR ONE YEAR. 

*Mr. Speaker : The point, as I have understood it, 
seems to be— apart from the words ‘particularly’ — that the 
President has got the power to make adaptations only 
with reference to the provisions of the Government of 
India Act, 1935. Perhaps the Law Minister may like to 
say something on this. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The wording 
of the article is that “the President may, for the purpose of 
removing any difficulties, particularly etc.” “Particularly” 
does not mean that he has not got the general power. 

Mr. Speaker : As I have understood the point of order 
of the hon. Member, apart from the words “any difficulties” 
and “Particularly”, he seems to construct article 392 as 
empowering the President to make adaptations only for 
purposes of transition from the provisions of the Government 
of India Act to the provisions of the Constitution. That is 
substantially the point. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That cannot be because it is a 
wrong construction. The point raised by my hon. friend 
is that under article 392 the only power which the 
President possesses is confined to an adaptation of any 
section of the Government of India Act, 1935, so as to 
bring it in line with the provisions of the Constitution. 
My submission is that that is not correct, because the 
opening words in article 392 are quite general, namely. 
“The President may, for the purpose of removing any 
difficulties” and then “Particularly etc.” comes in. 


*P.D., Vol. 5, Part II, 12th August 1950, pp. 935-38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


183 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 183 

Suppose you were to drop the words “particularly in relation 
to the transition from the provision of the Government of India 
Act, 1935, to the provisions of this Constitution” the wording 
would, “The President may, for the purpose of removing any 
difficulties, by order direct.... etc”. 

Shri Meeran (Madras) : May I say something with regard 
to this point ? If you remove the words “particularly in relation 
to the transition from the provisions of the Government of 
India Act, 1935” it would read “The President may, for the 
purpose of removing any difficulties to the provisions of this 
Constitution, by order direct. ...etc.” “Particularly” is something 
like an instance and it is a smaller provision. The wider 
provision is the giving of powers to remove any difficulties 
to the provisions of this Constitution. 

Mr. Speaker : I would just seek clarification on one or two 
points which may dispose of the matter, without entering into 
the niceties of interpretation. Am I right in my interpretation 
that the Constituent Assembly of India (Legislative) was 
functioning as a result of the Adaptation of the Government 
of India Act ? 

Dr. Amedkar : Yes, the Independence Act was an 
amendment of the Government of India Act, 1935. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


184 


184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 19 ) 

* ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : At the outset 
I would like to say that the point which has been raised, 
namely, whether the Parliament can by law repeal a State 
law in the concurrent field, seems to me to have been raised 
at a very late stage. This Parliament has passed, I am sure, 
very many laws which contain a provision whereby Parliament 
has specifically repealed a State law in the concurrent field. 
My friend Mr. Jain referred to one of them, which is the 
last one which Parliament has passed, namely, the Merged 
States Act (Act LIX of 1949). If my friends interested in this 
subject were to refer to the provisions of this particular law, 
they will find that there are very many laws which fall into 
the concurrent field and which were enacted by the states 
which have been repealed by this particular Act. Therefore, so 
far as practice is concerned, I do not think there is anything 
novel in the proposal introduced in this Bill. Of course, it 
might be contended that this practice is not in keeping with 
the provisions of the Constitution and that it has no warrant 
in the Constitution. I think that this practice is perfectly in 
consonance with the Constitution. 

My hon. Friend Mr. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar has very 
rightly referred to the proviso to sub-clause (2). The importance 
of this proviso, in my judgment, lies in this, namely, that 
it is possible and open to Parliament to make a law not 
only amending, varying, or adding to any law made by the 
State in the concurrent field, but it has also the power to 
repeal that law. I think this is quite clear from the proviso. 
So far as this proviso is concerned, the power is specific 
that Parliament can repeal a law made by the State in the 
concurrent field. But my hon. Friend Mr. Ananthasayanam 


*P.D., Vol. 5, Part II, 21st November 1950, pp. 339-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


185 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 185 

Ayyangar’s point was that this proviso is related only to sub- 
clause (2). Now I think that if he will apply his mind to the 
necessities mentioned in sub-clause (2) he will find why the 
Constitution thought it enough to attach the proviso to sub 
clause (2) and did not feel it necessary to extend it to sub- 
clause (1). As my friends will see, sub-clause (2) of article 254 
refers to a law, which — if my friends will allow me-I would 
call as a ‘protected law’, that is to say, a law which is not 
only passed by the State Legislature but a law which was 
reserved for the consent of the President and to which the 
President has given his consent. That is the law which is 
referred to in sub-clause (2). Now, it was felt that it might be 
argued that in the case of a law which, though passed by a 
State Legislature relating to the concurrent field, nonetheless 
was reserved for the consent of the President and to which 
the President had given his consent — obviously on the advice 
of the Central Government which represents the wishes 
of Parliament — the Central Government may be deemed, I 
am putting the argument, to be ‘estopped’ from doing any 
further thing by way of injuring that particular Act either 
through amendment or otherwise. It was to eliminate this 
kind of argument that once the law having been protected 
the Central Government — to use the term in the Evidence 
Act — was estopped, so to say, from taking any further action 
that the proviso was introduced. It was felt not necessary to 
extend this proviso to sub-clause (1) because the expression 
‘to make a law’ is itself so wide that it could cover even the 
repealing of a law. 

What does ‘making of a law’ mean? The making of a law, 
in ordinary terms, means: to enact an enactment where none 

_ exists; or, where an enactment exists; to add to 

12 NOON. ^ ^ ^ 

it, to vary it, to amend it, or to repeal it. All 

that is covered in the broad parase ‘making a law’ Therefore, 

as making a law included making a law repealing an earlier 

Act or creating another Act, it was felt that such a prevision 

as contained in the proviso was unnecessary in respect of 

sub-clause (1) of article 254. Therefore, article 254 carries 

the general implication involved, in the phrase ‘making of 

the law’ which includes repeal of the law. As sub-clause (2) 

of article 254 was felt not to carry that implication, — because 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


186 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of its protected character, — the proviso was added to 
it. Therefore, my submission is that there is nothing 
unconstitutional in Parliament making a law repealing a 
law made by the State Legislature in the concurrent field. 

With regard to the other point whether you can make 
a general omnibus law repealing certain laws, it seems 
to me that there again there is nothing improper in that. 
What are we doing by having this omnibus law? What 
we could have done was to have hundreds of Acts, each 
one dealing with a specific law, saying that we repeal 
this Act; another Act saying that we repeal that; and a 
third Act saying that we repeal a third one. Instead of 
doing this kind of thing, we did it in a collective manner. 

Shri M.A. Ayyangar : You could have added a schedule 
here. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That also might have been done. 
There are various ways of doing it. I do not deny that 
some ways, in some cases, may be better than others, 
but so far as the general principle involved in the Bill 
is concerned, I do not think that there is anything 
unconstitutional or contrary to the practice of the 
Draftsman. My friends will see that I have, for instance, 
introduced a Bill called the ‘Part B states Bill’ in the 
present session, to which there is a schedule attached. 
Every one of the Acts is mentioned there. The reason is, 
as I will explain when the matter comes up, that certain 
laws could not be applied without certain adaptation. 
Therefore, a schedule had to be introduced that this law 
shall become operative subject to this adaptation. There 
are certain others such as Cooch-Behar where no such 
schedule exists, because adaptation requirements are not 
necessary. That might come up today or tomorrow. We, 
therefore, have a general clause and I do not think that 
there is anything unconstitutional or improper in the 
sub-section which is contained in my hon. Friend’s Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


187 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 187 

*Mr. Speaker : As I said I was not present in the House 

yestarday, but I have read the proceedings Does the Hon. 

the Law Minister wish to say anything further? I do not think 
it is necessary now. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have already made the position clear, 

Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : Then I will put the amendment to the House. 
The question is : 

“In clause 2 in sub-section (2) of the proposed section 58 of 
the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, for the words 
“corresponding: to this Act”, substitute the words, brackets and 
figures “which corresponds to this Act and which is not repealed 
by subsection (1)”. 

The motion was adopted. 


*P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 21st November 1950, pp. 342.43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


188 


188 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 20 ) 

^QUALIFICATIONS FOR ELECTIONS TO 
PARLIAMENT AND 
LEGISLATURE OF STATES 

Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): Before you proceed 
further with the amendments would you not like, Sir, to 
call upon Dr. Ambedkar and enquire whether he would like 
to make any statement on the suggestion which Prof. K.T. 
Shah has made? 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think it was necessary for me to 
call upon him. If he had tried to catch my eye, certainly I 
would have called him. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I do not want 
my friend Prof. K.T. Shah to feel that I have not sufficient 
respect for him by not speaking on his motion and if you will, 
Sir, permit me at this stage I would like to say a few words. 

Mr. Speaker, I must confess that when I got the text of the 
Resolution moved by Prof. Shah I was considerably puzzled, 
because I felt that in a Resolution of this sort there should 
not merely be words indicating to Government that there 
exists in the Constitution a certain article which permitted 
them to legislate on it but should have also included in it 
specific suggestions as to what the Government should do 
in a legislation of this sort. As I said, I was considerably 
puzzled and therefore it was very difficult for me to come 
to any definite conclusion as to the attitude I should adopt 
with regard to this Resolution. I now see that the object of 
Prof. Shah in framing the Resolution in the terms in which 
he has framed it was really deliberate. He wanted the House 
to give him some idea as to what should be incorporated in 
a legislation under sub-clause (c) of the relevant article in 
the Constitution. Well, I have no objection to a procedure of 


*P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 23rd November 1950, pp. 537-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


189 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 189 

this sort but I should have thought that if Prof. Shah was 
so keen as he appeared to be for a legislation of this sort, 
he should not have had an empty mind without any kind of 
a suggestion of his own. However, I suppose those who have 
supported his resolution have correctly interpreted his mind 
and taking into account the various speeches that have been 
made in support of Prof. Shah’s Resolution, it appears that 
many Members who are keen about adding some qualification 
other than those mentioned in the Constitution have in their 
mind some kind of an educational qualification. But none of 
them has been very precise : none of them has given me any 
idea as to what is the standard of education that they would 
like to prescribe in order that the candidate may become 
lawfully entitled to stand. 

Now it seems to me that education can hardly be the 
sole qualification for membership of this House. If I may use 
the words of Buddha, he said that man requires two things. 
One is Gyan and the other is Sheel. Gyan without Sheel is 
very dangerous: it must be accompained by Sheel, by which 
we mean character, moral courage, ability to be independent 
of any kind of temptation, truthful to one’s ideals. I did not 
find any reference to the second qualification in the speeches 
I have heard from Members who have supported Prof. Shah, 
But even though I myself am very keen to see that no Member 
enters this August Assembly, who does not possess Sheel in 
adequate degree, I find it extremely difficult to find any means 
or methods to ensure that valuable qualification. 

Coming to the question of education, I do not wish to be 
understood that I regard ignorance to be a virtue: let that 
be quite clear. I regard education to be a very necessary 
qualification for possessing that degree of competence which 
is very necessary for the performance of one’s duty. In this 
House there are people who, although they are not educated, 
are very competent to voice the grievances of the class whom 
they represent. I am sure about it. A more educated person 
would not be able to discharge that function, because he 
does not know and does not have that experience. But my 
friends who come from these classes and with whom I have 
naturally very great sympathy do not realise that what is more 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

necessary for bringing relief to the class of people whom 
they represent is not merely making speeches in this House 
but to suggest remedies for the removal of their grievances. 
To make speeches and to ventilate grievances is a very easy 
matter but to formulate remedies is a very difficult matter. 
It requires education and therefore education even from 
the standpoint of the backward classes, scheduled classes 
or tribal areas is a very necessary ingredient. How can we 
ensure it ? When I examined the suggestion that there ought 
to be some kind of educational qualification, I found that a 
proposition which is very good in theory or in its academic 
aspect cannot be given effect to without producing other evils. 
That is my difficulty. Where will you fix the standard? Will 
you say that only B.As. should be qualified to be Members 
of this House ? Supposing you do that, what is the result ? 
Members probably might know that there are many people 
who are educationally and intellectually far more competent 
than any graduate, although they have never been inside any 
college or university. There are any number of them. Are you 
going to shut out these people who have privately educated 
themselves, who are equally competent or better than B.As. 
or M.As., merely because they have not been able to obtain 
a certificate from a university ? I think that would be a very 
unfortunate result. 

Take another consequence. In this country education is 
in the lowest grade. Not only that is so but for some reason 
which all of us know, education has not been universally 
spread among all the communities in this country. There 
are communities which are highly educated and there are 
communities where education is very, very low. Supposing 
you make B.A. or even matriculation as a standard, are you 
not making the membership of this House to be a monopoly 
of the few ? I fear that will be the consequence, Supposing 
you lower down your standard, say, for instance, to the fourth 
standard, to the study of the three Rs. or to literacy in order 
that no community may be excluded from the opportunity of 
sending its members to this House. Is That qualification any 
good? It is of no value at all. 

Therefore, my submission is this, that it is a good thing. 
I am not going to outcry the feeling that there ought to be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


191 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 191 

some education in Members who come to represent their 
various constituencies in this House. But I just cannot see 
how you can give legal effect to it. Therefore, my suggestion 
is that this is a matter which had better be left to the 
people themselves, or to the political parties who will run 
the Government. I have no doubt about it that if the political 
parties, for their own particular purposes, do not attend to this 
matter, people themselves in course of time will attend to it. 
People are not going to allow persons who cannot discharge 
their functions properly in this House to be continued and 
returned for ever. They want results, They want their welfare 
to be attended to, and I am sure about it that they will realise 
that the only instrumentality through which they can achieve 
this purpose is to send good men to this House. Therefore, I 
think the proper course is to leave the matter to the people. 

Now, Sir, my friend Prof. K. T. Shah in a somewhat 
desperate mood said that he knew the fate of this Resolution. 
That was because not that his Resolution was bad on merits 
but because he was the Mover of it. I like to assure my friend 
Prof. K. T. Shah that I have no such personal prejudice against 
him, and certainly I am not the man to reject a Resolution 
moved by a person because I happened to disagree with 
him or happened to dislike him. There are many people in 
this House who have personal prejudices — probably personal 
antagonisms — between themselves, but I am sure about it that 
no Member is going to allow these prejudices to stand in the 
way of doing the work which this House is always engaged 
in doing. Therefore, I hope that he will not carry such views 
in his heart when he finds me opposing his Resolution. 

Sir, I do not think that any purpose would be served by 
forming a Committee because, as I find, nothing workable 
has emerged from the debate. If I had found that any 
concrete suggestion had emerged from the debate which it 
was possible to give effect to in terms of law, I certainly 
would not have hesitated to accept that recommendation. 
My friend Prof. K T. Shah said that he did not despair at 
this stage of finding a formula which he might give legal 
effect to. I was waiting to hear from him further some 
concrete suggestion and the method by which he would give 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it a legal form, but he abruptly ended by saying that he did 
not despair of it, without throwing any light as to how the 
matter could be dealt with. Of course, this matter I know 
will be agitated on the Motion which I hope I shall be able to 
make during this session for the consideration of the People’s 
Representation Bill, because it is there that this matter is being 
specifically put before the House, namely, the qualifications 
and disqualifications. And no matter what the desire of my 
friend Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh may be, nothing can take 
away the liberty of the House to reagitate this question in the 
form of an amendment when the Bill comes. For the moment, 
I am afraid I cannot accept this Resolution. 

Mr. Speaker : I was just placing before the House the 
amendments. 

Shri Klamath (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, as the question is 
coming up before the House later in the Session, I beg leave 
to withdraw my amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker : Then there is an amendment moved by 
Shri S. N. Mishra. The question is: 

That before the word “qualifications” the words “minimum 
educational” be inserted. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Speaker: Then as regards the Resolution. The question 
is : 

“This House is do opinion that qualifications be laid down 

for membership of Parliament and Legislatures of States in the 

Union of India and that necessary steps be taken forthwith to 

give effect to them before the next election.” 

The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


193 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


193 


( 21 ) 

‘COOCH-BEHAR (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move for 
leave to introduce a Bill to assimilate certain laws in force in 
Cooch-Behar to the laws in force in the rest of West Bengal. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to assimilate 
certain laws in force in Cooch-Behar to the laws in force in the 
rest of West-Bengal.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I introduce the Bill. 


** The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to assimilate certain laws in force in Cooch- 
Behar to the laws in force in the rest of West Bengal, be taken 
into consideration.” 

This is a very simple and short Bill, but having regard to 
the experience which we have had in the last whole week, I 
hope that I will be fortunate enough to get this Bill through 
before the House rises this evening. 

Sir, the object of the Bill is to extend certain central laws 
relating to matters lying in List I and II to Cooch-Behar. The 
Bill proposes to give the Central Government power to appoint 
a day by notification in the Gazette as to when these laws 
will come into operation. There is only one exception to these 
laws, and that is with regard to the Muslim shariat law. With 
regard to that, power is given to the West Bengal Government 
to appoint the day so that on the day appointed by it the 
Muslim shariat law will come into operation. This Bill would 
have been unnecessary had Cooch-Behar become a merged 
State before 1949, because the House will remember that by 

*P. D., Vol. 5, Part II, 4th August 1950, pp. 291-292. 

**P. D., Vol. 6, Part II, 1st December 1950, p. 1147. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Act LIX of 1949 which was passed, I believe, in the December 
Session of the Assembly, the whole lot of Central laws were 
made applicable to all merged States, but unfortunately at 
that time Cooch-Behar had not become a merged State. The 
order merging Cooch-Behar in West Bengal was issued by 
the President some time in January 1950, with the result 
that this Supplementary Bill, so to say, became necessary. 
I do not think that there is any clause which requires any 
further explanation. 

The motion of Dr. Ambedkar was adopted. 

Clauses 1 to 4, were added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Mr. Chairman : The question is : 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


195 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


195 


( 22 ) 

* INDIAN TARIFF (FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I am very much 
surprised that a point like this should have been raised by 
my hon. friend, Mr. Tyagi, who always in the House has said 
that he represents the most ignorant class in this country. It 
is a point which I think baffled many lawyers and I should 
have thought it was worthwhile for my friend to have left 
this matter in other hands. Now that the point is raised and 
you have expressed your own opinion that a point like this is 
important and must be decided, I propose to offer a few remarks 
on the subject. While I was listening to Mr. Tyagi’s remarks, I 
thought he was confusing two different issues which must be 
kept quite separate. One is whether Parliament can delegate 
its authority. The second is whether Parliament should. The 
two are, in my judgment, quite different questions. We must 
apply very different considerations in coming to a conclusion 
on either one of them. 

I will take the first question whether Parliament can 
delegate. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : That is the only 
question. 

Shri Tyagi : No. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. On that subject, so far as I am 
concerned, I have not the least doubt that Parliament 
can delegate its authority to other agencies subject to 
one condition and that condition is this that Parliament 
does not by such delegation completely divest itself of the 
authority to resume back the powers which it has delegated. 
A delegation for a purpose, a delegation for a time, and a 
delegation which permits Parliament to resume back their 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part II, 4th December 1950, pp. 1171-76. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

authority is really no delegation at all, and therefore, 
Parliament is quite competent to enact a measure which 
conforms to this particular test. I think I cannot do better than 
read from a judgment of the High Court of Australia which 
deals with this matter. I will, of course, later on specifically 
cite an authority on this very point raised by the Bill. The 
case is Meakes Vs. Dignan, 46 Commonwealth Law Reports, 
page 117. This is what Mr. Justice Evat says : 

“ The Statesmen and Lawyers concerned in the framing of the 
Australian Constitution, when they treated of ‘legislative power’ 
in relation to the self-governing colonies, had in view an authority 
which over a limited area or subject-matter, resembled that of 
the British Parliament. Such authority always extended beyond 
the issue by Parliament itself of binding commands. Parliament 
could also authorise the issue of such commands by any person 
or authority which it chose to select or create. “Legislative 
power” connoted the power to deposit or delegate legislative 
power because this was implied in the idea of parliamentary 
sovereignty itself. It was of course always understood that the 
power of the delegate or depository could be withdrawn by the 
Parliament that had created it, and in this sense Parliament 
had to preserve ‘ its own capacity intact’.” 

I can read many passages : but I do not wish to trouble 
the House. In deciding the question whether Parliament can 
lawfully delegate, the test to be applied is this : whether 
Parliament has kept its capacity intact to withdraw the 
authority which it has deposed in somebody else. Therefore, 
the question that has to be considered so far as the first 
question is concerned, whether Parliament can delegate, is 
to examine the causes in order to find out whether the test 
that has been laid down is fulfilled or not, whether there is 
anything in this Bill which prevents Parliament from resuming 
that authority. That is one point. 

Now, on this very question I am glad to say that there 
is a ruling of the Privy Council reported in House of Lords, 
Appeal Cases, Volume 10, on page 282. The case is exactly 
on a par with the present one. There, the legislature of one 
of the Commonwealth countries passed a law permitting the 
Governor, which of course means the Executive, to levy a 
customs duty on certain articles which were not mentioned in 
the schedule attached to the Customs Act, some new article 
or similar article. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


197 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 197 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : Was it a fixed rate or a varying 
one? That is the only point. 

Mr. Speaker : Let him proceed. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No, that is not the point. Here, by this 
law, we are empowering the Executive to levy a customs 
duty on an article, — I am not concerned with the amount or 
its variability: an article which is not found in the schedule. 
That is the position. Here, the case is exactly on all fours. The 
Supreme Court of that country held that the law was ultra 
vires because it was a delegation. The Privy Council reversed 
the decision, and I shall read only one small passage from 
the judgment of the Privy Council on page 291. This is what 
the Privy Council said : 

“ It is argued that the tax in question has been imposed by 
the Governor and not by the legislature, who alone had the power 
to impose it. But the duties levied under the Order in Council 
are really levied by the authority of the Act under which the 
Order is issued. The Legislature has not parted with its perfect 
control over the Governor and has power at any moment to 
withdraw or alternate the power which they have entrusted to 
him. Under these circumstances, their Lordships are of opinion 
that the judgment of the Supreme Court was wrong in declaring 
section 133 of the Customs Regulation Act of 1879 to be beyond 
the power of the legislature.” 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma : May I submit, Sir 

Mr. Speaker : Let us hear him patiently. If there is 
anything to say, I shall hear the hon. Member. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee (West Bengal): Which country is that? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Some colony in Australia. If my hon. 
friend is anxious, I shall give it. 

Shri Tyagi : It may be too small a country. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The law is never small or big. Law is 
law. It is New South Wales. 

Thus, so far as the first question is concerned, whether 
Parliament can delegate, my submission is this. So far as 
this condition is observed, namely that Parliament has kept 
within its hands the power to withdraw any such delegation, 
there can be no legal objection. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Before I proceed to the other point, I should like to say 
that I cannot see how this House is competent to decide 
that question. Surely, this is not a point of order’ A point of 
order relates to rules of business. We are dealing here with 
the competency of the House. Supposing, Sir, this House or 
you decide that this was ultra vires, and notwithstanding 
that, Parliament proceeded to make the law, and the matter 
went to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court decided 
that the Act was intra vires, what a difficult situation would 
arise? Or supposing we proceed to deal with the point on the 
belief that it was intra vires, the matter went to the Supreme 
Court and the Supreme Court decided that it was ultra vires, 
we would be creating a great difficulty for ourselves. What I 
would like to say is this. All this attempt to raise questions 
regarding competency is really an attempt to convert this 
Parliament into a court. It is not a court. It is much better 
that justiciable matters had better be left to the Supreme 
Court to decide and we proceed on our understanding that 
whatever we are doing is within the competence of Parliament. 
Therefore, my submission is that this is not a point of order 
at all and should not be treated as such. 

Then, I come to the other question whether Parliament 
should delegate. That is a matter which is entirely within 
the competence of this House : entirely, I 
3-00 P.M. m ake no reservation whatsoever. If in certain 
circumstances Parliament thinks that it should not delegate, 
well, Parliament should insist that it will not delegate, and 
that the matter shall be dealt with by Parliament itself. 
In certain circumstances, such as an emergency and so on, 
when Parliament cannot meet, and when executive action 
must be speedy, Parliament will, no doubt, consider it, and 
it may be that circumstances are such that a certain amount 
of delegation may be permitted. Therefore, this Bill has to 
be considered from this point of view. The second question is 
whether we should or we should not delegate. My friend Mr. 
Tyagi referred to Campion and referred to the opinion given 
by Mr. Campion on the question of taxation. I have no doubt 
in my mind that that is the correct attitude which Parliament 
should adopt in the matter of taxation. The power to tax is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


199 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 199 

a very important power. It is really the one and only power 
which Parliament possesses to control the Government and 
to order the Government; and if Parliament were to give its 
permanent power of raising revenue to the Executive, the 
Executive would not care two hoots for Parliament. It is, 
therefore, very desirable that Parliament should keep within 
its own hands this power. The British Parliament keeps the 
Executive under control, if I have understood it correctly, in 
two ways. They have certain important Acts which are only 
Annual Acts, for which they never have permanent Acts. For 
instance the Army Act in England is an Annual Act. Every 
year, the Executive has to come before Parliament in order 
to get that Act renewed; and if they do not renew it, the 
whole army will have to be disbanded, because there will be 
no law governing it. The other measure by which the British 
Parliament controls the Executive is by reserving for annual 
levy, certain taxes, for instance, income-tax which forms a 
very large part of the resources of the British Government, 
and also of our Government. Therefore, there can be no 
quarrel on the question that Parliament should be very 
chary, very tardy, of handing over powers of taxation to the 
executive. It is perfectly open to Mr. Tyagi to say that in 
this matter delegation should not be made, or some other 
view may be taken. But so far as competency is concerned, I 
am afraid, he is out of court. After this matter was brought 
to our notice, I also came to the conclusion that, probably, 
from the point of view of financial propriety, from the point 
of view of maintaining the supremacy of Parliament, it was 
desirable to make some amendments in the clauses as they 
stood in the original Bill. I do not know whether I have got 
the thing with me now; but I am satisfied that there are two 
new provisions in the new amendments. One is this that the 
power to levy customs duty on articles not specified is only for 
a short period, up to the Budget Session, not indefinitely, for 
all times. Whenever the Budget Session comes, any customs 
duty levied by the Executive under this Bill will automatically 
lapse, and the matter will then be dealt with by Parliament, 
as Parliament deals with any other financial measure. I 
should have thought that that was a great improvement in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


200 


200 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Bill as it stands, and Parliament should not have any 
quarrel about proposing a legislation of this sort. 


*Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : After all this we 

must revert to our own Constitution to decide the point. As far 
as our Constitution is concerned this House is not competent 
to delegate any such authority to the Ministers. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no bar; we have plenary powers. 

Shri Santhanam : Will the hon. Member read article 286? 

Mr. Speaker : Matters would be shortened if the hon. 
Member is allowed to proceed with his argument in his own 
way. Let us hear him first. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : At this moment we 
need not be wedded to any theory. I am not wedded to any 
theory. I only place these facts for your consideration, so that 
you may consider them before coming to a final decision 


* P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 4th December 1950, p. 1178. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


201 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


201 


( 23 ) 

SOCIETIES REGISTRATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

*Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : My Bill refers to 
amendment of the Societies Registration Act, 1860. This is a 
very simple Bill. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : May I, with your 
permission, make a statement on the Bill, so that my friend 
Mr. Sidhva may be in a position to determine the course that 
he should follow? 

Last time when the Bill was before the House I promised 
that I would enquire from the various States as to what 
they thought about Mr. Sidhva’s measure and that I would 
communicate to Mr. Sidhva as well as to the House the replies 
received from the various States. Now the position is this. 

So far as Part A States are concerned, they are desirous 
that the improvement suggested by Mr. Sidhva should be 
made, but they have made this reservation that they would 
like to initiate legislation themselves. The Government of 
India, on a further consideration, do not think that, in view 
of the wishes expressed by the Governments of the Part A 
States, they should themselves undertake all-India legislation. 
They do not think that this is a matter of such character as 
to require common uniform legislation throughout India. They 
are prepared to, leave the matter to the different States. So 
far as Governments are concerned, Part A States must be 
excluded from this Bill. 

In regard to Part B States, they have no such law and 
consequently the Government of India did not consult them. 
The standing rule which the Government of India observe in 
the matter of initiating legislation falling within the Concurrent 
List is of a very longstanding character, namely, that they 
shall not undertake legislation without the consent 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 12th December 1950, pp. 1560-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of those States. Therefore, what remains for us to operate 
upon is States in Part C. Therefore, if Mr. Sidhva wishes to 
proceed with this Bill he must agree to confine this particular 
measure to Part C States. That is one limitation which I am 
afraid we shall have to insist upon. 

Then, the other thing that I find is this, that Mr. Sidhva’s 
Bill will require considerable amendment — almost every 
clause of the Bill requires amendment. As I said last time, I 
am myself in favour of the legislation and I do not wish to 
obstruct it in any way. In fact, I have here before me drafted 
such amendments as I think are necessary to make in this 
Bill. I am quite prepared to pass on those amendments to 
Mr. Sidhva so that he may himself move them and take the 
credit for initiating this legislation. 

Therefore, my suggestion to Mr. Sidhva was this that he 
might move for the postponement of the consideration of the 
Bill to the next session, have these amendments from me, give 
notice of the amendments himself, and, next time when the 
Bill comes up, move them. And I promise that I shall accept 
the amendments that I myself am suggesting, if that course 
is agreeable to him. 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : It is not a very great promise. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As I said, I am committing myself to the 
acceptance of these amendments, so that the Bill may not 
have the defects which we certainly find it is full of now. It 
is for Mr. Sidhva to decide what course he would follow. I 
thought I might help him by this statement. 

Shri Sidhva : I was glad to hear the statement of my Hon. 
friend the Law Minister. What I was suggesting was that my 
Bill was a very simple Bill, namely, an addition to Section 
4 of the Societies Registration Act. As the Law Minister has 
rightly stated, the Part A States have sent their opinions 
favouring the adoption of my Bill, but they said that they 
would themselves like to initiate in making the legislation. 

I hope that Dr. Ambedkar would be good enough to 

accept my suggestion. We do not want to wait any longer to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


203 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 203 

see that the fraudulent procedure that is being practised by 
various societies is continued. Now that the Hon. Law Minister 
has accepted the provisions of the Bill, there is no difficulty. 
The question is only of time and I hope the Law Minister 
will accept my suggestion. 

I therefore beg to move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Societies Registration 

Act, 1860, be taken into consideration.” 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am sorry. I think my hon. friend 
Mr. Sidhva has misunderstood me. He is probably under the 
impression that while accepting his Bill as it stands, I am 
seeking to amend some other provisions of the original Act. 
That is not so. I am amending his amendments because I find 
it impossible to accept the Bill as drafted by him without the 
amendments that I am suggesting. Therefore, as I said, I have 
not the least objection for the Bill going through provided 
the amendments I am suggesting are made in the Bill of 
Mr. Sidhva. Here are the amendments I am prepared to hand 
over the papers to Mr. Sidhva, but of course, there has been no 
notice of these amendments and I do not know what view the 
House will take, but as I said, he can take the amendments, 
give notice of them and have the matter discussed. 

Mr. Speaker : I was just thinking as to whether — I am 
not clear yet — whether we could get a priority in respect of 
this Bill on the assumption that the consideration motion is 
moved and then have the further consideration postponed. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That may be done. 

Mr. Speaker : Perhaps he will be coming in ballot. The 
only difficulty is that he loses the priority. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If I may say so, the Bill is very small 
and I am speaking without the authority from Government, 
but I do not think it would be difficult for me to persuade 
Government to give, for instance, whole day to Mr. Sidhva 
from one of the Government days in the next Budget Session. 

Mr. Speaker : There is another alternative to it also; 
supposing instead of taking it now, we postpone the 
consideration of this Bill say, at five minutes to five, and we 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


204 


204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

may then take up the Bill and leave it as part-heard, so that 
it may take care of itself. 

An Hon. Member : Dr. Ambedkar will accommodate 
Mr. Sidhva on a Government day. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I can arrange that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


205 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


205 


( 24 ) 

** REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill to amend the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to amend the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950. ” 

The motion was adopted. 


* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to amend the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950, be taken into consideration.” 

This bill has two objectives. One is to provide for the 
representation of Part C States in the Council of States. The 
second is to enact the provisions made by the Representation 
of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1950. I propose, first 
to deal with the first objective of the Bill, namely, to provide 
for the representation of Part C States, hon. Members will 
remember that under article 80, clause (5) this matter is left 
to be dealt with and determined by Parliament by law. There 
is no provision in the Constitution itself as to how Part C 
States should be represented in the Upper Chamber. As I 
said the matter is left to the discretion of Parliament to deal 
with it by such law as Parliament may deem fit. It is because 
of this obligation which has been cast upon Parliament that 
the present Bill has been brought forth. In dealing with this 
particular matter, it is obvious that three questions have to 
be dealt with. The first is the nature of the electorate. What 

* P. D., Vol. 6, Part II, 20th November 1950, p. 267. 

** P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 12th December 1950, pp. 1678-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is to be the electorate which is to represent or elect the 
representatives of Part C States in the Upper Chamber at the 
Centre? The second is the distribution of the seats which have 
been assigned to Part C States by the Fourth Schedule of the 
Constitution. And thirdly we have to consider the method of 
representation, whether they should be elected, by election, 
by nomination or by some other method. 

Now, the first question, namely the question of the 
electorate is dealt with in clause 9 of the Bill and it is to that 
clause that I propose first to draw the attention of the House. 
In considering this question, the question of the electorate, 
the House will remember that the Constitution has laid 
down the general principle for the composition of the Upper 
Chamber. That principle will be found in article 80, clause (4). 
That clause says though it is confined to the representation 
of Part A and Part B States, that the representation to the 
Upper Chamber shall be by indirect election by Members of 
the Legislatures in Part A and Part B States, That being so, 
in devising a method for securing representation to Part C 
States in the Upper Chamber, it is necessary and obligatory 
to follow that principle namely, that the representation shall 
be by the indirect method. Now, in following this method, 
there is one difficulty that stands up at the outset. 

So far as Part A and Part B States are concerned, the 
electorate already exists, namely, the Assemblies in the 
12 Noon var ^ ous P ar t A and Part B States. With regard 
to Part C States, there are no such Assemblies 
in existence and one does not know when Parliament will 
undertake any kind of Legislation to provide a more popular 
method of administering Part C States. Consequently, we 
must proceed upon the hypothesis that no Legislative bodies 
exist in Part C States, nor are they likely to come into being 
by the time the elections take place. The question, therefore, 
is what should be the nature of the electorate. Obviously, 
the only other method that comes to one’s mind is to resort 
to the existing local bodies in all Part C States, such as 
municipal committees, town committees, village panchayats 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


207 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 207 

and so on and so forth, and to permit members of these local 
bodies to be registered as voters. It was, however, found that 
probably this method of election may not provide a sufficiently 
large constituency. We have no idea as to how many municipal 
committees, town committees and village panchayats may be 
existing in various Part C States. It may be that in some 
Part C States there may be a plethora of them, and it may 
be that in some other Part C States there may be a great 
paucity of them. Consequently, in order to create a solid 
electorate, it is felt that in addition to the membership of 
these local bodies, it would be desirable if the franchise was 
extended to persons who have undergone some University 
examination. Therefore, in addition to membership to the 
local bodies, it is proposed, in this bill that matriculates or 
persons holding other equivalent qualifications may also be 
permitted to be registered as voters, provided they have the 
necessary qualification on the qualifying date, and have put 
in the necessary period of residence during the qualifying 
period. That is the general provision contained in clause 9 
which seeks to introduce after section 25 of the original Act, 
new sections 25A, 25B, 25C and 25D. This is the nature of 
the electorate that this Bill proposes to bring into existence 
for the purpose of electing representatives to Part C States 
in the Upper Chamber. 

I will take up the other two questions which I said, 
necessarily require consideration. The second question is 
nomination versus election. This mater is dealt with in clause 4 
of the Bill. In this connection, it is felt that so far as the two 
States of Manipur and Tripura are concerned, election will 
not be possible, for the simple reason that so far as these two 
States are concerned, there are hardly any local authorities 
existing there. Therefore, the basis of the general proposal 
which is introduced by clause 9 does not exist at all so far 
as these two States are concerned. Tripura is really a tribal 
area. Manipur is a very backward area. There are hardly any 
of these local bodies and organisations. The educational status 
of these two States is also very backward. Consequently, it 
is not hoped that even if the educational qualification was 
introduced, it would be possible to obtain a sufficiently large 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


208 


208 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

electorate to permit of elections being introduced in the 
representation of these two States. Consequently it is felt 
that the only course left is to secure the representation of 
these two States by nomination by the President and it is 
proposed that their nomination should alternate at the end of 
a two year period — once a representative of Manipur would 
be nominated by the President for the first two years and in 
the second two year period a representative of Tripura would 
be nominated. In the rest of Part C States the representation 
would be by election. 

A further question, as I said, arises, namely the distribution 
of the seats. The House will remember or it can see by 
reference to Schedule IV that that Schedule in three cases has 
given one seat to two States. Those three cases are Manipur 
and Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur, which together 
have one seat and Ajmer and Coorg have together one seat. 

There are two methods for regulating the representation 
of these states which have one seat jointly between them. 
One is to treat them as one constituency and the other is 
to treat them as two different constituencies and give them 
alternate representation. The case of Manipur and Tripura 
has already been disposed of, because the question of election 
does not arise there. That is a case which is governed by 
nomination. With regard to Ajmer and Coorg it is proposed 
that they should be represented by election separately in 
rotation — once the seat should be filled by election in Ajmer 
and the second time it should be filled by representation 
from Coorg. With regard to Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur 
it is proposed that the two States should be treated as one 
constituency and they should in a joint election elect one 
representative. 

The House will no doubt say that we have given one 
treatment to Ajmer and Coorg and a different treatment to 
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. The argument is apparently 
correct. But I do not see how it is possible to treat these two 
series of States on a common footing. It will be realised that 
Ajmer and Coorg are not territorially contiguous. It will also 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


209 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 209 

be realised that their cultural outlook, their mode and manner 
of life, their economic problems are altogether different and 
distinct. It can hardly be said that a representative of Ajmer 
could very well represent the problems and difficulties of the 
people of Coorg or vice versa. But with regad to Himachal 
Pradesh and Bilaspur the two are conguous : in fact it is 
only by some accident, which I am unable for the moment to 
understand or to explain, that the States Ministry decided to 
keep the two in two distinct watertight compartments. I should 
have thought that the two could have been amalgamated into 
one. I have no doubt that that will happen : perhaps it may 
happen long before the election takes place. Therefore I do not 
see any justification why the principle of divisive constituency, 
which has been adopted in the case of Ajmer and Coorg for 
the circumstances which I have mentioned, must necessarily 
logically and as a matter of categorical imperative apply to 
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. 

Therefore, what is proposed is that Manipur and Tripura 
would have separate electorates but their representation would 
be regulated by nomination by the President for a period of 
two years in rotation. With regard to Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur they would form one constituency and in a joint 
election elect one representative. With regard to Ajmer and 
Coorg the provision is that for a period of two years Ajmer 
will enjoy the seat reserved for two and subsequently Coorg 
will enjoy the seat which is reserved for both. 

Those are the provisions, which we have made in the Bill 
with regard to the representation of Part C States. As I said 
at the outset, this Bill had a double objective. One was to 
make provision for the representation of Part C States in the 
Upper Chamber. The second objective was to give the effect 
of law to the provisions contained in the Ordinance. 

I will briefly explain to the House why it became necessary 
for Government to issue this Ordinance. As the House will 
remember, at one time Government felt that elections could 
be held in the months of April and May and they were very 
keen about it and wanted to do everything possible to give 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


210 


210 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

effect to that intention. On the examination of the 
circumstances, as I then said, it was found that in certain 
areas electoral rolls were not ready and in certain areas 
constituencies had not been delimited. If we had allowed the 
original provisions contained in the People’s Representation 
Act 1950 what would have been the position? The position 
would have been this. Under the Original Act the Election 
Commissioner is bound to publish preliminary electoral rolls — I 
am using the words “ preliminary electoral rolls ” constituency- 
wise. That was the first step in the process of election. After 
that was done two or three processes had to be undergone. 
One was the inviting of claims and objections, the second was 
to have the claims and representations dealt with by some 
authority judicial or otherwise and to have them disposed of: 
and thirdly, to enter all the corrections consequent upon the 
decision of the revising authority into the electoral rolls and 
then to publish them finally. 

Speaking for the moment and taking into consideration 
the time that would have been necessary to go through 
these processes, the position would have been this. After the 
constituencies were delimited, certainly three weeks or one 
month ought to be given to the electors to make their claims 
and objections. You could not fairly give less than that time. 
Thereafter, at least two months would be necessary for the 
revising authority, I am giving a very conservative estimate, 
two months would be necessary for the revising authority to 
dispose of claims and objections. That means three months. 
Add one more month for revising the electoral rolls in the 
light of the decision of the revising authority. That means 
four months. Assuming that the preliminary electoral rolls 
were prepared by the end of this month, which I don’t think 
is a very sanguine hope — but supposing that was so — it is 
quite obvious that following the principles embodied in the 
original People’s Representation Act, the final electoral rolls 
could not have been published even by the end of April 
or May. That meant that if we had followed literally the 
provisions contained in the original Act, the elections could 
not have taken place in the month of April and May. As 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


211 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 211 

Government were very keen in having the elections in April 
and May, Government felt that that would have been possible 
only if the process was reversed. If claims and objections 
were invited on the basis of electoral rolls prepared for units 
or for areas, and they were disposed of, and after they were 
disposed of electoral rolls on the basis of constituencies were 
made, perhaps the time that would be utilised after the 
constituency-wise electoral rolls were prepared could be used 
in the beginning so that the process of claims and objections 
and revisions could be got rid of and possibly the elections 
could have taken place in the month of April and May. It 
was from this point of view that Government felt that the 
process might be reversed, that is to say, claims and objections 
might be invited on the basis of preliminary electoral rolls 
not prepared on the basis of constituencies but on the basis 
of area. 

That is what the Ordinance did. Now, it might be asked 
that since the date of the election has been postponed, is 
it desirable to give effect to the Ordinance? The answer to 
that is simple: a large part of the work which is required to 
be done by the Election Commissioner in the matter of the 
preparation of the rolls has already been done, and if the 
Ordinance does not become law, all that work will have to 
be thrown overboard and the Election Commissioner would 
have to begin his work de novo. (An Hon. Member: Reverse 
gear). Reverse gear, as my friend says. I don’t think the 
House will desire that such a thing should happen. I am not 
merely considering the question of time but also the question 
of money which Government has spent over the work that 
has already been done. We have taken care in the Bill that 
the provisions of the Ordinance would apply only for the first 
elections so that in the subsequent elections the provisions 
of principal Act will govern the conduct of elections and the 
preparation of the electoral rolls. That is why we are seeking 
the permission of the House to give effect to this Ordinance. 

The other provisions in the Bill are purely consequential — 
changing of qualifying date and qualifying period, and so on 
and so on. I don’t think I need detain the House over them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The House will be able to see for itself what those 
amendments are. 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to amend the Representation of the People 

Act, 1950, be taken into consideration. ” 

*Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): I may in this 
connection refer to article 240 of the Constitution which 
says that “ as soon as possible....” 

Dr. Ambedkar : Where is “ as soon as possible ” ? 

Shri Sarwate : It was meant when the article was 
framed. 


** Shri Kamath : So far as the present Bill is concerned 
and so far as the Member for Manipur and Tripura in the 
Council of States is concerned, this Bill is silent on the 
point whether the President will nominate a Member who 
has got experience of these matters or has got a special 
knowledge of these matters. I would like Dr. Ambedkar to 
throw some light on this, but my impression is that the 
nominated Member will be in addition to the 12 which are 
referred to in clause (1) (a) of article 80 of the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar : He would be out of the 238. 

Shri Kamath : I am glad that Dr. Ambedkar has given 
us the correct interpretation of this article. Therefore it is 13. 
Mr. Tyagi tells me that it is a bad number; I do not know 
whether it is really bad. 


* Mr. Speaker : I was referring to all the Members, from 
Part A, Part B and Part C States, because all are interested 
in a proper democratic set-up. I mentioned particularly those 
from Part C States because it is only those that are most 
affected by this Bill. That is why I suggested that they should 

* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 13th December 1950, p. 1711. 

** Ibid., p. 1716. 

***Ibid., 14th December 1950, p. 1779-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


213 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 213 

be given a fuller chance. That was the point But all should 
meet. So, if that is acceptable I think I may put off this 
matter and go to the next item of business. Is that agreeable? 

The Minister of Law (Dr, Ambedkar) : I am prepared 
to accept that suggestion. 

Shri J.R. Kapoor : May I complete what I wanted to 
say? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. He will now have ample 
opportunity of talking, and more fully, in the informal 
conference. The Hon. the Law Minister will hear him more 
fully than what he can do now. So we might adjourn this 
matter. But when shall we take it up? It is an important 
matter. 

An hon. Member : Day after tomorrow. 

Mr. Speaker : The Hon. the Law Minister might say 
when we shall take it up. Hon. Members will see that we 
intend to finish the session by the 20th. 

An hon. Member : By the 21st. 

Mr. Speaker : Well, the 21st. But unless you have the 
break from the 20th. it wont’t be possible. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : 21st is a standby. 

Mr. Speaker : Yes. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I suggest Saturday either morning or 
evening — after the House rises or before it meets. 

Mr. Speaker : I am not talking of the time for the 
conference. They can meet at any time. I was asking as 
to when we are to take up this business again. 

Dr. Ambedkar : On Monday. 

Mr. Speaker : I have no objection. Then let us put it 
off to Monday the 18th by which time we expect something 
agreed will come up. I am really sorry for interrupting 
Mr. Kapoor’s speech, but then the House will be thankful 
to him for having agreed to stop his speech. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (NO. 2) 

BILL 

* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to 

move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide or the conduct 
of eections to the Houses of Parliament and to the House or 
Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications 
and disqualifications and disqualifications for membership 
of those Houses, the corrupt and ilegal practices and other 
offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with such elections. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“ That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for 
the conduct of elections to the Houses of Parliament and to 
the House or Houses of the Legislature of each State, the 
qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those 
Houses, the correct and illegal practices and other offences at 
or in connection with such elections and the decision of doubts 
and disputes arising out of or in connection with such election.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I introduce the Bill. 


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILI^contd. 

**Mr. Deputy Speaker : Shall I take the Employers’ 
Liability Bill or People’s Representation Bill. 

The Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru) : People’s Representation Bill is 
a part-heard Bill. We will take that now. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : Sir, you will 
remember that while the debate on the motion for the 
consideration of the Bill was going on last time the hon. the 
Speaker was pleased to make a suggestion that the debate 
might be adjourned in order to give opportunity to me and 

* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 18th December 1950, pp. 1834-35. 

** P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 21st December 1950, pp. 2209-10 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


215 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 215 

the Members interested in Part C States to meet together 
and to evolve some kind of a scheme over which there might 
be agreement between myself and the representatives of the 
Part C States. 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair \ 

I accepted the suggestion and thereafter had one or two 
meetings with Members of the Part C States as well as other 
Members of the House who felt a certain amount of interest 
in this Bill. As you will recall, Sir, when the debate was going 
on, it was found that there were three points of difference 
between myself and the Members who spoke for Part C States. 
The three points were: 

1. Indirect system of election; 

2. Nomination of Manipur and Tripura; and 

3. Representation by rotation. 

I am happy to state that it has become possible by exchange 
of views to arrive at a formula whereby it has become possible 
for me to eliminate from the Bill the provisions relating to 
the indirect system of election from the municipalities, local 
boards, village panchayats etc. It has also been possible for 
me to eliminate the provision regarding the representation 
of Manipur and Tripura through nomination. It is only with 
regard to the third point viz., representation by rotation that 
it has not been possible to find a way out and it will therefore 
be a part of the original Bill. Now in accordance with this 
agreement, I have given notice of certain amendments which 
are already in the hands of Members. It will be seen that in 
place of the indirect system of election. I now propose to ask 
the House to agree to assist in creating an electoral college 
by exercise of adult suffrage and allow these electoral colleges 
to help the representatives which have been allotted to them 
by schedule 4 of the Constitution. This system of creating an 
electoral college for the purpose of sending representatives to 
the Upper Chamber by election is also proposed to be extended 
to Manipur and Tripura. 

With regard to the other part of the Bill viz., that part 
which deals with the enactment of the Ordinance it will of 
course remain and so far as the debate that took place the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

other day on the provisions of the Bill is concerned, I did not 
find that the House was in any way opposed to that part of 
the Bill. Therefore, having regard to this position, I do not 
think there is any necessity for Mr. Kamath to insist upon 
his amendment to send the Bill to a Select Committee. It 
is now clear that the time and the date that he had fixed 
in his amendment has already passed and consequently the 
ground under his amendment has already been covered but 
apart from that if I had been called upon to speak on that 
day on his amendment, I would no doubt have said that it 
was not possible for me to accept the amendment in view 
of the fact that the provisions of the Bill relating to the 
Ordinance were so peremptory that without delay they had 
to have their legal form which the Constitution requires us 
to give. I therefore plead that the Bill may be taken into 
consideration without referring it to a Select Committee 
and that the amendments which I have proposed in the 
Supplementary List No. 6 to the Revised Consolidated List 
may be taken into consideration. 

Mr. Speaker : I put the motion to the House. I believe 
after a long discussion, it is not now necessary to go on 
with further discussion of this Bill. I shall put it clause 
by clause and instead of having a general discussion hon. 
Members will get an opportunity of having their say when 
the clauses come before the House. Let us now specifically 
go to the very clauses to which Members may have any 
objection. 


*Mr. Speaker: As there are proposed changes in the 
various clauses, hon. Members will be keeping a watch so 
that I may not pass over any amendment. 

Clause 2 . — {Amendment of the long title ) 

Amendment made: 

For clause 2, substitute the following: 

“ 2. Amendment of the long title. Act XLIII of 1950 . — In the long 
title of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 21st December 1950, p. 2212. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


217 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 217 

to as the said Act), after the words ‘the preparation of electoral 
rolls’ the words and letter ‘the manner of filling seats in the 
Council of states to be filled by representatives of Part C States’ 
shall be inserted.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar .] 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is merely to bring the Preamble in 
line with the purpose of the present Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is: 

“That clause 2, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion Was adopted. Clause 2, as amended, was 
added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 . — ( Amendment of Section 2) 

Amendment made: 

In clause 3, for the proposed new clause (cc) of section 
2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, substitute 
the following: 

“ (cc) ‘ Council of States constituency ’ means a constituency 
provided by order made under section 27C for the purpose of 
election of members to the electoral college for any Part C State 
or group of such States referred to in section 27A.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ,] 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, this is merely to bring it in line 
with the new scheme of having elections through electoral 
colleges. 

Mr. Speaker : The Bill is introduced as a whole and 
therefore every clause is before the House. If any hon. Member 
is keen to move any amendment to this clause, I think the 
Chair is bound to put the clause before the House. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : Unless the mover withdraws. 

Mr. Speaker : He cannot withdraw in that manner 
after once having placed the whole Bill before the House. 
The clause has to be negatived by the House. But then I 
was following this informal procedure, simply for shortening 
the discussion. That is all I take it that Mr. Kamath is not 
moving his amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath : That is correct, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : That means that none of the amendments is going 
to be moved. The question is: 

“That clause 4 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is: 

“ That clauses 5 and 6 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Clauses 7 and 8 were added to the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“ That clause 9 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 

New clauses 10A and 10B. 

* Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I move: 

After clause 10, insert the following new clauses: 

“10A. Amendment of section 27, Act XLIII of 1950. — In sub- 
section (4) of section 27 of the said Act, after the figure ‘ 23’ the 
brackets and words ‘(excluding the Proviso)’ shall be inserted. 

10B. Insertion of new Part IV- A in Act XILII of 1950. — After 
Part IV of the said Act, the following Part shall be inserted 
namely: 

PART IV- A 

Manner of filling seats in the Council of States to be filled 
by representatives of Part C States. 

27 A. Constitution of electoral colleges for the filling of Seats 
in the Council of States allotted to Part C States. — (1) For the 
purpose of filling any seat or seats in the Council of States 
allotted to any Part C State or group of such States in the Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an electoral college 
for each such State or group of States: 

Provided that for the purpose of filling the seat allotted to 
the States of Ajmer and Coorg there shall be an electoral college 
only for the State of Ajmer: 

Provided further that for the purpose of filling the seat 
allotted to the States of Tripura and Manipur there shall be an 
electoral college for each of the said States. 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 21st December 1950, pp. 2215-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


219 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


219 


(2) The electoral college for each State or group of States specified 
in the first column of the Fifth Schedule shall consist of the number 
of members specified in the second column thereof opposite to that 
State or group of States to be chosen by direct election. 

(3) The electoral college first constituted under this Act for any 
State or group of State; shall be reconstituted by a fresh election 
every time when there is a general election held in that State or 
group of States for the purpose of election of members to the House 
of the People, and on every such reconstitution the electoral college, 
for that State or group of States functioining immediately before 
such reconstitution shall be deemed to be dissolved and the electoral 
college so reconstituted shall be the electoral college for such State 
or group of States, as the case may be for the purposes of this Act. 

(4) Any casual vacancy in the seat of a member of an electoral 
college shall be filled by election held in the constituency concerned 
in the manner in which the election of that member to such seat 
was held. 

27B. — Council of States constituencies. — For the purpose of 
election of members to the electoral college for any State or group 
of States there shall be the constituencies provided by order under 
section 27C and no other constituencies. 

27C. Delimitation of Council of States Constituencies. — As soon 
as may be after the commencement of this Act, the President shall 
by order determine — 

(а) the constituencies into which each State or group of States 
specified in the first column of the Fifth Schedule shall be 
divided for the purpose of election of member to the electoral 
college for such State or group of States; 

(б) the extent of each constituency; and 

(c) the number of seats allotted to each constituency. 

27D. Power to alter or amend orders. — The President may, from 
time to time, after consulting the Election Commission, by order, 
alter or amend any order made by him under section 27C. 

27E. Procedure as to orders delimiting constituencies. — (1) The 
Election Commission shall, — 

(а) in consultation with the Advisory Committee set up under 
subsection (1) of section 13 in respect of each Part C State specified 
in the first column of the Fifth Schedule, other than Bilaspur and 
Himachal Pradesh, formulate proposals as to the delimitation of 
constituencies in that state under section 27C, and 

(б) in consulation with the Advisory Committee set up under 
the said sub-section in respect of Himachal Pradesh, formulate 
proposals as to the delimitation of constituencies in the states of 
Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh under section 27C, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


220 


220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


and submit the proposals to the President for making the 
order under the said section 27C. 

(2) Every order made under section 27C shall be laid before 
Parliament as soon as may be after it is made and shall be subject 
to such modifications as Parliament may make on a motion made 
within twenty days from the date on which the order is so laid. 

27F. Electoral rolls for Council of States constituencies. — (1) For 
the purpose of election of members to the electoral college for any 
State or group of States there shall be an electoral roll for every 
Council of States constituency in that State or group of States. 

(2) So much of the roll or rolls for any Parliamentary 
constituency or constituencies for the time being in force under 
Part III as relate to the areas comprised within a Council of 
States constituency shall be deemed to be the electoral roll for 
that Council of States constituency. 

27G. Termination of membership of electoral college for certain 
disqualifications. — If a person who is a member of an electoral 
college becomes subject to any disqualification for membership of 
Parliament under the provisions of any law relating to corrupt 
and illegal practices and other offences in connection with election 
to Parliament he shall thereupon cease to be such member of 
electoral college. 

Manner of States allotted to Part C States. — Save as otherwise 
provided in section 27-1 the seat or seats in the Council of States 
allotted to any Part C State or group of such States in the Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution shall be filled by a person or persons 
elected by the members of the electoral college for such State or 
group of States in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote. 

27-1. Special provisions for the filling of the seats in the Council 
of States allotted to the States of Ajmer and Coorg and the States 
of Tripura and Manipur. — (1) The seat in the Council of States 
allotted to the States of Ajmer and Coorg in the Fourth Schedule to 
the Constitution shall be filled by a person elected by the members 
of the electoral college for the State of Ajmer and by the elected 
members of the Coorg Legislative Council in rotation, that is to 
say, at the first general election and at every second subsequent 
biennial election the said seat shall be filled by a person elected 
by the members of the electoral college for the State of Ajmer 
and at the first biennial election and at every third subsequent 
biennial election the said seat shall be filled by a person elected 
by the elected members of the Coorg Legislative Council. 

(2) The seat in the Council of States allotted to the 
States of Tripura and Manipur in the said Schedule shall 
be filled by a person elected by the members of the electoral 
college for the State of Tripura and by the members of the 
electoral college for the State of Manipur by rotation, that 
is to say, at the first general election and at every second 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


221 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


221 


subsequent biennial election the said seat shall be filled by a 
person elected by the members of the electoral college for the 
State of Tripura and at the first biennial election and at every 
third subsequent biennial election the said seat shall be filled by 
a person elected by the members of the electoral college for the 
State of Manipur. 

(3) The casual vacancy in the seat allotted to the States of 
Ajmer and Coorg or to the States of Tripura and Manipur shall 
be filled by election in the State in which the election to fill the 
seat was held at the last preceding general or biennial election, 
as the case may be. 

(4) Every election held under sub-section (1), sub-section (2) 
or sub-section (3) shall be held in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. 

27J. Replacement of electoral colleges by bodies created under 
article 240 to function as legislatures. — Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part — 

(a) if a body is created by Parliament by law under article 240 
for any of the States specified in the first column of the Fifth 
Schedule, other than Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh, to 
function as a legislature for that State, then after such body 
has been constituted it shall not be necessary to constitute 
or reconstitute any electoral college for that State and on 
the constitution of such body any electoral college for the 
time being functioning, for such state shall be deemed to be 
dissolved, and section 27H or section 271, as the case may 
be, shall in its application to that State, have effect as if 
for any reference to the electoral college for such State in 
that section there were substituted a reference to the body 
so created for such State. 

( b ) if any such body as aforesaid is so created for each of the 
States of Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh, then after both 
such bodies have been constituted, it shall not be necessary 
to constitute or reconstitute any electoral college for those 
States and on the constitution of both such bodies any 
electoral college for the time being functioning for those 
States shall be deemed to be dissolved, and section 27H 
shall, in its application to that group of States, have effect 
as if for the reference to the electoral college for the said 
group of States in that section there were substituted a 
reference to the bodies so created for those States; and 

(c) if any such body as aforesaid is so created for the State of 
Coorg, then on the constitution of such body section 27-1 
shall, in its application to that State, have effect as if for 
any reference to the Coorg Legislative Council in that section 
there were substituted a reference to the body so created 
for such State’.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* Mr. Speaker : Amendment of Shri Deshbandhu Gupta 
moved : 

In the amendment by Dr. Ambedkar, in the proposed new clause 
10B, Before the existing first Proviso to sub-section (1) of the proposed 
new section 27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, insert 
the following new Proviso : 

“ Provided that for the purpose of filling the seat allotted 
to the State of Delhi, the elected members of all local bodies 
such as Municipal Committees, District Board and notified area 
committees and members elected to the Chief Commissioner’s 
Advisory Council and the House of People shall form the 
electoral college.” 

Dr. Ambedkar : With regard to the amendment moved 
by my hon. Friend, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, there are one 
or two points to which I would like to make a reference. In 
a way this amendment read with the other provisions which 
the House has now passed for the purpose of making provision 
for elected representatives of Part C States to the Upper 
Chamber ” appears to be somewhat incongruous. There we are 
creating an electoral college elected by adult suffrage. Here 
we are retaining the original scheme contained in the Bill, 
namely, that the representation should be by indirect means 
through local authorities, but I do not think that is a very 
grave objection to the acceptance of this proposal in view of 
the fact that my hon. Friend, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, told us 
this morning that all these bodies are in a very short period 
going to be democratized and are likely to be elected by audit 
suffrage. In view of that, it is a mere matter of fancy, it seems 
to me, whether you would take the municipality or the local 
board as a basis for election or whether you would go down 
and dilute it further and make it as the basis for election. 
Therefore fundamentally I have no objection to his proposal. 

There are two other points to which I would like to 
make a reference. In view of the fact that he is making local 
authorities as instruments for election, it does appear that 
there are certain local authorities in the Delhi province where 
the members are not elected but are nominated. Take, for 
instance, the New Delhi Municipality. I understand that there 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 21st December 1950, pp. 2231-33. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


223 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 223 

is a very large element of nomination there and I do not 
suppose that my hon. Friend, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, will 
insist that the persons who are nominated to the Delhi 
Municipality although they have not been elected by adult 
suffrage are from the point of view of intelligence, from the 
point of civic sense going to be in any way inferior to persons 
elected, by other municipalities. I would therefore suggest 
that I should be quite prepared to accept his amendment 
provided he agrees to delete the word ‘elected’ from his clause. 

The second thing that I would suggest to him, which I 
think is a mere matter of drafting aesthetics, is that it would 
be better if his proposition was to be put in as sub-clause 
(5) of section 27A rather than as a proviso. I have gone 
through the whole thing. It seems to me that it would be 
much neater to put this as sub-clause (5). Subject to this, 
I have no objection to accept it. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : May I point out, Sir, that I 
want to have one clarification from the Hon. Minister, when 
he says that I should agree to delete the word ‘ elected ’, does 
he realise that there is a big element of nomination in other 
local bodies also? If the idea is only to have representation 
for New Delhi, which is a wholly nominated body, then, 
the purpose would be better served by having non-official 
members of the New Delhi Municipal Committee. There are 
7 or 8 members. In Old Delhi, there are 50 elected and 10 
nominated members. In Shahdara there are 10 elected and 5 
nominated members. Does he want that all these nominated 
Members also should be given the right to vote ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not see any reason to make any 
discrimination. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : I stick to the word ‘elected’. 
But I am prepared to include non-official members of the 
New Delhi Municipality. 

Dr. Ambedkar : All right. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Mr. Speaker : So then, I am afraid, looking at the 
trend of the discussion, I must put the amendment of 
Mr. Deshbandhu Gupta to the House. 

Dr. R. U. Singh : But Sir, my questions have not been 
answered. I wanted to know two things, What is the basis 
on which the Legislative Councils will be elected as the 
populations electing the members will be very low. And 
secondly, whether the Hon. Minister will be pleased, in view 
of the points that I had stressed, to reconsider the position. 
As I said it is intrinsically wrong and this is a hotch-potch 
arrangement for which there is no justification, I would like 
to hear what Dr. Ambedkar has to say. 

Mr. Speaker : Has the Hon. Law Minister followed the 
point which the hon. member is raising? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Some hon. members have always felt that 
I am one of the hardest nuts in the cabinet. I now find the 
advantage of being a hard nut. To be yielding to all people, 
all and sundry, lands one in the difficulty in which I find 
myself now. If I had decided to stick to the original position, 
probably I might not have been in the difficulty in which I 
find myself now. 

But having accepted the position on the assurance, of 
course, that the elections to these municipal bodies are going 
to be based upon adult suffrage, I do not think that there was 
any very great principle involved, in accepting the suggestion 
made by my friend Mr. Deshbandhu Gupta. 

Secondly, as hon. Members will see, this scheme may 
not even come into operation, because in the amendment 
that I have moved, I have made provision that if Parliament 
provides by law for the creation of legislative bodies as it is 
done in other Part B and Part A States, elections then will 
take place on the basis of the newly created bodies. Having 
regard to these facts, I am not disposed to attach very great 
importance to the decision, whether it is taken one way or 
the other, because I feel that if there is enough pressure and 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 21st December 1950, pp. 2236-44. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


225 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 225 

if there is enough time, Parliament may be persuaded before 
the elections come, to take upon itself the responsibility of 
having legislatures, giving effect to Article 240. Therefore, for 
the present, what I would insist is that the word “elected” be 
removed. And probably, I would like that with regard to New 
Delhi where I understand there is a very large element of 
nomination, I would restrict the representation of New Delhi 
to non-official persons. With that I think the House should 
be content, for the moment. 

Shri Sondhi : What about the non-official members of 
other bodies? We should not discriminate between one body 
and another. 

Dr. Ambedkar : With regard to other bodies in other Part C 
States, we need not go into it very much now because we are 
creating electoral colleges on the basis of 

Shri Sondhi : I was referring to unofficial members who 
are nominated to other bodies. The hon. Member referred only 
to nominated members in New Delhi. We cannot discriminate 
between them. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Under the new scheme probably the non- 
official elements will disappear. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us not carry on the dicsussion any 
further. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : The Hon. Law Minister said 
that the word “elected” should go and be replace by “non- 
official body” for Delhi and New Delhi. Is that his desire? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, that would simplify the matters. 

Shri Tyagi : But it has to be made clear that the Law 
Minister has accepted this on condition and in the hope that 
the new elections will be on the basis of adult suffrage and 
that they will be conducted in time for the general elections. 
We know that in these old boards a large part of the new 
populations are not represented or reflected at all. Not to give 
them representation will be very wrong. 

Shri Kamath : Sir, I would like to bring to your notice 
that Dr. Ambedkar a little while ago referred to hon. Members 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


226 


226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as “all and sundry”. I do not know if it is quite proper. It 
may not be unparliamentary, but it is not dignified, I believe. 
So I request you to give your views, if not your ruling on 
this point. 

Mr. Speaker : I do not give that expression any vulgar 
meaning. And he did not mean Members of Parliament. So 
many people come before the Ministers over this and that, and 
the words “all and sundry” do not apply solely to Members 
of Parliament. At any rate no hon. member need think that 
the cap fits him. 

Shri B. Das : Sir, the Hon. Health Minister who controls 
the Delhi Municipal bodies has not been present here to 
assist us. Could we not decide this question later with her 
assistance also ? 

Mr. Speaker : It was not expected that, after informal 
conferences and after postponing the question for the purpose 
of the conference, this point will be again discussed. I have 
been expecting a spirit of give and take, just a little giving 
in here and there. After all, humanly it is impossible to do 
absolute justice to everyone. Let us try to do as much justice as 
we can. And so I proceed further. Now how does the position 
stand ? Do I put the amendment to the House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is suggested that instead of the word 
“elected” we may have the words “Members other than 
officials”. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : I accept this change. 

Mr. Speaker : Let there be no more discussion, but let us 
get through with the Bill. Otherwise hon. Members will not 
get sufficient time tomorrow for the other Bills. My difficulty 
comes now. How am I to put the amendment ? 

Order, order, let there be less noise in the House. 

The Minister of Transport and Railways (Shri 
Gopalaswami) : I would like to suggest to the Law Minister 
the desirability of omitting the words “such as”. I think we 
ought to say “Members of Municipal Committees District 
Board and notified area Committees”. If we put in the words 
“such as” it would mean as if there were other categories of 
local bodies in which you want to refer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


227 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 227 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : The reason for having those 
words is, there is the Delhi Improvement Trust. 

Dr. Ambedkar : But in my copy I do not find the words. 

Mr. Speaker : Mr. Deshbandhu Gupta may withdraw 
his amendment and the Hon. Minister may move his 
amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am accepting it with certain 
modifications, and putting it as sub-clause (5) of article 27-1. 

Mr. Speaker : Is the hon. Member Deshbandhu Gupta 
agreeable to this course ? 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : Yes. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Dr. R.U. Singh : Sir, I raised the question of Coorg and 
it has not been answered. 

Mr. Speaker : Any Member may raise any question 
but the Minister need not answer every question. We must 
now proceed with the business in a reasonable manner as 
quickly as possible. The Minister is substantially accepting 
the amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I propose the amendment of which 
I have given notice just now. It is purely nominal and 
consequential and I propose to include Deshbandhu Gupta’s 
amendment also in my amendment. 

Mr. Speaker : In the case of these amendments, it is 
better that we read them. I find a little difficulty because 
these are not circulated to hon. Members. Therefore, the 
alternative courses open to us are either the amendments are 
read in the House or we postpone this clause and take up 
the next clause and keep this pending. There remains only 
one clause — clause 11. Then there is a further amendment 
by Dr. Ambedkar in respect of the schedule. That may be 
disposed of. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : Why not have the amendments 
read out? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


228 


228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : After disposal of clause 11 and the 
amendment of Dr. Ambedkar giving a new clause, the whole 
ground will be clear and there will remain nothing except the 
amendments. At this stage, we put this matter just aside for a 
few minutes — not till tomorrow necessarily. I go to clause 11. 

Shri Dwivedi (Vindhya Pradesh): There are some 
amendments to Clause 11 A. 

Mr. Speaker : That I am just putting off. It is rather 
unfortunate that hon. Members are engaged in talking and 
do not follow the proceedings. 

The question is : 

“That clause 11 stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 11 was added to the Bill. 

New Clause 11A 
Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

After clause 11, insert the following new clause: 

“11A. Addition of new Fifth Schedule to Act XLIII of 1950 . — 
After the Fourth Schedule to the said Act, the following Schedule 
shall be added, namely: 

“THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 27A(2), 27(a), 27E(1) and 27J(a)] 

Number of Members of Electoral Colleges 


Name of State 

Number of 
Members 

1 

2 

1. Ajmer 

20 

2. Bhopal 

20 

3. Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh 

25 

4. Kutch 

20 

5. Manipur 

20 

6. Tripura 

20 

7. Vindhya Pradesh 

50” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


229 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 229 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : Same as above. 

Shri Dwivedi : I beg to move : 

In the amendment by Dr. Ambedkar in the proposed 
new clause 11 A, for the proposed Fifth Schedule of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, substitute the following: 
“THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 27A(2), 27C(a), 27E(1) and 27J(a)] 

Number of Members of Electoral Colleges 


Name of State 


Number of 
Members 


1 2 

1. Ajmer 30 

2. Bhopal 30 

3. Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh 42 

4. Kutch 30. 

5. Manipur 30 

6. Tripura 30 

7. Vindhya Pradesh 60” 


In the morning I had a talk with Dr. Ambedkar along 
with certain other representatives of Part C States and we 
suggested to him that if a small Electoral College is created 
there will be difficulty and smaller the electoral college, it 
is likely to give some cause for corruption. It was therefore 
suggested that there should be bigger electoral College and 
this suggestion was accepted by Dr. Ambedkar. Therefore 
this amendment was proposed by me and others. Sir I move. 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment, (of Shri Dwivedi) as mention 
abover moved: 


Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I accept the amendment. 

Mr. Speaker : Are there any other amendments to this 
particular clause? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


230 


230 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, they are just formal re-numbering 
the letters etc. 

Mr. Speaker : That we shall take up later. If this 
amendment is accepted, I will put to the House the amended 
clause. 

Shri Kamath : The first schedule to the Representation 
of People Act, 1950 has listed Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
among the part C States. I do not know what its position is 
now. 

Mr. Speaker : It has already been cleared in the opening 
address that there is nothing there. It is a penal settlement 
only. So I will put the amendment to vote. The question is : 

The motion of Shri Dwivedi was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

After clause 11 insert the following new clause: 

“11A. Addition of new Fifth Schedule to Act XLIII of 1950 . — 

After the Fourth Schedule to the said Act, the following Schedule 

shall be added, namely: 

(Schedule as above) 

The motion was adopted. 

New Clause 11A was added to the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : There is no other clause to be taken up 
excepting 10-B. 

An hon. Member : There are formal amendments. 

Mr. Speaker : Formal amendments like re-numbering and 
re-lettering will be taken up at the end. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Clause 12 has not been put. 

Mr. Speaker : Yes, clause 12 remains. 

Clause 12 was added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not know whether you have put 
to the House my amendment No. 2 in Supplementary List 
No. 7, regarding the addition of a new clause 27-J. It has 
been taken as moved but it has not been put and accepted. 

Mr. Speaker : That has to be put. It will be a part of 10-B. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


231 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 231 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, but it is on a separate list — that 
was why I was wondering , 

Mr. Speaker : Clause 10-B was held over. I shall put 
that in due course after disposing of the other amendments, 
but it is just possible that I may forget, in which case hon. 
Members will invite my attention to it. 

Now do we proceed to clause 10-B ? 

Some hon. Members : Let us finish it. 

Mr. Speaker : If it is the desire of Members to finish it, 
I have no objection. 

Some hon. Members : No, Sir, we shall adjourn now. 

Mr. Speaker : I myself have been feeling a little diffident 
about it. Though the amendment may be formal, yet it is a long 
amendment and hon. Members should have an opportunity of 
seeing and studying it. Therefore, we might now adjourn and 
re-assemble tomorrow at 2 p.m. And I may say that the longer 
we discuss this tomorrow the shorter the time for the other 
Bill because the guillotine for the other Bill will be applied 
at 6 p.m. sharp. We are not sitting day after tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till Two of the Clock on Friday, 
the 22nd December 1950. 


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL — Contd. 

New Clauses 10A and 10B 

*Mr. Speaker : We will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the Bill to amend the Representation of the 
People Act. We were discussing yesterday clauses 10A and 
10B and certain amendments moved by hon. Members. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : Sir, I drew your 
attention to the fact that there was an amendment standing in 
my name. It is amendment No. 2 in Supplementary List No. 7. 
I should like to move it at this stage. The first amendment 
was moved by my friend Mr. Gupta. The second has remained 
undisposed of. May I move it ? 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 18th December 1950, pp. 2252-55. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : Yes. Will he move the other amendment 
also ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This was an independent amendment — 
addition of a clause. My other amendment would include 
Mr. Gupta’s amendment. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam) : I think all the amendments have been 
placed before the House. This has only to be adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : Those that came subsequently have not 
been placed by me before the House. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I shall formally move the amendment 
I beg to move : 

In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed 
new clause 10B, after the proposed new section 271 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, insert the following 
new section 27J and re-number the subsequent section as 
section 27K : 

“27J. Power of electoral colleges or the Coorg Legislative 
Council to elect notwithstanding vacancies therein. — No election 
by the members of an electoral college or the elected members 
of the Coorg Legislative Council under this Act shall be called 
in question on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in the membership of such college or Council, as the 
case may be.” 

It is just to remove any difficulty or doubt that might 
exist. 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : (as above). 

There are other amendments also. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, in supplementary list No. 8 I 
thought if this was disposed of I could move the others. 

Mr. Speaker : I take it that this is an agreed amendment, 
that hon. Members are agreeable to it. Shall I put it to the 
House ? 

The Minister of Transport and Railways (Shri 
Gopalaswami) : May I draw your attention to one point? 
Would this amendment not need some modification if you 
are accepting the other kind of electorate that is proposed 
for Delhi ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


233 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 233 

Dr. Ambedkar : That also is described as an electoral 
college. 

Shri Gopalaswami : Is it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in the 
proposed new clause 10B, after the proposed new section 
271 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, insert 
the following new section 27J and re-number the subsequent 
section as section 27K : 

“27J. Power of electoral colleges or the Coorg Legislative 
Council to elect notwithstanding vacancies therein. — No election 
by the members of an electoral college or the elected members of 
the Coorg Legislative Council under this Act shall be called in 
question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in 
the membership of such college or Council, as the case may be.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : I believe the amendment to incorporate 
sections 27A to 27J have already been moved. I would now 
take the amendments in supplementary list No. 8. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think it would be better if I move 
them seriatim. 

Mr. Speaker : The amendments in supplementary list 
No. 8 which are amendments to that amendment, have to 
be moved. My idea is to have all the amendments once 
before the House and then we will proceed, for purposes of 
discussion and voting, in parts rather than put the whole 
clause immediately. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

(i) In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in sub-section (3) of the proposed new section 
27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, after 
the words “for any State or group of States” occurring in 
line two, insert the words “so specified”. 

(ii) In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in sub-section (4) of the proposed new section 
27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, after 
the words “electoral college” insert the words, brackets and 
figure “for any such State or group of States as is referred 
to in sub-section ( 2 )”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(iii) In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, after sub-section ( 4 ) of the proposed new section 
27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, add the 
following new sub-section : 

“(5) the electoral college for the State of Delhi shall consist of — 

(a) the members of the House of the People representing that 
State; 

(b) the non-official members of the Advisory Council of the 
Chief Commissioner of Delhi; and 

(c) the non-official members of every Cantonment Board, 
District Board, Municipal Committee and Notified Area 
Committee within that State.” 

(iv) In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed new clause 
10B, in the proposed new section 27B of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950, after the words “any State or group 
of States “insert the words” specified in the first column of 
the Fifth Schedule”. 

(v) In the amendment proposed by me, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in sub-section ( 1 ) of the proposed new section 
27F of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, after the 
words “for any State or group of States” insert the words 
“specified in the First column of the fifth Schedule”. 

(vi) “That the necessary corrections for the numbering and 
lettering of the clauses in the Bill and of the sections 
inserted by the Bill be carried out together with consequential 
corrections of cross references.” 


* Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : (as above) 

In the amendment by Dr. Ambedkar, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in clause (6) of the proposed new section 27J of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, — 

(t) after the words “so created” occurring in line one, insert 
the words “jointly or”, 

(tt) after the words “then after” occurring in line three, insert 
the words “such body has or”; and 
(iii) after the words “constitution of’ occurring in line six, insert 
the words “such body or”. 

I should like the Hon. Law Minister to clarify the point. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are two objections to this amendment. 
The first is a Constitutional objection which arises out of the 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 12th December 1950, pp. 2259-60. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


235 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 235 

provisions contained in article 240 of the Constitution. I 
think it is quite clear from the amendment of my hon. friend 
Dr. Parmar that he supposes that it would be possible for 
Parliament to create one single legislature for these two 
areas, namely Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. I submit 
that it would not be open to Parliament to do any such thing 
because article 240 says : 

“Parliament may by law create or continue for any State 
specified in Part C of the First Schedule...” which means that 
if Parliament wants to create legislative bodies for the States 
mentioned in Part C, it shall have to create for each Part C 
State a separate legislative body. There is no authority given 
by article 240 to create a joint legislature. On that ground, this 
amendment is not in order. 

My second submission is this. I believe my hon. friend 
suggested that it might be possible for Bilaspur to be merged 
in Himachal Pradesh, and in that event, that would constitute 
a single State. That possibility, I do not deny; but the 
consequence of that would be that we shall have to amend 
this Bill and make Bilaspur a merged State, which stands on 
a quite different footing, and would not come within the four 
corners of the Bill as presented to Parliament. 

Therefore, my submission is that it is not possible for 
me to accept the amendment in view of the objections that 
I have stated. 

Shri J. N. Hazarika (Assam) : Sir, section 27J which 
has now been renumbered as 27K is absolutely unnecessary, 
because this clause is likely to create 

Mr. Speaker : To which clause is the hon. Member 
referring? 

Shri J. N. Hazarika : Section 27J. It is likely to create 
some delusion in the minds of the people in Part C States. 

Mr. Speaker : Hon. Member may please see that section 
27J has just been replaced by an amendment which has been 
carried by this House. Would he refer to the new section 27J 
as just adopted by the House? 

Shri J. N. Hazarika : It has become 27K now. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


236 


236 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : After my amendment, section 27 J would 
become 27K. 


* Mr. Speaker : Then we come to the first 

amendment of Dr. Ambedkar to his own amendment. After 
disposing of it, we shall come to the main amendment. The 
first amendment which Dr. Ambedkar has moved to his own 
amendment is in Supplementary List No. 8. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The one about the addition of the words 
“so specified”. 

Mr. Speaker : The amendment is, more or less, a formal 
one. The question is : 

In the amendment by Dr. Ambedkar, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in sub-section ( 3 ) of the proposed new section 27A 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, after the words 
“for any State or group of States” occurring in line two, insert 
the words “so specified”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : Then we come to the second amendment. 
That is also, more or less, a formal amendment. The question 
is : 

In the amendment by Dr. Ambedkar, in the proposed new 
clause 10B, in sub-section ( 4 ) of the proposed new section 27A 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, after the words 
“electoral college” insert the words, brackets and figure “for any 
such State or group of States as is referred to in sub-section (2)”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : Now we come to the amendment regarding 
the Electoral College for the State of Delhi, and which is 
proposed to be added as sub-section (5) of section 27A. What 
does Mr. Tyagi want to say? , 

Shri Tyagi : Sir, I only want to enquire what will be the 
meaning of the word “non-official”. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Other than official, that is all. 


* P.D., Vol. 7, Part II, 22nd December 1950, pp. 2263-64. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


237 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 237 

* Shri Tyagi : Those who have no office, they 

are non-official, persons like me, Sir. But persons like Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Dr. Ambedkar they hold offices, and 
they are not non-officials. I hold no office and therefore, I am 
a non-official. Therefore, I request that a clear definition of 
the word “non-official” may be given, unless it be that it is 
given in some other Act. Otherwise this will lead to difficulties. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The word “non-official” is so elemental 
that I should have thought that it would be very, very difficult 
to find a simpler phraseology; and I suggest to my friend 
Mr. Tyagi that if he was involved in any legal dispute about 
this word, if he engages even a third-class lawyer, he will be 
able to get sufficient advice. 


** Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : I only want to point out 
that there is no official Member of the Advisory Council. Here 
in (b) it is said that the non-official members of the Advisory 
Councial of the Chief Commissioner etc. There is no official 
at all. Therefore, if it is not necessary, this word ‘non-official’ 
may be dropped. I am suggesting it to the Mover. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It cannot do any harm. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : Then under section 134 

rules were framed. When the Government of India Act was 
repealed an Ordinance was issued defining who were ‘officials’ 
and who were ‘non-officials’. This Ordinance has lapsed. What 
is the present position? If in 1919 they were defined and 
later on under the Ordinance also it was found necessary 
to define the words, why should we not define it here also ? 
That lacuna must be made up. It is not such a simple term 
that it can be found in a dictionary. It will depend upon the 
interpretation that is put on it. It is a very valid objection. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am sure the matter is covered. If it is 
not covered it is not difficult to cover it. 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 22nd December 1950, pp. 2264-65,. 
**Ibid., pp. 2269. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* Mr. Speaker : Then comes addition of Part IV. 27A is 
proposed to be added. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I would like to move an amendment to 
10B. I beg to move : 

In the proposed new clause 10B of the Bill, in the proposed 
section 27A of the representation of the People Act, 1950, for 
the words “Tripura and Manipur” substitute the words “Manipur 
and Tripura.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Members will remember that out 
of the five amendments moved this morning by Dr. Ambedkar, 
three related to 27A which have been carried by this House. 

I find that nobody wishes to move any of the amendments 
or make any speech further. So I shall come to all the clauses 
together, because I find that other amendments are only verbal. 

Does any hon. Member wish to address himself to any 
particular clause now? No. Then I will put all the clauses — 27— D, 
E, F, G, H, I, 


Dr. Ambedkar : With regard to 27-1, Sir, with your 
permission I would like to move a small amendment to sub- 
clause (2), like the one I had moved earlier, namely, instead 
of Tripura and Manipur, it should be Manipur and Tripura. 


*Mr. Speaker : Then there is a further amendment 
proposed by Dr. Ambedkar. The question is : 

“That the necessary corrections for the numbering and 
lettering of the clauses in the Bill and of the sections inserted 
by the Bill be carried out together with consequential corrections 
of cross references.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 22nd December 1950, pp. 2271. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


239 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 239 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (No. 2) BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for the conduct of 
elections to the Houses of Parliament and to the House or 
Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications and 
disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt 
and illegal Practices and other offences at or in connection 
with such elections and the decision of doubts and disputes 
arising out of or in connection with such elections. 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I introduce the Bill. 


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (No. 2) BILL 

** The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to provide for the conduct of elections to 
the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications 
for membership of those Houses, the corrupt and illegal practices 
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with such elections, be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava, Shri Frank Anthony, Pandit Hriday Nath Kunzru, 
Shri M. A. Haque, Shri Mahavir Tyagi, Shri Biswanath Das, 
Shri Sarangadhar Das, Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man, Srijut 
Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri, Shri Girija Sankar Guha, Shri 
Khandubhai K. Desai, Shri S. Sivan Pillay, Shri Chandrika 
Ram, Shri T. R. Deogirikar, Shri P. Basi Reddi, Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee, Shri Hussain Imam, Shri M. V. Rama Rao, 
Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt, Shri Raj Bahadur, Kumari 
Padmaja Naidu, Shri S. Nijalingappa, Shri Ramnath Goenka, 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 18th December 1950, p. 1834. 

* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 22nd December 1950, pp. 2283-91. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


240 


240 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath, Shri S. N. Mishra, Shri L. 

Krishnaswami Bharathi, Shri Surendra Mohan Ghose, Shri 

Krishna Kant Vyas, Shri M. L. Dwivedi and the Mover, with 

instructions to report by the end of the third week after the 

commencement of the next session of Parliament.” 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal) : What will be the quorum? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The quorum, I understand, is provided 
by rules, namely, one-third. 

Sir, this Bill, as members must have noticed, is a very 
long Bill and contains 163 clauses. It would take me much 
beyond the time that is available now for the consideration 
of the motion, if I were to enter upon a full and complete 
description of the various provisions contained in these 163 
clauses. This Bill has already been in the hands of Members 
of Parliament for at least three or four days and I am sure 
that they must have found time to go over the clauses of 
the Bill and to understand the main purport of the clauses 
incorporated therein. I do not think, therefore, I am called 
upon to give an exhaustive expose of the matters included in 
this Bill. I, therefore, propose to be very brief. 

The House will recall that at an earlier Session of the 
Parliament a Bill for the Peoples Representation Act, 1950, 
was passed by this House. That Bill dealt with the following 
maters : (1) allocation of seats between the different States 
for their representation in the lower Chamber and the upper 
Chamber; (2) delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of 
the election to the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assembly of the various States; (3) qualifications of voters at 
such elections and (4) preparation of the electoral roll and 
constituencies. 

The following matters were left out, namely, (1) 
qualifications and dis- qualifications for candidates to and 
for the members of the legislature; (2) the actual conduct of 
elections; (3) corrupt and illegal practices; (4) the definition 
of election offences and (5) the constitution of the Election 
Tribunal for the purpose of deciding election disputes. 

I should have been very happy myself if the provisions 
of the last Bill and the provisions contained in this Bill had 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


241 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 241 

been incorporated in a single Statute, so that hon. Members 
would have had the facility of carrying one single Statute 
covering all matters affecting the representation of the 
people in the Central Legislature as well as in the State 
Legislatures. But, unfortunately, it was not possible to 
do so, because it would have taken a very long time, it 
was felt better to cut up the matter into two parts, that 
is to say, to provide for the constituencies, for the voters’ 
qualifications and so on, in an earlier measure, so that 
the Election Commission would have been in a position 
to start work with a view to putting through the elections 
by April or May. That was the reason why a certain part 
of the matter which was, so to say, integral with matters 
contained in this Bill were severed and put into an earlier 
piece of legislation. 

Now, Sir, as I have said, the present Bill deals with 
five matters. I am sure the House will not expect me to go 
over the whole gamut of the provisions relating to each of 
these five parts. I will take up certain important provisions 
which I am sure the House will be interested to know at 
this stage. 

Now, first of all, I will take up the question of the 
qualifications and disqualifications for candidates. So far 
as the elections for candidates is concerned, we do not 
impose any additional qualification except that he must 
be a voter, that is to say, he must be a citizen, he must 
be of 21 years’ age and must have resided in a particular 
constituency for the qualifying period. Every voter will, 
therefore be entitled to stand as a candidate without 
requiring to fulfil any additional qualification. One other 
matter to which I would like to draw attention in this 
connection is this, that in the present Bill we have removed 
all residential qualifications. At one time, hon. Members 
will remember, that a candidate was not only required to 
be a voter, but was also required to be a resident in that 
particular constituency. Otherwise, he could not stand. 
It was felt that in view of the fact that we are now a 
united people under one single Constitution, recognising 
no barriers of caste, creed, community or provincial 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

barriers, it was desirable to provide that any person who 
is entitled to be a candidate may stand anywhere in India, 
notwithstanding the fact that he does not belong to that 
province or to that constituency. 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair \ 

So that under the provisions of the Bill a person may not 
only stand as a candidate in his own constituency but he may 
stand as a candidate in any other constituency in his State, 
nay, he may stand as a candidate in any other State where 
he has not resided, provided he is a qualified voter in some 
particular constituency. That is with regard to qualifications. 

With regard to disqualifications what we have done is this. 
Hitherto the law relating to disqualification was scattered in 
different statutes. Part of it was laid down in the Government 
of India (Provincial Elections, Corrupt Practices and Election 
Petitions) Order of 1936 issued by the Secretary of State after 
the passing of the Government of India Act, 1935. Other 
provisions were to be found in the Indian Elections Offences 
Enquiry Act, 1920. It was felt that it would be much better 
to have a consolidated list of disqualifications in this very 
Act. And that is what has been done. 

I may here mention that it was my proposal that the 
holding of a contract with the Government should also be 
a matter for disqualification. Such a provision exists in the 
U. K. Act. But I thought that it might be better to consult 
the Select Committee on this particular provision whether 
the disqualification should be for standing as a candidate or 
whether the disqualification should be limited to continuing 
to be a Member of Parliament. As I myself was not certain 
which course to adopt I have left the question open to be 
decided by the Select Committee. 

Now I come to another matter, namely, the conduct of 
elections. In this connection I would like to draw the attention 
of the House to certain new features that are contained 
in the Bill with regard to nomination. As the House will 
remember, under the existing law the question of the validity 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


243 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 243 

of the nomination of a candidate can be canvassed, discussed 
and decided upon on an election petition. I have always felt 
that that is a very harsh procedure. The question of nomination 
is so to say a preliminary issue and there is no reason why 
this preliminary issue should be kept hanging, allowing the 
whole election to take place, forcing people to spend their time 
and their energy in contesting the election, and subsequently 
somebody comes up and says that the elected candidate has 
not been validly nominated. So that, without getting into 
the merits of the election the practice is followed and the 
whole thing is disposed of on a preliminary issue. I think it 
is right that in the matter of election petitions it is desirable 
to separate this preliminary issue from the other issue as to 
whether the election is valid on other grounds or not. I have 
therefore proposed in this Bill that this issue shall be treated 
as a preliminary issue and the Election Commission shall make 
some provision for the purpose of constituting some tribunal 
to which any dispute as regards the validity of nomination 
will be referred and disposed of finally : so. that when the 
election takes place no such issue could be raised before the 
tribunal. I am sure this is a very salutary provision. I am 
sorry, on the advice of the Election Commissioner, it would not 
be possible to give effect to this provision at the time of the 
first election, because he thinks that he has not got sufficient 
time to think about forming an ad hoc tribunal which may 
be set up to come and give relief to the contestants. But, as 
I say, if the Select Committee thinks that this should also 
be applied then I would have no objection. 

Under the conduct of elections I should also like to draw 
attention to another important matter, namely, method of 
voting. This Bill provides that some constituencies shall be 
two member constituencies. That is inevitable in view of the 
fact that the Constitution provides for the reservation of seats 
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The fact 
that you have reserved constituencies presupposes at least 
two-member constituencies. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab) : Why? It is not 
inevitable. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is a matter which you may discuss 
but that is how the Bill proceeds upon. There will therefore 
be some two-member constituencies. The other constituencies 
will be single-member constituencies. In the two-member 
constituencies the voting will be by distributive vote. 

Now I come to the Election Tribunal. 

Pandit Maitra : May I know whether in no case there 
will be three-member constituencies? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am going to say at the end that these 
are not matters which can be taken as concluded. 

With regard to the Election Tribunal the position is this. 
There are of course a variety of ways in which an election 
tribunal could be constituted. Either you can constitute an 
election tribunal whose authority will be final, without any 
right of appeal, or you can have a tribunal whose decision 
will be subject to an appeal. As I said, on this there cannot be 
any dogma. One has to decide in the light of public opinion. 
But the Bill proceeds upon the assumption that there should 
be some sort of a right of appeal to the High Court. It is 
also assumed that the public has a greater confidence in the 
official machinery for the disposal of election disputes. Non- 
officials, it is said, may have a bias which may prejudice 
the ultimate judgment in the case of an election dispute. 
Consequently what the Bill proposes to do is to have a 
two- member tribunal. The Chairman will be the District 
Judge and the other member will be a judicial officer. He 
may not be a District Judge. He may be some other judicial 
officer, but an official. The point is this that it is difficult to 
imagine at this stage what would be the number of election 
petitions. In view of the fact that the people of this country 
are so enamoured of politics so far as I see — having almost 
a passion for politics — I surmise that there might be a very 
large number of election petitions. If that happens and if you 
wish that the machinery to decide appeals should be official, 
the number of District Judges that may be available today 
would be found to be considerably insufficient to cope with the 
task. It is therefore that the second Member is described as 
a Judicial Officer. He may not be of the rank of the District 
Judge. In addition to that, it has been provided that the 
High Courts in the different provinces may prepare a list of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


245 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 245 

advocates, who in the opinion of the High Court, may be 
deemed to be sufficiently qualified and reliable to be employed 
as Members of this Tribunal. That is again on the supposition 
that the petitions may be so large that even the Judicial 
Members may not suffice. (. Interruption .) I think it is good 
that we should give some employment to advocates because 
notwithstanding the many remarks that I have been hearing 
I am firm enough to say civilization cannot exist without 
advocates. Law is the very foundation of civilization. 

As I said, the Bill provides that in the case of difference 
of opinion in the Tribunal a reference may be made to the 
High Court. Another, I think, very important feature of the 
Bill is this. I am not very much versed in the law relating 
to election petitions; I have not dealt with them on a very 
large scale. With what little experience I have, I have come 
to the conclusion that the law is in the most indefinite state 
that one can find. You can never definitely say what are the 
manners in which an election petition may be disposed of. You 
can never be certain on what grounds the election as a whole 
may be declared to be void. You can never be certain what are 
the grounds on which the election of a particular candidate 
may be declared. You are never certain under the existing 
law what are the cases in which the Courts may entertain 
what is called a plea of recrimination. I have therefore devoted 
considerable time and attention to the clarification of this 
position and I would invite the attention of hon. Members to 
clauses 93, 95 and 96 in which they will find that the position 
is made as clear as one can possibly do, and I hope that this 
will be a great advantage both to-the Tribunal as well as to 
the contesting candidates themselves. 

Then, I come to the law of corrupt and illegal practices. 
Here again, the law has been scattered in various places. I 
endeavoured to bring all the provisions relating to corrupt 
practices and illegal practices under this one Bill and you 
will find them codified from sections 122 onwards. Our law 
in a sense was defective so far as corrupt intention was 
concerned. The law has not made it clear that in the case 
of a corrupt practice what was essential was not a practice 
which is declared to be corrupt but the corrupt intention. With 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regard to the illegal practice, there is no question of intention 
at all; the practice is declared to be bad, but with regard to 
the corrupt practice in order to give a finding of guilty, it is 
necessary to have a finding that the intention was corrupt. You 
might call your friend to a dinner or lunch during the period 
when your election is going on. Your opponent may say that 
you have corrupted him. I do not know whether such a plea 
could be sustained but under the existing law this proviso was 
not there and I have tried to square up the thing, because I 
find that is also the provision in the English law that in a 
corrupt practice there must be a corrupt intention. 

I know that the House is more interested in finding out 
what provisions are made in this Bill for a free and fair election. 
That, I think, is the desire of everybody and I therefore will 
now give to the House the provisions which relate and which 
are intended to bring about a free and fair election. 

(1) All election meetings on the election day and the day 
preceding such a day have been banned. We have thought 
that it would be desirable to have two peaceful nights to 
the voters as well as to the candidates before they go to the 
polling-booths. 

(2) Penalty has been provided for disturbance at election 
meetings, which I think is very desirable. 

(3) Officers performing any duty in connection with an 
election and police officers have been prohibited from acting 
for candidates or to influence voters. That you will find in 
clause 124. 

(4) Canvassing in and near polling stations has been 
prohibited. 

(5) Penalty has been provided for disorderly conduct in or 
near polling stations such as the use of a mega-phone or loud 
speaker or shouting in or near the polling station. 

(6) This is an important thing. The hiring or procuring of 
conveyances for bringing voters to or from the polling station 
has been made punishable. 

(7) Breaches of official duty in connection with the elections 
have been made punishable. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


247 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 247 

(8) Removal of ballot papers from the polling station has 
also been made an offence. 

(9) Personation has been made a cognizable offence 
throughout India, and as you will see, there are other provisions 
of the Bill. There is a provision which says that every voter 
shall have to give his thumb impression in an indelible ink. 
I hope the ink will be indelible so that there will be no case 
of a second vote in the name of another person. We have 
got an enormous electorate and it would be quite difficult to 
find out that there is no impersonation. The only method of 
safeguarding it is to have some kind of mark by which when 
a voter comes to give a vote, it will be possible for a polling 
station to ascertain that he has already not voted. 

These are the general provisions which are contained in 
this Bill. Sir, I quite see that the time at the disposal of the 
House is very short, having regard to the length of the Bill, 
but I think the House can take comfort in the fact that we 
have had a very large Select Committee. I do not think that 
any Bill has had such a big Select Committee. 

An Hon. Member : Except the Hindu Code. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It was also a very small Select Committee, 
if I remember aright but here there are about 31 Members. 

An Hon. Member : Adult franchise? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have given almost adult franchise. 
Secondly, as I said, this does not involve any question of policy. 
These are mere questions of methods of bringing about a fair 
deal in the election and consequently, I do not propose when 
the Select Committee meets to raise any kind of objection to 
any suggestion that might be made. It will be an open forum. 
I should also like to say that if those Members who have not 
had the luck to be included in the Select Committee also care 
to send any suggestions either personally to me. or to the Select 
Committee, I shall place them before the Select Committee 
and see that they are given due consideration. Sir, I move. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Prof. Ranga : I feel, Sir, that the Member should 

be given the opportunity to say which seat I wants to keep 
and even if he fails to declare, the result of that election which 
was declared first, that seat should be treated to be one for 
which he was elected. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is there, he has only to resign within 
the prescribed period. 


*P.D. ,Vol. 7, Part II, 22nd December 1950, p. 2295. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


249 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


249 


( 25 ) 

‘DEMAND NO. 13— MINISTRY OF LAW 
Mr. Deputy Speaker : Motion is : 

“That a supplementry sum not exceeding Rs. 15,93,000 be 
granted to the President to defray the charges which will come 
in course of payment during the year ending the 31st day of 
March 1951, in respect of “Ministry of Law’.” 

Shri Kamath : About this Supplementary Demand, in the 
last Session in the middle of the discussion of this, Parliament 
rose and Dr. Ambedkar had to reply to this particular demand 
placed before the House at that time. The footnote says that the 
excess is due to the post-budget creation of a Central Agency 
in the Ministry of Law for the conduct of cases in the Supreme 
Court on behalf of the Central and State Governments, The 
expenditure is to be shared between the Government of India 
and the Governments of the participating States. Dr. Ambedkar 
will recollect that he had to answer this particular point raised 
at that time, but Parliament rose for the day and the demand 
was not subsequently before the House. I would be grateful 
if Dr. Ambedkar can throw some light on this agency created 
after the Budget was passed, particularly with reference to 
the recoveries from other Governments. How many State 
Governments are contributing to this agency and in what 
proportion, and what exactly is the work to be transacted by 
this Central Agency that has been created? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, I believe — in fact I am certain — that there were 
two questions put to me during the course of this Session 
one by Mr. Raj Bahadur and another by Mr. Kazmi and 
I have given the fullest information on this point in reply 


*P. D., Vol. 7, I, Part II, 21st December 1950, pp. 3178-79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


250 


250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to those two questions. If my hon. friend will take the trouble 
of referring to my replies, he will have all the information 
that he requires. 

Shri Hussain Imam : Were they written replies or oral ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : They were oral replies but they will 
appear in the record of proceedings. If required, I will give 
him my copy. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is here in the proceedings. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


251 


SECTION IV 

9th February 1951 
TO 

21st April 1951 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013 


252 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


253 


SECTION IV 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

26. Dentists (Amendment) Bill 

27. Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill 

28. Part B States (Laws) Bill 

29. Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High 
Court) Bill 

30. Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill 

31. Code of Civil Procedure (Second Amendment) 
Bill 

32. Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Bill 

33. Constitution (First Amendment) Bill 


Pages 

255-265 

266-279 

280-296 

297-309 

310-316 

317-319 

320-328 

329-422 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


254 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


255 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


255 


( 26 ) 

* DENTISTS (AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : As the Hon. the 

Health Minister is ill, I am asked to take charge of this Bill 
and I therefore beg to move : 

“That the Bill to amed the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken into 

consideration.” 

The Bill is a very short one and it does not involve any 
controversial matters. The Dentists Act of 1948 came into 
force on the 29th of March 1948. It was made applicable to 
Part A, Part C and Part D States. Under Section 49 of that 
Act, it is provided that no person shall be entitled to practise 
dentistry after the 28th March 1950 unless his name appears 
on a register of dentists which the Act required should be 
prepared in accordance with the rules contained therein. It 
was hoped that that register would be ready by the 28th of 
March 1950. Consequently, the operative portions of this Act 
were so framed as to come into operation on the 28th March 
1950. Unfortunately, this expectation has not been fulfilled. 
It was reported from various States that the register would 
not be ready by the 28th March 1950 and consequently it 
became necessary to extend the period by one year in order 
to enable the States concerned to prepare the register. As 
the Parliament was not then sitting, Government issued an 
Ordinance giving effect to the necessary provision expending 
the period up to the 28th March 1951. This Bill is intended to 
convert the Ordinance into law. The main provision therefore is 
to extend the period for the purpose of preparing the register. 

Advantage has been taken of the present occasion to amend 
the law in order to remove some of the difficulties which 
have been felt in giving effect to the original Act. Firstly, the 


* P .D. Vol. 4, Part II, 11th August 1950, p. 841. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


256 


256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

original Act contained two provisions. One provision was not 
to allow any person who was not placed on the register to be 
employed in Government hospitals. Obviously, it was expected 
that this provision would become operative after the registers 
ready. As the registers are not ready, persons who have not 
been placed on the register by reason-not of their not being 
qualified, but of the register not being ready would become 
disabled from holding any office in Government hospitals. 
Therefore, it has become necessary to extend the period and 
permit such persons to hold office notwithstanding the fact 
that they are not placed on the register. 

Secondly, there is a Dental School in Bengal which used to 
grant Diplomas in Dentistry. At the time when the Act was 
passed there was a controversy as to whether the diplomas 
granted by this Dental School of Bengal should be recognised 
to enable persons holding diploma to be placed on the register. 
It was felt that the diplomas granted by the Dental School of 
Bengal were not sufficiently qualified to place them on the 
register. There has been considerable agitation by persons 
holding the diploma granted by the Dental School of Bengal 
that this disability should be removed. A compromise has 
been suggested by the Government of West Bengal according 
to which persons who have received their diploma before 
the year 1940, subject to certain conditions, may be treated 
as persons qualified to be entered upon the register. That 
compromise is also given a place in this Bill. 

The Bill, therefore, contains three provisions : 

(1) to extend the period, (2) to permit names of persons holding 
diplomas of the Dental School of Bengal in certain cirumstances 
to be placed on the register and (3) to continue the employment 
of unregistered dentists in the Government hospitals till 1951 
until the register is prepared. 

This is all that the Bill contains and I hope that the House 
will not find any difficulty in giving its assent to the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : motion moved : 

“That the Bill to amend the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken 
into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


257 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 257 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : First of all I take 
strong exception to the issue of an ordinance when the House 
was sitting in the month of March. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The ordinance was issued some time 
in May. I wish that the points that were raised by my hon. 
Friends Mr. Sidhva and Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava had 
been reserved by them to the time when their amendments 
were taken up. It becomes somewhat embrassing to reply on 
matters which would, I have no doubt, be raised again when 
their amendments are moved. But, I cannot help now having 
to reply to the points raised by them : I shall do so rather 
briefly, because I know I shall have to say 

Mr. Speaker : I do not propose to allow any arguments 
on the amendments. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not going to move 
any amendment if my hon. friend dose not accept it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Mr. Sidhva has raised one or two points. 
The first point raised was why an Ordinance was made when 
the House was in session. The answer to that is two-fold. 
The first is this. The first question that was made to the 
Government of India in the matter of extension of time for 
the preparation of the Register came from the Government 
of Madras, and that too on or about the 15th of March 1950. 
That mean that only 13 days had been left for the period for 
the preparation of the roll to expire. That is one reason, the 
second reason is that after the receipt of this letter from the 
Government of Madras, informing the Government of India 
that it was not possible for them to complete the Register, 
naturally, it was necessary for the Government of India to 
find out from other States as to whether they were in a 
position to prepare their list by the date fixed, or whether 
they too wanted some extension. Naturally, there ensued 
correspondence between the Government of India and the 
various other States. 

That undoubtedly took time, and must take time, with the 
result that by the time the Government of India had received 
the replies and was able to assess whether an amendment 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in terms proposed by the Government of Madras was necessary, 
Parliament had been prorogued. That is the reason why the 
measure could not be brought up before the recess. 

The second point raised by my friend Mr. Sidhva was 
this that he did not see any reason why we should make a 
statutory provision for the recognition of certain qualifications 
granted by the Bengal Dental School. According to him that 
was a matter which by the Act is left to the Dental Council. 
Now, I think my friend Mr. Sidhva has missed one important 
point and it is this. The power to grant recognition vested 
in the Council relates to qualifications or degree granted by 
schools to existence; but we are dealing with a matter in which 
degree and diplomas have been granted by a body which has 
become defunct. Consequently, it is for the Government of the 
day to decide whether the degree granted by a school giving 
tuition in dentistry were worthwhile recognition or not. It is 
not a matter which should be left to the Bengal Council under 
section 10, sub-clause (2). The word is “grants” which means 
“is granting at present” and not diplomas which have been 
granted before. That being so it cannot be a matter which could 
be left easily to be dealt with by the Dental Council under 
its power, and if we have to amend the Schedule, then that 
must be done by the law itself. That is why a legal provision 
is made in the Bill to cover that particular matter. 

Now, what I have said with regard to the Bengal Dental 
School also applies to what my friend Pandit Thakurdas 
Bhargava said on the very same question. 

I come now to the points raised by Mr. Kamath. The first 
point raised by him was more or less of a technical character. 
If I understood him correctly, he said that the law required 
that the Register should be ready on the 28th March, 1950, 
and that if a person was not on the Register, then under the 
provisions of Section 46 and 49, he incurs certain penalties, 
while the Ordinance which exempted the person concerned 
from these penalties came into operation on the 29th May, 
1950. There is, therefore, a two months’ period in which a 
person not being on the Register and continuing to practise 
or holding office was liable to certain penalties. What 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


259 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 259 

is the position with regard to these persons ? I think my 
friend Mr. Kamath, if he had read clearly the terms of the 
amendment proposed in the Bill itself, he would have seen 
that the provisions say that : 

“In sub-section (3) of section 46 and sub-section (1) of section 
49 of the said Act, for the words ‘two years’ the words ‘three 
years’ shall be subsituted and shall be deemed always to have 
been substituted.” 

Therefore, it is clear that that point has been adequately 
covered by the present clause. 

Shri Kamath : My point was that if during these two 
months, from March 29th to May 29, if a dentist had not been 
registered, then under the Act, and because the Ordinance 
had not come into force, how could mere executive instruction 
from the Government prevent a prosecution, or some other 
penalty being imposed on that dentist ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I quite agree that that could not have 
prevented prosecution. But fortunately no such case happened 
and it cannot happen now because the period is carried back 
to the original Act. 

Shri Kamath : But then, Sir 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. The point is very clear. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My friend Mr. Kamath in dealing with 
the reasons as to why this Bill was brought in, has made, if 
I may say so, certain very serious allegations. The contention 
on behalf of the Government is that this Bill has become 
necessary by reason of the fact that the States which were 
required to carry out the provisions of preparing the list 
have not been able to do so. My friend suggests that there 
is another reason, and that reason is that there are certain 
British dentists working in this country who do not propose 
to become domiciled and get themselves registered, and that 
this Bill is intended to benefit them. Now, I first of all do 
not understand how an extension of one year is going to 
benefit a British dentist working here who has no intention 
of becoming a domicile of this country. I cannot understand 
it. But if my friend persists in making that suggestion, which 
I think is a very serious allegation against an hon. Member 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of Government, then it should be his duty when that Member 
returns, to specifically put the question and ask her reply, 
whether this was the real motive in bringing forward this 
particular Bill. I am unable to give any categorical answer; 
but I may say that I find it extremely different to believe 
that an hon. member of Government should venture to bring 
forth such a Bill for no other except, the paltry purpose of 
benefiting one or two European dentists now in this country. 
It seems to me a most extravagant allegation. 

Shri Kamath : I did not say it is the only purpose, it may 
be one of the purposes. 

Mr. Speaker : But still, the suggestion is very uncharitable. 

Dr. Ambedkar : On that point also I would like to point 
out to him, in answer to a question that he asked, namely, 
to state the present position, that all the States, who were 
written to in order to find out how much time they would 
find it necessary to prepare the register, have replied that 
they would require not less than one year. And the Bombay 
Government which may be given the credit of having a more 
efficient administrative machinery than others, insisted that 
they should have two years. I think that in itself would suffice 
to dismiss the suggestion made by my friend Mr. Kamath 
that this Bill was intended to protect some Britishers in this 
country. 

I do not think that there is any point which has been raised 
to which I have not adverted in the course of my reply. The 
Bill, as it is, is a very simple, non-controversial one. It has 
arisen not because of the fault of the Central Government, 
but because of the other burdens carried on by the Provincial 
Government, they could not find the time to bring a particular 
provision of the Act into operation. I do not know whether we 
can do anything else except to help the Provincial Governments 
to give effect to this piece of legislation and being the Dentists 
Act into operation as early as possible. 

Mr. Speaker : The queation is : 

“That the Bill to amend the Dentists Act, 1948, be taken 

into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


261 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 261 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 (Amendment of section 46 and section 49, Act 
XVI of 1948 ) 

Shri Kamath : I beg to move : 

“In clause 3, in the proposed amendment to sub-clause (3) of 

section 46 and sub-section (1) of section 49 of the Dentists Act, 

1948, for ‘three years’, substitute ‘two years and six months’.” 

The present clause has been inserted so as to enable State 
Governments to complete their registers of dentists under 
section 46 and 49 of the Act. This is a retroactive piece of 
legislation inasmuch as the words used in the clause are 
“and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.” I for 
one cannot see why for registering a few hundred, dentists, 
such a long period is necessary. I therefore ask again the 
Minister to tell the House how many dentists were still to 
be registered on the 29th March 1950 and in what stage the 
process is. That would be useful for us to know how much 
time is necessary for the complete registration and why this 
extension of time by one year is necessary. If those figures 
are forthcoming, we will be able to judge what time would be 
needed to complete the work of registration. In the absence 
of that it would be very difficult to arrive at an idea of the 
time required for the registration. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is a matter of opinion. My friend 
Mr. Kamath with his abundant energy and administrative 
experience no doubt thinks that six months would be more 
than enough for completing the register. But, as I just now told 
the House, even a Government as efficient as the Government 
of Bombay asked for two years. I personally myself think 
that in view of the fact that the obligation of preparing 
the register rests upon the Provincial Governments, it is 
desirable that this House should follow what the Provincial 
Governments think is feasible in this matter. As a matter 
of fact we have curtailed the period to one year instead of 
the two years asked for by the Bombay Government. We 
have stuck to one year, which was the original proposal 
by the Government of Madras. I do not think it is possible 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for us with safety to curtail the period for us with safety to 
curtail the period provided in this Bill. 

Shri Kamath : I take it that the Hon. Minister has no 
figures with him. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No figures. 

Mr. Speaker : If the registers are incomplete, how can 
he give the correct figures ? 

Mr. Ambedkar : There is no register and who knows who 
is a dentist and who not. 

The motion of Shri Kamath was negatived, 

Shri Sidhva : I beg to move : 

Renumber clause 3 as sub-clause (1) of clause 3 and add the 
following new sub-clause (2) : 

“(2) In sub-section ( 1 ) of section 49 of the said Act, after 
the words ‘three years’ the words ‘ from the commencement of 
this Act or on the completion of formalities under section 32, 
whichever is earlier,’ shall be inserted.” 

Dr. Ambedkar : As my friend Mr. Sidhva has said, this 
amendment affects an important principle which underlies the 
provisions of this clause, namely that the registers should be 
operative on the same date throughout India. This is not a 
mere matter of academic interest 

Shri Sidhva : Is it laid down in the Act ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is why we have said three or 
two years throughout. Otherwise we would have prescribed 
different dates for different States. It is necessary and desirable 
to preserve the principle of uniformity. The House will see that 
it affects eligibility for holding posts. It cannot be said that 
a person is eligible for holding a post in a particular State 
and not eligible in another State, simply because the State 
has not been in a position to prepare the register. Therefore 
I think as it is desirable to preserve the principle I cannot 
accept the amendment of Mr. Sidhva. After all, the difference 
is only a matter of six months. 

Shri Sidhva : I beg leave to withdraw my amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


263 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 263 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 3 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 


(Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER in the Chair) 

Clause 4 (Amendment of the Schedule, Act XVI of 1948) 
Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : My amendment reads as 
follows : 

In clause 4, for the proposed item (2A) of Part I of the 
Schedule to the Dentists Act, 1948, substitute : 

“(2A) Any other institution imparting education or giving 
practical training in dentistry which the Central Government may, 
in consultation with the Central Council of Dentists, recognise for 
this purpose and on such conditions as the Government may deem 
fit to prescribe therefore.” 

I wish to confess that Dr. Ambedkar is a hard nut to crack. He 
has already said in his speech that the organisation mentioned in 
this sub-clause was defunct, whereas I was informed by a member 
of the council of Dentists that a Committee had been appointed 
to inquire into the conditions of this institution and that the 
Committee was already working on it. I don’t want to make any 
aspersions on the institution. I don’t know what its standard is, I 
have no personal knowledge of it, and that therefore I don’t want 
to damage the reputation of the institution. But as an enquiry-is 
going on. I think instead of committing the whole Parliament to 
recognising that institution, it is better that the Government had 
reserved the right in their own hands to decide . . . 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are not affecting the institution in any 
way. We are dealing with the degrees granted by that institution 
in 1940 — eight years ago. 

Shri Tyagi : Dr. Ambedkar expects me to believe that the 
degrees of an institution may be recognised without the institution 
itself being recognised. What I am suggesting is that he may even 
recognise that institution. I want Government to have powers to 
recognise any institution .... 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


264 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : That power exists in section 10(2). 

Shri Tyagi : Sir, I do not move my amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to move : 

“In clause 4, in the proposed item (2A) of Part I of the 

Schedule to the Dentists Act, 1948, omit all the words occurring 

after ‘March, 1940’. 

Therefore, as you have recognised all others as dentists 
on the basis of practise the principle of practise should also 
apply to these eight or ten mens. Therefore, I would request 
that this amendment may be accepted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I know the reason of the 
Hon. Minister to this amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This clause is a clause which really gives 
effect to the suggestion made by the West Bengal Government. 
Personally I myself feel, however much sympathy I may have 
with my friend Mr. Bhargava, it involves the question of the 
assessment of the qualification of the dentist as distinguished 
from a person who makes a denture. I thought he was rather 
eloquent on the man who makes a denture. A person may 
make a denture without being a dentist. We are talking of a 
dentist, which is a very different profession. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : But he has got a degree 
of L.D.Sc. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The point is this. When the Act was 
passed, this institution was not deemed to be worthy of 
recognition. Subsequently there has been a considerable 
degree of agitation and the West Bengal Government decided 
to examine the position as to whether any of the persons 
qualified by tuition in this college were worthy of recognition. 
They came to the conclusion that before 1940 the standard 
observed by this institution was some thing which could be 
considered for the purpose of recognition. But there again 
they said that although there was a standard maintained it 
was also known that many boys merely attended and filled in 
certain terms without learning anything. Therefore, the two 
additional qualifications were introduced that he should not 
only have obtained his diploma before 1940 but in the course 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


265 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 265 

of being a student in that college he should have filled in 
certain terms. It is to make the qualification a real one, 
worthy of recognition, that these limitations were put in. 
I am personally prepared to place myself in the hands of 
the West Bengal Government who know the matter better, 
rather than substitute my own judgment, however great 
sympathy I may feel with the dentists themselves. 


The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : The wording 
of the article is that “the President may, for the purpose 

of removing any difficulties, particularly etc.” 

“Particularly” does not mean that he has not got the general 
power. 

Mr. Speaker : As I have understood the point of order 
of the hon. Member, apart from the words, “any difficulties” 
and “particularly”, he seems to construe article 392 as 
empowering the President to make adaptations only for 
purpose of transition from the provisions of Government 
of India Act to the provisions of the Constitution. That is 
substantially the point. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That cannot be because it is a wrong 
construction. The point raised by my hon. Friend is that 
under article 392 the only power which the President 
possesses is confined to an adaptation of any section of 
the Government of India Act, 1935, so as to bring it in 
line with the provisions of the Constitution. My submission 
is that that is not correct, because the opening words in 
article 392 are quite general, namely, “The President may, 
for the purpose of removing any difficulties” and then 
“particularly etc.” comes in. Suppose you were to drop the 
words “particularly in relation to the transition from the 
provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the 
provisions of this Constitution” the wording would be “The 
President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, 
by order direct etc.”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 27 ) 

* CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908, be taken into consideration.” 

The object of this Bill is three-fold. The first one is to 
make the Civil Procedure Code applicable throughout India, 
except in certain areas which are specified in clause 2 of the 
Bill. As the House will remember, while the Civil Procedure 
Code extends to what are called Part A states, it does not 
extend to Part B States. Part B States have, each of them, 
their own Civil Procedure Code which is although more or 
less the same as the Civil Procedure Code which operates 
in Part A States yet it constitutes a separate jurisdiction. 
The result is that there is a great deal of difficulty in the 
service of summonses and in the execution of decrees passed 
by courts in Part A States within the areas covered by the 
courts of Part B States. Since India has become one under 
the provisions of our Constitution, it is desirable from the 
point of view of establishing civil jurisdiction in the matter 
of suits and processes and execution of decrees that there 
should be one single Civil Procedure Code. That purpose is 
achieved by clause 2. 

The second object of the Bill is that there were certain 
matters which were not covered by the existing Civil Procedure 
Code even as it operates in Part A States. For instance, there 
was no provision for the service of foreign summonses from 
foreign courts. Again, there was no provision for the execution 
of decrees passed by civil courts in places to which this Code 
did not apply. Similarly, the execution of decrees passed by 
revenue courts in places to which this Code did not apply 
was also a matter not covered. Similarly, the provision for the 


* P. D., Vol. 8, Part II, 9th February 1951, pp. 2627-32. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


267 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 267 

operation of commissions issued by foreign courts is also not 
provided for by our present Civil Procedure Code. In order 
to provide for these matters, there are introduced in this 
amending Bill clauses 6, 8, 9 and 11 which deal with them. 
They are by themselves so self-explanatory that I do not think 
that any observations of mine are necessary to make hon. 
members understand what is the purport of these new clauses. 

The most important clause, of course, is clause 12 and it 
is with regard to it that I propose to offer some remarks. As 
will be observed, clause 12 substitutes sections 83, 85, 86, 
87 and 87B. These sections deal with suits by aliens, by or 
against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys. Now, the 
only sections in which certain changes have been made are 
86 and 87B. So far as section 86 is concerned, it is really 
the old section 86 with some minor changes. The one change 
that is proposed to be made in section 86 is in sub-clause 
(2) (d). It deals with the waiving of a privilege given to the 
foreign Rulers, namely, that they shall be sued only under 
certain conditions and subject to the satisfaction of certain 
procedural rules. The question that has been raised is whether 
any such person covered by the provisions of section 86 can 
waive this privilege or whether, notwithstanding the fact 
that he is prepared to waive such privilege, nonetheless the 
statutory provision should be gone through. Some courts in 
India have held that this being a statutory privilege of a 
procedural character, it is not open to the party to waive it and 
that a person who wants to sue should follow the particular 
procedure. Now, it does not seem very right or correct that 
a person who has been given a privilege should be debarred 
from taking the benefit of that privilege if he thinks that he 
does not need or does not want the benefit of that privilege. 
In order, therefore, to set this matter right, this provision 
has been introduced which expressly says that a person who 
has been granted this privilege may waive it if he so desires. 

The second clause in section 86 which makes a change and 
to which I wish to draw the attention of the House is sub- 
clause (4)(b). We have added to the old categories of privileged 
persons one more category, namely, the category of a High 
Commissioner stationed in India. The position of a High 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Commissioner was up to now somewhat of an anomalous 
character. Is he an Ambassador? What is he? Whom does he 
represent? Does he carry the privileges as the representative 
of a foreign ruler does? In order, therefore, again to remove 
this ambiguity, it has been felt that it would be desirable to 
include the Ambassador in the category of privileged persons. 
There are, for instance, within our territory representatives of 
the Commonwealth who have been called High Commissioners 
and who from a diplomatic point of view occupy the same 
position as Ambassadors. Consequently, whatever may be 
the reason for making this distinction in their designation, 
factually, they do represent the heads of their Governments 
and it is, therefore, proper that they also should receive the 
same kind of consideration which an Ambassador does. 

The other clause which makes a change in the old section 
86, is clause 86, sub-clause (4), sub-clause (c). It says that 
the privilege granted to the heads of the foreign government, 
or to their Ambassadors and High Commissioners may also 
be extended to such members of their retinue and their 
staff as may be notified by the Government of India by 
public notification. Here again, from the point of view of 
international law there does not seem to be any unanimity. 
One set of international lawyers have held that when you 
once grant immunity or a privilege to the Ambassador as the 
representative of a foreign State and you do it on the ground 
that his little colony is a little bit of his country established 
here, there is no ground, legally speaking, for making any 
distinction between the man himself and the agents through 
whom he operates in this country. There are other international 
lawyers who have said that such privileges need not be 
extended to everybody, but a state is free to pick and choose 
as to whom it shall grant these privileges. Now as this matter 
is not settled in terms of international law, it is felt that 
the best course would be for the law to give the power to 
the Central Government to notify whom it shall extend this 
privilege. It would be possible under this clause for the Foreign 
Department of the Government of India to make enquiries 
as to the practice prevalent in other countries and to make 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


269 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 269 

suitable notifications in order to be in conformity with the 
largest political international opinion in this country. This is 
all that we propose to do by way of changes in the old section 
86 of the Civil Procedure Code. 

Now, I come to section 87B in which I know most Members 
are deeply interested. Section 87 deals with the Rulers of the 

, T Former Indian States. The question is whether 

12 Noon , 

they should also be given any privileges, such 
as the one they had under the existing. Civil Procedure Code. 
Obviously, since they have ceased to be rulers in the political 
and legal sense of the term, they of course cannot claim any 
immunity from the operation of the law which is applicable 
to the rest of the citizens of this country. But the House will 
know that certain commitments have been made both by the 
Government of India and, if I may say so, also by the Constituent 
Assembly when the Constitution was before them, and it is 
necessary that we must recognise what we have already done. 
What is, therefore, proposed to be done by the new Section is 
to make section 85 and sub-sections ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) of Section 86 
applicable to the Rulers of the former Indian States. If hon. 
members will refer to section 85 as put down in this amending 
Bill, they will find that it only says that when a foreign Ruler 
proposes to sue or if he is being sued, he may be permitted 
to appoint any particular individual, and the Government of 
India may permit him to do so, to conduct the litigation on his 
behalf either as a plaintiff or as a defendant. There is nothing 
wrong in extending this. The only privilege, so to say under 
section 85 that a ruler of a former Indian State gets is that 
he may not be required to attend personally when the suit is 
proceeding against him. He can defend by proxy. 

With regard to 86(7), it says that the consent of the 
Government of India may be necessary before any proceedings 
of a civil character are launched against a Ruler of a former 
Indian State. This matter, again, I believe, was considerably 
debated yesterday when we were dealing with the Bill to 
amend the Criminal Procedure Code. The point was that in 
the present circumstances, there are grounds to believe that 
those persons residing in the Indian States may have many 
grounds or reasons for giving effect to their grudge, to their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

enmity, or personal hostility to a prince, and they may, without 
any bona fide reason drag him to a court and harass him. 
The object of requiring the consent of the Government of 
India is not that there shall be vested in the Government of 
India an absolute power to protect the prince from any kind 
of litigation in which the opponent may have a substantial 
ground for proceeding against him, but to see that the claim 
that is made against him is of a bona fide character. Beyond 
that there is no purpose in requiring this consent. 

With regard to sub-clause ( 3 ) it gives him freedom from 
arrest and execution of decree against his property except with 
the consent of the central Government. As I said, these are 
merely, what I might say, fulfilment of certain undertakings 
that we have given in order to maintain the dignity of the 
Indian Rulers. Beyond that there is nothing. 

I might also draw the attention of the House to the 
definition of the word “Ruler” which is given in section 87B 
(2) ( b ), I think that definition is important. It is not that 
every Ruler of a former Indian State will get the benefit of 
the provisions contained in section 87B. The definition is of a 
restricted sort, namely, that the Ruler must be recognized by 
the President as one entitled to these privileges. If a prince 
were to behave in such a manner that the President thinks that 
he ought not to be recognized, it would be perfectly possible 
for the President to delete his name from any notification, so 
that he would be reduced to the status of an ordinary citizen 
and be liable to the ordinary process to which every citizen 
will be liable in this country under the Civil Procedure Code. 

The other clauses are just to clear any ambiguity, difficulty 
and so on. The most important clause is clause 12 and 
think I have given the House sufficient explanation as to 
the fundamental basis of the amendments which have been 
introduced by this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : Motion moved. 

“That the Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908, be taken into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


271 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 271 

* Dr. Ambedkar : There is not much that calls for a reply. 

But as certain points have been made I should like to 
make my position clear. 

The first speaker who took part in this debate said that the 
provision contained in this Bill with regard to the immunity 
to be granted to the retinue of a diplomat was not in accord 
with international opinion. He felt that he was convinced 
that there was unanimity among the writers dealing with 
international law that not only the diplomat should get the 
privilege but also his retinues. I am sorry to differ from him. 
I have before me several extracts from treatises dealing with 
international law and I do not wish to weary the House by 
reading them. I can assure the House that I do not find any 
such unanimity from the extracts before me. It is on that 
account that the section has been worded in the way in which 
it has been worded. My friend will also realise that whatever 
may be the method of defining the positions, the result will 
not be in any way different if the clause is allowed to stand 
as it is. Because whether the immunity is granted by the 
section itself or whether it is granted by a notification issued 
under the section, the result cannot be very different. 

His second point was that we were not justified in using the 
word “Ruler”, because there are heads of States who are not 
called “Rulers”. I should like to draw his attention to the fact 
that in drafting this clause we have been following practically 
the same language which has been followed in the existing 
Civil Procedure Code. I would like to draw his attention to 
the heading of section 83 of the Civil Procedure Code, also 
to section 85, sub-clauses (1) and (2) and section 86, where 
the wording which we have used is also the wording used 
there. There is therefore no departure from the language that 
has been adopted in the existing Civil Procedure Code. But 
in this connection I would like to draw his attention to the 
definition that we have given of a “Ruler” which is contained 
in proposed section 87A of the Bill which says : 

“Ruler” in relation to a foreign State, means the person who 
is for the time being recognised by the Central Government to 
be the head of that State.” 


* P.D., Vol. 8, Part II, 9th February 1951, pp 2646-62. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


272 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Therefore, whether any particular State has a monarchical 
form of Government and the Ruler is a monarch or whether 
any particular State has a republican form of Government 
with a President or some other dignitary at the head of it, it 
really cannot make any difficulty at all in view of the fact that 
our definition leaves the matter to the Central Government 
to State who is to be regarded as the head of the State. 

Coming to the position of the Indian Rulers, I have been 
asked to clarify one or two things. One is how long these 
privileges are going to last, and then, secondly, whether the 
privileges are personal privileges of the present, existing 
Rulers or whether they have any hereditary character which 
will pass on from father to son. My lawyer friends will realise 
that a lawyer never undertakes to solve a problem unless the 
problem is present to him, before him. No such problem is 
present before me and therefore I am not in a position nor 
willing to commit myself to any particular interpretation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is there : Rulers for the time 
being. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, for the time being. Therefore, 
what I am saying is that this is a matter which is open to 
consideration, to revision, at all times. It is not a matter which 
has been so to say taken out of the purview of Parliament or 
of Government. If Parliament so chooses, it can decide that 
these privileges and immunities shall end because enough 
time has intervened for us to suppose that these enemies 
of the Indian Princes have died out or disappeared without 
leaving any kind of progeny to harass them further, or they 
may take the view that these privileges may be permitted 
to last till the life time of the present holder. Therefore, the 
issue is quite open, not a closed one. 

With regard to the assurances that have been demanded 
from me on behalf of Government as to how Government 
propose to utilise this power of granting or refusing consent, 
speaking for myself, I cannot have the slightest doubt in my 
mind that any Government or a Member of Government who 
may be dealing with this matter would ever think it advisable 
or proper to withhold consent in a matter where the claim 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


273 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 273 

is absolutely bona fide. I have no doubt in my mind at all 
because any Member who might be dealing with such a matter 
would be answerable to the House. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, it is past one o’clock 
now. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If possible let us complete the 
first reading now. 

Pandit Kunzru : The Hon. Minister might take half an 
hour. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How long will the Hon. Minister 
take to finish? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I will not take long, Sir. 

My friend, Mr. Sarwate, in his anxiety to criticise 
Government for giving certain privileges to the former Rulers 
of Indian States said that he did not quite understand why 
sub-section (2) of section 86 was not made applicable to the 
Indian Princes, I am sure my friend, Mr. Sarwate, will realise 
that we have done the wisest thing in not applying it because 
if we had applied it Government would have been debarred 
from giving any consent to a suit against a Prince unless 
the four conditions mentioned in sub-section ( 2 ) had been 
satisfied. Clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) embodied in sub-section 
(2) of section 86 are really rules of International law. There 
can be no dispute about them and we don’t want to treat the 
Indian Princes on the same footing as ambassadors or heads 
of States or Rulers of other foreign States. The immunity 
that we have granted therefore, is of a very small dimension. 
If sub-section (2) had been made applicable the thing would 
have been worse. 

I do not think, therefore, that any serious objection can 
be levelled against this Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will stand adjourned 
till 2-35 p.m. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


274 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Thirty Five Minutes 
Past Two of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled after Lunch at Thirty Five Minutes 
Past Two of the Clock. 

[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair ] 

Clauses 2 and 3 

Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 

Clauses 4 to 11 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan) : I have an amendment 
to clause 4 but I would not like to move it formally. I only 
want to say one thing. Nowhere in the Constitution has the 
Central Government as such been empowered to constitute a 
court. The authority that is there in this behalf is exercised 
in the case of the Supreme Court by the President and in 
the case of the courts in the States by the Governor of the 
State. My objection pertains only to this point. I think that 
if we simply substitute the words “under the authority of the 
Constitution” for the words “Central Government” it would 
be much better. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I Cannot accept the suggestion. The 
Constitution has established certain courts — the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts. As far the establishment of 
special courts, Parliament has been given the power and the 
Central Government can act under the authority given by 
Parliament. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the words 
“the Constitution of India”. Besides, “Central Government” 
has been used throughout in all the adaptation orders and I 
think it would be very unfortunate if a departure is made in 
the matter of terminology in this particular Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So, the hon. Member’s point is 
answered. I shall put clauses 4 to 11 together as there are 
no amendments to them. 

The question is : 

“That clauses 4 to 11 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


275 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 275 

Clauses 4 to 11 were added to the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : On a point of information, in regard 
to clause 9 may I know from the Hon. Minister what is the 
need for saying “execution of a decree of any revenue court 
in any State in any other State”. Could it not be “a revenue 
court in that State”? Why should it be augmented? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The object of putting it in larger terms 
is to facilitate. 

Dr. R. U. Singh: When the general discussion on the 
motion for consideration was on, I raised the same point and 
the Hon. Law Minister was pleased to say that the word 
‘Ruler’ is used in some of the sections of the Civil Procedure 
Code under discussion. I have looked through the various 
sections of the Civil Procedure Code which are under discussion 
under clause 12 of the amending Bill, and I dare say that the 
word ‘Ruler’ is not used anywhere else. As I said earlier, it 
is only the sub-title that uses the word “Foreign Rulers”. In 
the sections themselves the word ‘Ruler’ is not used. ‘Ruling 
chiefs’ may have been used because this term was in vogue 
in this country or some such term may have been used, but 
I dare say, Sir, the term ‘Ruler’ has not been used. 

As the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code stand, it 
was not necessary to define the term Ruler. The point that 
was made by me was that it has been done unnecessarily 
and I reinforce that argument by saying that when we are 
dealing with questions of International Law, we might use 
terminology which is familiar to International Law. I observe 
that the term “Ruler” is not used. The words used generally 
are, “Head of a State” or “Sovereign”, “foreign State” or 
“Foreign Sovereign”. I do think that Government have taken 
pains unnecessarily to introduce the term “Ruler”. I do feel 
that if the word ‘Head’ only is substituted now, because they 
have re-arranged the section and framed the thing in such 
a manner, some of the clauses will become clumsy. In some 
places ‘Head of the State’ will have to be used, in some places 
‘Head’ only will do. Therefore, while sticking to my original 
point of view, I observe that it is unhappy that the term 
“Ruler” has been used. I think the clumsy phraseology used 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the amending Bill may be allowed to stand. Or if that is 
not to stand, then, in some places, the word “Head” has to 
be used and in other, the ;erm “Head of a Foreign State” has 
to be used, because the draftsmen have some-how rearranged 
the clauses in such a manner that there is no escape from 
this position. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am really at a loss to understand why 
my hon. friends are unhappy over the phraseology that has 
been used in this Bill My hon. friend Mr. Raj Bahadur says 
that it is better to distinguish foreign Rulers from Indian Rulers 
by giving them a different name. Supposing that was true, 
would it not be necessary again to define “Head of a Sate”. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : No, no 

Dr. Ambedkar : In the United States of America, there 
is the President; in Great Britain, there is the King; in 
Switzerland, there is some other machinery to represent 
the State. If the facts are various, you will have to have a 
definition of “Head of State”. 

Another hon. Member says that he has examined the 
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code to which I made 
reference in the morning. He thinks that the words that we 
have used in this amending Bill do not occur there. I hope he 
has got a copy of the Civil Procedure Code in front of him. 

Dr. R. U. Singh : I have got it here. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Please look up the heading of section 83. 

Dr. R. U. Singh : That I stated earlier. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The heading is, “Suits by Aliens and 
by or against Foreign Rulers and Rulers of Indian States.” 
I would like to draw his attention also to the fact that this 
amendment was made in 1937 by the adaptation of Indian 
Laws Order. I cannot say that I am quite up-to-date in the 
matter of International Law and the phraseology that they use. 
But, I am quite content in saying that any one who made this 
Adaptation — and he will permit me to say that the adaptation 
was made by the India Office — must have been advised by 
some Parliamentary Lawyer, who could not have gone very 
much wrong in using the phraseology ‘Foreign Rulers’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


277 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 277 

Then, he says that the term ‘Ruler of an Indian Sate’ has 
never been used in sections 83 onwards. I quite agree that 
a variety of designations have been used. The Indian Rulers 
have been called Princes, Rulers, Chiefs and so on. But, what 
I want to submit is this. When the Constitution by several 
articles has given them a particular description, namely. ‘Rulers 
of Indian States’, is it permissible for the draftsmen to use a 
language other than the one that is used in the Constitution? 
The Justification for using the words “Rulers of Former Indian 
States” is simply that that is the language that is used in the 
Constitution. We do not want to have any departure from the 
language used in the Constitution so as to leave it open to 
anybody like my hon. friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed to come 
up and say, “well, this provision does not apply to the people 
to whom it is intended to apply.” 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 12 in the proviso to the proposed new section 84 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for “Ruler” substitute 
“Head”, 

The motion was negatived. 

Similar 3 other motions were negatived 


* Dr. R. U. Singh : So far as the immunity of 

the Rulers of the Indian States is concerned, we do not have 
any such assurance from the Law Minister, in regard to 
things done even in their personal capacity. We are concerned 
with that aspect of the question. It has not been said that 
a certain amount of notice would be sufficient or some such 
thing. The immunity now sought to be conferred on them is 
much greater than the immunity conferred on the Head of the 
Indian Republic, as also the Heads of the various States of 
the Union. And if Government would indicate their mind and 
their policy in this regard, as to the duration of the immunity 
and the extent of that immunity — I dare say it ought not to 
be very wide — it would be extremely nice indeed.. 


* P. D., Vol. 8, Part VIII, 9th February 1951, pp. 2664-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


278 


278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : Before recess, I was also called upon 
to answer some of the questions which have been raised by 
my friend. I think I gave replies to those which I thought 
one should very safely give, and I do not know that I have 
anything further to add to what I have said. All that I would 
like to say now is this. My hon. friend if he will forgive my 
saying so, seems to lack sufficient imagination. 

Shri R. U. Singh : All lawyers do not have much of it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Lawyers sometimes have very long 
imagination. If he had sufficient imagination he should 
have realised the fact that the Constituent Assembly very 
definitely and very rightly said that whatever was included 
in the covenant made before a certain date, matters contained 
in it were not justiciable. Now, I think that was a very 
great protection and a very important fact. It means that 
Parliament or Government is free to make any change it likes, 
notwithstanding the fact that the matters were mentioned in 
the convenant. That being so, I think the House at any rate, 
should feel satisfied that the future is in no way closed or 
dark. I do not think that anybody would expect me to say 
anything more than that. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 12, omit the proposed new section 87B. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 12 stand part of the Bill,” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 12 was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 13 to 18 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 19 . — (Special Provisions etc.) 

Amendment made : 

In Clause 19, omit “Code of” occurring in line 2. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Clause 19, as, amended, was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


279 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 279 

Clause 20 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 . — ( Short title etc.) 

Amendment made : 

In Sub-clause (1) of clause 1, for “1950”, substitute “1951”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Clause 1, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed”. 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


280 


280 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 28 ) 

‘PART B STATES (LAWS) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : Sir, I move for 
leave to introduces Bill to provide for the extension of certain 
laws to Part B States. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the 
extension of certain laws to Part B States.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 


**PART B STATES (LAWS) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to provide for the extension of certain laws to 

Part B States, be taken into consideration.” 

The Bill is a very simple one... 

An Hon. Member : As all other Bills are. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Much simpler than the others. The object 
of the Bill is this. There are certain Acts passed by the Central 
Legislature which on account of the jurisdiction formerly 
exercised by the Central Government were confined in their 
operation to Part A States only. Part B States (formerly called 
the Indian States) which were sovereign and independent, 
had their own laws which might be compared to the laws 
passed by the Central Legislature under Lists I and III. Now 
this Parliament has obtained jurisdiction over the territories 
covered by Part B States so far as Lists I and III are concerned. 
There are already in existence a large number of Acts passed 
by the Central Legislature covering the field of Lists I and III, 
which on account of their territorial limitation did not apply 

* P. D., Vol 6, Part II, 20th November 1951, p. 183. 

** P. D., Vol 8, Part II, 9th February 1951, pp. 9665-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


281 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 281 

to Part B States. It is for this purpose that this Bill has 
been brought forward. 

Hon. Members will see that to this Bill is added a 
Schedule giving the list of Acts which it is proposed under 
the powers given by this Bill to be extended to Part B States. 
There are altogether 135 Acts, so far as I have computed 
them, which are sought to be extended to Part B States. 

While seeking to extend the Central Acts to Part B 
States it is felt that these Acts themselves required some 
small amendment according to the views of the various 
administrative departments of the Government of India 
which are working these Acts. Consequently the occasion 
which now exists for the purpose of extending these 135 
Acts is also utilised for the purpose of making certain 
amendments in these Central Acts, so that when this Bill 
is passed, not only these Acts will come into operation in 
Part B States but they will also come into operation in the 
form in which they are modified by the provisions contained 
in the various Acts in the Schedule as mentioned therein. 
I do not think any controversy is likely to arise over the 
principle of this Bill. 

There are one or two omissions which we have discovered 
since and I propose to move amendments in order to bring 
them under this Schedule. 

Mr. Speaker: Motion moved: 

“ That the Bill to provide for the extension of certain laws 

to Part B States, be taken into consideration. ” 


* Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the point made by my 
friend from Travancore- Cochin, Shri Sivan Pillay the position 
is quite easy as I see it. There are some laws which are sought 
to be extended by this Bill which fall in the Concurrent List. 
Consequently, it would be open to any State in India to amend 
these laws in the manner that they wish to do. To take his 
illustration, namely, the Indian Penal Code, it is quite true 
that the Indian Penal Code sanctions death as one of the 


* P. D., Vol 8, Part II, 9th February 1951, pp. 2669-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

penalties. It is equally true, as he has said, that the Penal Code 
as it now operates in Travancore abolishes that penalty. Well, 
after the Indian Penal code has been made applicable under 
this Act, it would be perfectly possible for the Travancore- 
Cochin Legislature to pass an amending Bill and amend the 
Indian Penal Code in the way they wish to do. Consequently, 
so far as the laws which fall under the Concurrent List are 
concerned, all States in India which have the power to make 
laws will certainly make laws to suit their circumstances. 

With regard to the point made by my other hon. friend, 
it seems to me that he has not read correctly the provisions 
of clause 3 of this Bill which says : 

"The Acts and Ordinances specified in the Schedule shall be 
amended in the manner and to the extent therein specified ”. 

Therefore, this Bill is both a Bill to amend and also to 
extend. Of course, he might stay that this is a very inelegant 
method of legislation, but let him consider his plan of doing 
the thing. We will have to stay here and pass 135 different 
laws, first to amend and then to extend. I think it is desirable, 
although it may not be quite so straight or elegant, to adopt 
the summary procedure that has been adopted in this Bill, 
namely, both to amend and to extend. I do not think my hon. 
friend will have any quarrel after this explanation. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“ That the Bill to provide for the extension of certain laws 
to Part B States, be taken into consideration. ” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 2 to 6. 

Clauses 2 to 6 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 7 . — (Power to remove difficulties) 

Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 7, after part (b) insert: 

“(c) specify the areas or circumstances in which, or the extent to 
which or the conditions subject to which, anything done or any action 
taken (including any of the matters specified in the second proviso to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


283 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 283 

section 6) under any law repealed by that section shall be 

recognised or given effect to under the corresponding provision 

of the Act or Ordinance as now extended. ” 

— [ Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Clause 7, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

The Schedule 

Dr. Ambedkar: I was wondering whether all the 
amendments to the Schedule standing in my name may be 
taken as moved. 

Mr. Speaker: Is the House agreeable to this course? 

Hon. Members: Yes, Sir. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: I would like to have clarification 
on one point before you put these amendments to vote. On 
page 4 of the schedule, under the Government Savings Banks 
Act, 1873, it is said that that Act would not apply to any 
deposits made in the Anchal Savings Bank of the State of 
Travancore-Cochin. It is not clear to us why it won’t apply 
to this Bank. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid it would be very difficult for 
me to reply to the various queries. I should therefore like to 
explain my position. This Bill is like a supplementary estimate 
which the Finance Minister puts before the House, although 
the actual responsibility of defending the different estimates 
falls upon the d iff erent Ministers who are responsible for them. 
I am merely sponsoring what the other Departments desire 
should be done. I am sorry that the Finance Minister is not 
here, otherwise, he might have explained to my friend exactly 
why he wants this particular amendment to be made. All the 
same, I hope that my friend will agree that this must have 
been done after very deliberate and mature consideration. 

Mr. Speaker: I do not wish to raise any objection, if the 
House has none, but this is not a satisfactory procedure. An 
hon. Member is entitled to know before he votes what he is 
called upon to vote and why. Even if the position be like the 
supplementary estimate, it should be the practice to append 
some kind of notes for the benefit of hon. Members explaining 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


284 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the reasons why they are called upon to vote for a certain 
proposition. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is a very valuable suggestion. We shall 
try and follow it up. 

Mr. Speaker: What is the present position of Shri Shiv 
Charan Lai ? Is he agreeable to vote for it without knowing 
the reasons? 

Dr. Ambedkar: We shall insure any risk, if he is 
undergoing one. 

Mr. Speaker: It does not mean that he doubts the 
correctness or the soundness of the proposition, but still as 
a Member he is entitled to know the reason. 

Shri S. V Naik (Hyderabad): On page 5 of the list of 
amendments to the Schedule, under the heading “Currency 
Ordinance, 1940” after section 2, certain temporary provisions 
with respect to Hyderabad one-rupee notes are made. I would 
like to know what will be the position in regard to the other 
currencies that are prevalent in the Hyderabad State. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall have to answer in the same way 
that I have done before. I can inform the Hon. the Finance 
Minister and he will probably communicate to the hon. Member 
what is the answer. 

4 P.M. 

I have one more amendment to the schedule. I request 
that that may also be taken as moved. 

Amendments made: 

1. In the schedule, under the heading “The Indian Oaths 

Act, 1873”, for the item relating to section 1, substitute : 

“Section 1. — “except Part B states” substitute “except the 

States of Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir”. 

2. In the Schedule, after entry relating to “The Partition 

Act, 1893”, insert: 

“The Livestock Importation Act 1898 (IX of 1898) , 

Section 1 . — For sub-section (2) substitute : 

(2) It extends to all Part A States, Part C States and the 

States of Saurashtra and Travancore- Cochin’.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


285 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


285 


3. In the Schedule, under the heading “ The Indian Coinage Act, 
1906 ”, for the last item substitute : 

“After section 23, insert the following, namely: 

‘ 24. temporary provisions with respect to certain Part B States 
Coins. — Notwithstanding anything in section 6 of the Part B States 
(Laws) Act, 1951, coins of such description as at the commencement 
of the said Act were in circulation as legal tender in any Part B State 
shall continue to be legal tender in that State to the like extent and 
subject to the same conditions as immediately before the commencement 
of the said Act for such period, not exceeding two years from such 
commencement, as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, determine.’ ” 

4. In the Schedule, under the heading “The Indian Companies Act, 
1913”, after the item relating to the new section 2B, insert: 

“ Section 144. — After sub-section ( 1 ) insert: 

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1 ) but 
subject to the provisions of rules made under sub-section ( 2A ), the 
holder of a certificate granted under a law in force in the whole or 
any portion of a Part B State immediately before the commencement 
of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, entitling him to act as an 
auditor of companies in that State or any portion thereof shall be 
entitled to be appointed to act as an auditor of companies registered 
anywhere in that State. 

(2A) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules providing for the grant, renewal, suspension or 
cancellation of auditors’ certificates to persons in Part B States for the 
purposes of sub-section (2), and prescribing conditions and restrictions 
for such grant renewal, suspension or cancellation’.” 

5. In the Schedule, after the entry relating to the “ Indian 
Copyright Act, 1914 ”, insert: 

“The Cinematograph Act, 1918 (II of 1918) 

Section 1. — In sub-section (2), omit “Hyderabad and’.” 

6. In the Schedule, after the entry relating to “The Indian Bar 
Councils Act, 1926 ”. insert: 

“ The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (XIX of 1929). 

Section 1. — In sub-section (2), for ‘except Part B States’ substitute 
‘except the State of Jammu and Kashmir’.” 

7. In the Schedule, under the heading “The Petroleum Act, 1934”, 
in the item relating to section 1. for “For” substitute “In sub-section 
(2), for”. 

8. In the Schedule, after the entry relating to “The employment 
of Children Act, 1938”, insert: 

“ The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (IV of 1939).” 

Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for the 
States’ substitute ‘India’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


286 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Section 1 . — (a) In sub-section (2), for ‘except Part B States’ substitute 
‘except the State of Jammu and Kashmir’; 

(b) for sub-section (3), substitute: — 

‘(3) Chapter VIII shall not have effect in any Part B State to which 
this Act extends until the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, so directs, and notwithstanding the repeal by section 6 
of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, of any law in force in that State 
corresponding to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, the corresponding law, 
in so far as it requires or relates to the insurance of motor vehicles 
against third party risks shall, until Chapter VIII takes effect in that 
State, have effect as if enacted in this Act.’ 

Section 2. — (a) after clause 9 insert 

‘(9A) ‘India’ means the territories to which this Act extends’: 

(b) omit clause (29A). 

Section 9. — (a) In sub-section (2), for ‘In any Part B State’, substitute 
‘in the State of Jammu and Kashmir’; 

(b) In sub-section (4), — 

(i) for ‘any Part B state or’ substitute ‘the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or any’; and 

(ii) for ‘in any State’ and ‘in any such State’ substitute ‘in the State’. 

Section 28. — (a) In sub-section (2), for ‘any part B State’ substitute 
‘the State of Jammu and Kashmir’; 

(b) in sub-section (5), — 

(i) for ‘any Part B State or’ substitute ‘the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or any’; 

(ii) for ‘registration in such State’ and ‘registration in any State’ 
substitute ‘registration in the State ’; and 

(iii) for ‘ issued in any such State’ substitute ‘issued in the State’. 

Section 42 . — In sub-section (3), — 

(i) in clause (a), for ‘the Government of a Part A State’ substitute 
‘a State Government’; 

(ii) in clause (h), for ‘any Part B State or’ substitute ‘ the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir or any.’ 

Section 133. — For ‘the Legislature of a Part A State’ substitute 
‘the State Legislature’. 

The Sixth Schedule. — For the table, substitute the following: — 


Assam ... ... AS 

Bihar ... ... BR 

Bombay ... ... BM, BY 

Madhya Pradesh ... ... CP, MP 

Madras ... ... MD, MS 

Orissa ... ... OR 

Punjab ... ... PN 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


287 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


287 


Uttar Pradesh 

UP, US 

West Bengal 

WB, WG 

Hyderabad 

HT, HY 

Madhya Bharat 

MB 

Mysore 

MY 

Patiala and East Punjab States Union 

PU 

Rajasthan 

RJ 

Saurashtra 

SS 

Travancore-Cochin 

TC 

Ajmer 

AJ 

Bhopal 

BS 

Bilaspur 

BL 

Coorg 

CG 

Delhi 

DL 

Himachal Pradesh 

HI - 

Kutch 

KH 

Manipur 

MN 

Tripura 

TR 

Vindhya Pradesh 

VP 

Andaman and Nicobar Islands 

AN’ ” 


9. In the Schedule, under the heading “ the Protective Duties 
Act, 1946 ”, omit the last item relating to section 2. 

10. In the Schedule, omit the entry relating to the Employees’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948, (XXXIV of 1948). 

11. In the Schedule, omit the entry relating to “The Transfer 
of Detained Persons Act, 1949 (XLV of 1949)”. 

12. In the Schedule, under the heading “The Currency 
Ordinance, 1940 ”, after the item relating to section 2, insert; 

“ After section 2, insert the following, namely: — 

“2A. Temporary provisions with respect to Hyderabad one- 
rupee notes. — Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6 of 
the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, notes of the denominational 
value of one rupee which at the commencement of the said Act 
were in circulation as legal tender in the state of Hyderabad 
shall continue to be legal tender in that state to the like extent 
and subject to the same conditions as, immediately before the 
commencement of the said Act and for such period, not exceeding 
two years, from such commencement, as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine’.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


288 


288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


13. In the Schedule, insert the following as the first entry: 
“The caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850 (XXI of 1850) 

Long title and preamble . — For ‘the territories subject to the 
Government of the East India Company’ substitute ‘India’ 

Section 1. — (1) For ‘the territories subject to the Government 
of the East India Company’ substitute ‘India’ and for ‘in the 
courts of the East India Company and in the courts established 
by Royal Charter within the said territories’ substitute ‘in any 
court’. 

After section 1, add the following section, namely: — 

2. Short title and extent. — (1) This Act may be called the 
Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850. 

(2) It extends to the whole of India, except ‘the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir’. ” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

The Schedule, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1. — (Short title etc.) 

Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 1 and elsewhere in the Bill where 
there is a reference to the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1950, for 
“ 1950 ” substitute “1951”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Clause 1, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Speaker: Motion moved : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Capt. A. P. Singh (Vindhya Pradesh): Sir, I would like 
to draw your attention to one point. The statement of Objects 
and Reasons lays down that “for the purpose of improving 
the administration”, and as such I oppose it; although this 
is not a part of it and so no amendment could be put forth 
in this connection. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. The hon. Member is too late. 
I may inform him, however, that a protest on this same point 
was raised by another Member of this House previously. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


289 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 289 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to apologise, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

That the bill, as amended, be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


PREVENTIVE DETENTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 

* The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajgopalachari): 

I was coming here in a hurry for I heard that Dr. 

Ambedkar was able to get through two solid Bills in this 
House as I had not at all anticipated last evening. It seems 
to me that people treat me much worse than they treat Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I am a Harijan; 
you are not. 


LAYING OF ADAPTATION ORDER ON THE 

TABLE 

** Mr. Deputy Speaker : Dr. Ambedkar. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Sir 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Sir, before the Law 
Minister begins, may I make a submission? Now we have 
got an idea of the work to be done by Parliament up to the 
16th. But we do not yet know what Bills or other legislative 
measures or other work will be taken up on the 17th of this 
month and ... 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): There is the agenda up 
to the 19th. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : But it only says whether 
the business will be official or non-official. 

Shri Sidhva : No, they are all official Bills. We got it 
today. 

* P. D., Vol 8, Part II, 9th February 1951, p. 2679. 

** P. D., Vol 10, Part II, 12th April 1951, p. 6659. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mr. Deputy- Speaker, yesterday, my hon. 
friend Mr. Hussain Imam raised a question with regard to an 
answer which I gave to a question put by Pandit Bhargava 
with regard to the Adaptation Order issued by the President. 
Unfortunately I was not present in the House. I wish he had 
given me previous notice that he was going to raise this matter; 
I certainly would have been present in the House to give him 
the answer. From the proceedings, extracts from which were 
supplied to me yesterday evening. I find that he raised two 
questions. One question which he raised was that he was not 
able to obtain a copy of the Adaptation Order although he 
made an effort to get one. On that point, the facts which I have 
been able to ascertain are these. The Adaptation Order was 
published in the Gazette Extraordinary dated the 4th instant. 
I gave my reply on the 7th. Copies of the Adaptation Order, 
or rather, of the Gazette, were received in the Constitution 
Branch on the 10th, the date on which he sent a telephonic 
message to the Constitution Branch, enquiring as to what had 
happened to the copies of the Adaptation Order. My information 
is that the Superintendent whom he contacted on that matter 
told him that the copies of the Gazette Extraordinary had 
just reached him and that he was examining whether there 
were any clerical or printers’ errors. I am told that my hon. 
friend did not specifically ask for a copy. I do not know, he 
is in a better position to confirm this or not. 

Shri Hussain Imam (Bihar): I asked for it in the Notice 
Office and in the Library. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am telling what happened in the 
Superintendent’s branch. That being so, the hon. Member 
was not directly supplied any copies from the Constitution 
Branch. It is obvious that if the copies were received by 
the Superintendent on the 10th it was not possible for him 
to supply copies to the Notice Office for distribution among 
Members of Parliament. That is the position so far as the 
first complaint is concerned. 

I find from the proceedings, extracts of which were sent to 
me, that the hon. Member also raised a question of privilege. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


291 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 291 

What I understood him to say was that as soon as an 
Adaptation Order is made by the President, it ought to be 
placed on the Table of the House. Now, Sir so far as that 
point is concerned, my submission is this. Whatever privileges 
this House has, they are regulated by article 105 of the 
Constitution which says that the Parliament shall have all 
the privileges which the House of Commons has. That takes 
us to an enquiry as to whether, when laying a paper on the 
Table of the Parliament is a matter of privilege and when it 
is not a matter of privilege. Referring to May* one thing is 
quite clear.... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am sorry to interrupt the Hon. 
Minister. So far as the question of privilege is concerned first 
of all the Speaker looks into the matter, goes through the 
rules and regulations and then ascertains the opinion of the 
House. If he comes to the conclusion that a matter of privilege 
is involved, he then sends it to the Privileges Committee. I 
do not think the hon. Member seriously raised a question of 
privilege. The question was that a copy of the Adaptation 
Order ought to be made available. He went to the Notice Office 
and also to the Library. He said that the Adaptation Order 
was made as early as the 4th April and therefore normally 
expected it to be placed in the Library in a day or two. Now 
that the matter has been made clear by the Law Minister we 
need not go further into the question of privilege. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If that is your ruling I would not pursue 
the matter. But I only wanted to submit one point which 1 
think is of general interest and which the House should know. 
A matter of privilege can arise only when a statute makes 
it obligatory upon the government that a paper should be 
laid on the table of the House. Now so far as the Adaptation 
Order is concerned there is no such obligation at all. I would 
like hon. members to compare article 372, which deals with 
Adaptation, with article 392 which deals with an order 
made by the President for the removal of difficulties in the 
Constitution during the transition period. It will be found 
that so far as article 392 is concerned there is a specific sub- 
clause which says that any order made by the President for 
the removal of difficulties shall be placed on the table of the 


* May’s Parliamentary Practice — ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

House. There is no such proviso with regard to article 372. 
Therefore my submission was that there is really no privilege 
involved and the question of breach of privilege therefore 
cannot arise. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): Sir, are you going to allow 
a general discussion as to whether or not this is a question 
of privilege .... 

Shri Bharati (Madras): The Chair has already ruled that 
there was no question of privilege. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am not deciding the question 
of privilege at all. In as much as there was a reference by 
Mr. Husain Imam to the word privilege, the Hon. Law Minister 
thought that he must answer that other point also. He has 
now placed his view point. That question does not arise now 
and therefore I will not go into it. 


[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair.} 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member may resume 
after we hear the Hon. the Law Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I have applied my mind to the points 
which you were good enough to put to me and I would like 
to submit my opinion about those points. 

The real question that the House has to consider is whether 
this Bill offends against Article 117 — either clause (1) of that 
article, or clause (3) of that article. Those are the main points 
that are to be considered and the clauses which require to 
be considered in the light of Article 117 are clauses (4), (5) 
and (6) of the Bill. 

I should take clauses (5) and (6) together. Now it is 
contended that those clauses offend against clause (1) of Article 
117. The validity of that contention must depend upon the 
meaning that is to be attached to the word “appropriation” 
occurring in sub-clause (d) of clause (1) of Article 110 which 
defines what is a “Money Bill”. Now, I am quite certain in 
my mind that the word “appropriation” which is used in 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 12th April 1951, pp. 6725-27. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


293 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 293 

sub-clause (d) — and I have verified myself by reference to 
May’s “ Parliamentary Practice ” where this matter has been 
discussed at great length — is a term of art and it involves two 
things: first the naming of the service, the particular service, 
and secondly the exact allotment of money to be spent on 
that particular service. It is these two things that go to make 
what we know now as appropriation and it is in that sense 
that the word is used both in Article 114 and Article 266 of 
the Constitution. 

Reading the two clauses 5 and 6 in the Bill I do not think 
it is possible to import into those two clauses any such thing 
as we now understand by the term “ appropriation”. They are, 
in my judgment, mere directions to the Government that this 
is a service on which money may be spent which Government 
may or may not spend. Therefore, so far as Article 117, clause 
(1) is concerned, the Bill, it may be said, sails clear and no 
difficulty can arise on that account. 

Now, I turn to clause 4 of the Bill. There, we have to 
consider whether that clause offends against clause (3) of 
Article 117. My conclusion is that it does, because clause 4 of 
the Bill imposes a liability upon the Government to undertake 
a service which, if the Bill is passed by this House, would 
undoubtedly involve expenditure out of the Consolidated 
Fund. Therefore, it would require a recommendation from the 
President under the provisions of clause (3) of Article 117. 

The question that remains for consideration is this. At 
what stage must the recommendation of the President be 
forthcoming? The word used there is “ consideration ”. It has 
been contended that “ consideration ” means the very initation 
of the Bill. I am afraid I cannot agree with that contention. A 
bill has two stages: the first stage is called in our parlance “ 
Introduction ”, which is different from ‘ consideration ’. After a 
Bill is introduced, then the stage of consideration begins and 
the stage of consideration continues from that point when the 
Bill is taken up by the House after the stage of introduction, 
until it is passed. During that interval the proceedings are 
proceedings in respect of consideration of the Bill. Therefore, 
in my humble opinion, if before the motion for passing is put, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a recommendation is obtained, that would meet the 
requirements of clause (3) of Article 117. But while that is so, 
I think there is one practical point which must be considered. 
The House must not readily assume that the President will 
give his assent or recommendation whenever it is asked. If 
a financial liability is involved, the President will have to 
consider the matter in detail and find out whether the financial 
condition of the country is such as he could agree to take 
more financial liability. It is possible that the President may 
refuse his recommendation, in which case the labour spent 
by the House would be wasted. I think, therefore, there is 
no harm in adopting or suggesting the rule that whenever 
there is any bill projected before the house which involves 
or is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund, the House should insist that immediately, before the 
consideration stage begins, the Member in-charge should 
produce a recommendation from the President so that the 
House may be engaged in labours which may ultimately not 
turn out to be fruitless. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have heard this point in extenso. 
I entirely agree with the Hon. the Law Minister in coming 
to the conclusion that ‘appropriation’ as used in Article 110, 
Sub-clause (1) (d) is only a term of art and it applies only 
to cases which are referred to in Article 114. Therefore the 
provisions do not militate against the provisions of Article 117 
(1). Of course, it involves expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund and therefore comes within the purview of sub-clause 
(3) of Article 117. 


*Mr. Chairman : So far as the word “mechanical” goes 
it appears the defect must be something relating to the 
machine. So far as the word “construction” used by Mr. 
Sidhva goes, it does not look quite opposite. The word 
“structural” better explains the meaning. At the same time, 
if both the words are taken away the wording will be merely 
“defective” which perhaps will be more vague than now. So 


* P. D., Vol 10, Part II, 18th April 1951, pp. 7006-8. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


295 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 295 

far as the powers given in clause 19 are concerned, the 
wording is, “prescribe the power, duties and functions of the 
registering authority and the local limits of their jurisdiction.” 
If a rule can be made that it will be the duty of the registering 
authority to look into the structure of the ship also, then I 
think this lacuna may be covered. But I leave that to the 
House to decide. If the hon. Minister wants to change the 
wording. I will certainly permit an amendment at this stage. 

Shri S. C. Samanta (West Bengal): May I suggest that 
we say, “mechanically or otherwise defective”? 

Shri Santhanam: You are making it more vague. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay (Uttar Pradesh): 
If the word “mechanical” is dropped and only “ defective” 
remains, then all sorts of defects can be covered by the rules. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): May I say a word 
as it strikes me? I have not seen the Bill and therefore I am 
speaking from such impression as I have formed. The main 
object of the Bill is to secure safety. Now, safety depends, so 
far as I understand it, upon the mechanical structure of the 
ship and not upon structure in the sense of its shape or size. 
Therefore a distinction, I think requires to be made between 
the two, the structural defect which has nothing to do with 
the ship, and the mechanical defect which has something, 
in fact greatly, to do with the safety of the ship. The object 
of the Bill is to secure safety and therefore emphasis must 
necessarily be laid upon the mechanical side of the ship and 
not so much upon the structural side. A man may have, for 
instance, an oblong ship; a ship may be something whose 
bottom may be very different from the others. 

Shri Sidhva: That is a defect. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What I want to know is, what is a 
structural defect? One man may say, “ From my point of view 
it is a structural defect. It ought to have been in some other 
shape.” Another man may say, “ It ought to be of some other 
shape.” The submission I am going to make is this, that the 
Bill aims at securing the safety of the passengers; the safety 
of the passengers essentially, mainly, fundamentally depends 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

upon the mechanism of the ship, and therefore what is 
necessary in the matter of giving a certificate by the surveyor 
is that he should see whether there is any mechanical defect. 
That is my submission. 

Shri Venkataraman: May I ask the Law Minister 

Dr. Ambedkar: This is no question of law. I am only 
speaking as one of the Members of the House. 

Shri Hussain Imam: Sometimes structural defects may 
endanger the safety of passengers. For instance, the railings 
on the deck may be so low that passengers may fall into 
the water. Again, if the blades are not properly screened 
passengers may fall on them and get crushed. Similarly, 
if the engine room is not properly protected you may have 
accidents. The word “structural” does not imply any defect in 
size and shape but should be included for the same purpose on 
which the Law Minister insists, namely, that it is the safety 
of passengers that we look to. We must trust our authority 
to so interpret the statute as not to make it inoperative. I 
consider “structural” is very essential. 

Shri Sidhva: My friend Mr. Santhanam said that though 
my wording did cover the intention still there is vagueness in 
it, and my Hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar has stated that what 
we aim at is the safety of passengers. I am also for safety, 
but he has mixed up shape with safety. My hon. friend. 
Mr. Hussain Imam has come out with the correct instances. 
I can tell Mr. Santhanam that some of these shipowners 
deliberately put the railings very low and as a result many 
accidents have occurred. 

An hon. Member: Why put it “deliberately” low? 

Shri Sidhva: Because it cuts down the costs. The deck 
Passengers Committee has made structures on this practice. 
There are many other structural points, for instance, use of 
bad wood in construction. Those who have experience in this 
field have spoken in favour of my suggestion. Unfortunately, 
my friend Dr. Ambedkar 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have travelled very much 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


297 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


297 


( 29 ) 

SUPREME COURT ADVOCATES 
(PRACTICE IN HIGH COURTS) BILL 
* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to authorise advocates of the Supreme 
Court to practise as of right in any High Court, be taken into 
consideration.” 

The Bill is a very simple Bill. The House will realise that 
we have now in India two different courts — the High Courts 
and the Supreme Court. The High Courts and the Supreme 
Court have independent jurisdictions in the matter of enrolling 
persons who as of right may practise before them. The 
High courts have their own rules for enrolment — of persons 
appearing in their courts. The Supreme Court has recently 
made its rules which are published in the Gazette according 
to which it is said that a person shall not be entitled to be 
enrolled as an advocate unless he possesses : 

(1) (a) a degree in law of an Indian University, or 
(6) is a member of the English Bar, 

(2) has been for not less than ten years in the case of 
a senior advocate or seven years in the case of any other 
advocate, enrolled as an advocate in a High Court or a 
Judicial Commissioner’s court in the territory of India. 

We have, therefore, to-day two different sets of lawyers — 
one who are enrolled on the roll of the Supreme Court and 
another set who are enrolled on the roll of the High Courts. 
But the difficulty is this that those who are enrolled on the 
roll of the Supreme Court are not entitled to practise in the 
High Courts unless they are also enrolled on the various High 
Courts. It is felt that this causes a great deal of difficulty for 
clients. Let me illustrate the difficulty by a simple example. 
There is an appeal which comes, say for instance, from the 


* P. D., Vol 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7120-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Madras High Court to the Supreme Court. The client instead 
of employing a Madras advocate wishes to employ an advocate 
from U.P. which he is perfectly entitled to do provided of 
course that the U. P. counsel is enrolled in the Supreme 
Court. It may however, happen that the matter is not finally 
disposed of by the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court 
sends the case back to the original High Court from which it 
came up, for further evidence, or for the trial of some issues 
or for taking evidence or something like that. Now, the U. P. 
lawyer, who was originally engaged in the Supreme Court in 
the matter which came from Madras, while he can appear 
in the Supreme Court and conduct the case, argue the case 
and so on, he cannot be engaged when the case is remitted 
back to the High Court of Madras, as he is not an advocate 
of Madras, he is an advocate of U. P. Now this difficulty, it is 
felt, must be resolved, because it is in the interest of justice 
not merely in the interest of the client that a lawyer who 
has spent a large part of his time and energy in studying 
the case and understanding it should also be in a position 
to deal with it when it is remitted back to the original court. 

Well, this difficulty could be solved in two different ways. 
One way to solve it would be to say that any particular lawyer 
who has been engaged in a particular case, when that case 
goes back, that particular lawyer would be entitled to appear 
in that case. The other is to have a general rule saying that 
all lawyers and advocates who have been enrolled by the 
Supreme court shall as of right be entitled to practise in any 
court. The original idea on which we were proceeding was the 
limited one. But subsequently on further consideration it was 
felt that it would be desirable to have a general rule permitting 
all advocates who are enrolled in the Supreme Court as of 
right to practise before any High Court, without any further 
procedure to be undergone. That is what this bill proposes 
to do. This as I said, is the general principle which the Bill 
embodies. To this principle, the Bill attaches two exceptions. 
One exception is this. A lawyer who is enrolled in the Supreme 
Court shall not automatically be entitled to practise in a High 
Court on the original side. He may practice on the appellate 
side without any further enrolment but not on the original 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


299 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 299 

side. The second exception proposed to be made is with regard 
to a lawyer who was an ex-judge and has been enrolled, 
because before the Constitution came into existence there was 
no rule prohibiting judges, after retirement, from practice. 
They were free to practise and there are many cases where 
judges have been enrolled in the Supreme Court and are 
allowed to practise, but there are cases where persons, who, 
before the Constitution, were appointed to the High Courts 
and were required to give an undertaking that they would 
not practice in that particular High Court. Our exception says 
that if there is any advocate of the Supreme Court, who was 
an ex-judge of a High court and had given an undertaking 
not to practise in a particular High Court (which must be the 
High Court of his own province) then he shall not practise 
notwithstanding the provision contained in this Bill. These 
are the simple provisions of the Bill. 

Shri C. Subramaniam (Madras): What is the reason for 
the first exception? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The reason is this. Under the Bar Councils 
Act a special provision exists. I believe there are only now 
three courts which have got original jurisdiction. All other 
High Courts are only appellate High Courts and they have 
no original jurisdiction but they have been invested with 
special powers to make rules for the enrolment of persons 
on the original side. As it is not proposed to amend the Bar 
Councils Act, it is felt desirable to keep that provision intact. 
That cannot cause much difficulty, because after all when the 
matter is remitted back by the Supreme Court to the High 
Court it will in all probability and in most cases be dealt 
with by the appellate side of the High Court. 

Shri S. N. Sinha (Bihar): Some of the High Courts have 
got original jurisdiction in cases like probate and company 
law. Even in these cases are you going to prohibit? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Leave something for the local lawyers. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved 

“That the Bill to authorise advocates of the Supreme Court to 

practise as of right in any High Court, be taken into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


300 


300 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Venkataraman (Madras): This Bill in so far as it 
tries to unify the bar of this country is most welcome. Not 
only after the establishment of the Supreme Court but even 
earlier, immediately after the establishment of the Federal 
Court, the lawyers’ conference held in Madras year after year 
suggested by passing resolutions that the Bar in India should 
be unified and there should be an All-India Bar Council and 
the enrolment of and disciplinary jurisdiction over all these 
Lawyers should be brought under one central control, namely, 
the All-India Bar Council. Though this bill does not go so far 
as that, it certainly makes a beginning in that it says that 
the advocates who are enrolled in the Supreme Court will be 
entitled to practice in the High Courts notwithstanding the 
fact that they have not been enrolled in such High Courts 
themselves. The Minister unfortunately stopped short of the 
very ideal which he set before himself. He said that it was 
his intention that the advocate who is enrolled as a member 
of the Supreme Court Bar should be enabled to go and appear 
in the province from which the case emanated even though he 
was not enrolled as an advocate of that court. If you merely 
substitute for the word “Madras” in the instance which the 
Hon. Minister gave by the word “Bombay” and then apply all 
the process step by step, which he took us through, you will 
find that the object, when he says is embodied in this Bill, 
is not carried out. I will repeat the instance myself. 

Suppose a case emanates from Bombay and if chances that 
an advocate from Madras is engaged to appear before the 
Supreme Court on an appeal. It is possible for the Supreme 
Court to remit the case not only to the appellate side of the 
High Court but even send it back for a finding to the original 
side of that court. That advocate who studied and prepared 
the case and spent a lot of time over it — the client too must 
have spent a lot of money, as the Minister said, in briefing 
and instructing that particular advocate — would be prevented 
from appearing on the original side, just because the exception 
has been introduced in the Bill. Let me look at the rationale 
of the exception introduced... 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no iogic in it I confess. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


301 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 301 

Shri Venkataraman : He has aken the argument out of 
my mouth. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept logic ; I accept expediency. 

Shri Venkataraman : ‘So I shall proceed on the basis 
that there is no logic 

Mr. Chairman : May I ask the hon. Minister if a question 
of fundamental rights under article 22 is not involved in this? 

Dr. Ambedkar: We have just now heard from several 
Judges that they are prepared to make classifications. 

Shri Venkataraman : Article 22 of the Constitution gives 
the right to legal practitioners to appear in all courts. This 
Act will certainly be challenged by some enterprising lawyer 
some day and there is no doubt about it. 

Apart from that I want to bring to the attention of the 
Hon. Minister that he will lose nothing by deleting part (a) 
of the proviso to clause 2. I understand that in Bombay also 
they have abolished the distinction between the advocates of 
the original side and the advocates of the appellate side 

Dr. Ambedkar: They allow them to go from one side to 
the other after a certain period. 

Shri Venkataraman: The practice which was hitherto 
prevailing of practitioners on the appellate side not being 
entitled to appear in cases on the original side has gone and 
today the preactitioners on the appellate side can still appear 
on the original side as in the Madras High Court. So far as 
the Madras high Court is concerned there is no distinction 
between a practitioner on the appellate side and a practitioner 
on the original side. An advocate of the Madras High Court 
can appear on both the appellate and original sides 

Dr. Ambedkar: They go without shoes also. 

Shri Venkataraman: There are customs and customs. I 
can see quite a few of people here which would be appalling 
to my countrymen. 

We are not concerned with footwear here but with the legal 
rights of the practitioners. A practitioner of the Bombay High 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


302 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Court is also placed on the same footing. The difference 
between the Bombay and Madras High Courts consists in this : 
whereas in the High Court of Madras there is no dual system, 
an advocate need not necessarily be instructed by an attorney 
or solicitor for appearing on the original side, in the appellate 
side they have got that system in which the practitioner on the 
original side must be instructed by a solicitor or an attorney. 
I can understand solicitors and attorneys insisting on their 
privileges being preserved for them. So far as their rights 
are concerned, let them be preserved. Let any practitioner 
appear but let him be instructed or briefed by an attorney or 
solicitor. If that is the object it can very well be preserved and 
achieved by deleting the words “ to plead ”. Any practitioner 
of the Supreme Court can be prevented from going before 
the High Court of Bombay or any other High Court on the 
original side. This Bill as stands with part (a) of the proviso 
will make it impossible for a practitioner of the Supreme 
Court to appear on the original side notwithstanding the fact 
that he had appeared in that particular case itself before the 
Supreme Court and the case had been remitted to the original 
side of that court. 

An Hon. Member : Let him continue tomorrow. It is five 
o’clock. 

The House then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the 
Clock on Friday, the 20th April, 1951. 


* SUPREME COURT ADVOCATES 
(PRACTICE IN HIGH COURTS ) BILL — concld. 

Mr. Speaker: We will now proceed to legislative business, 
namely: The further consideration of the motion moved by 
Dr. Ambedkar yesterday: 

“That the Bill to authorise advocates of the Supreme 
Court to practise as of right in any High Court, be taken into 
consideration.” 

Shri Venkataraman (Madras): Yesterday, I was 
submitting that this Bill is a welcome measure, but that the 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7129-34. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


303 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 303 

proviso militates against the very object of the Bill. I was 
trying to show how 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): To cut short the 
proceedings, I may say I am prepared to accept the amendment, 
subject of course, to other understandings. 

Shri Venkataraman: I am very grateful to the hon. Law 
Minister for accepting the suggestion and so I whole-heartedly 
support the Bill without clause (a) in the proviso. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): I rise to support 
the Bill 

With regard to proviso (b) I have a point to submit. 

Proviso (b) is to the effect: 

“(b) to practise in a High Court of which he was at any time 

a Judge, if he had given an undertaking not to practise therein 

after ceasing to hold office as such Judge.” 

I submit that the prohibition to practise in the High Court 
by a man who is an ex-Judge of that High Court should not 
depend on any undertaking. Public policy requires that an 
ex-Judge of a high Court should not practise in that Court, 
but the proviso makes it conditional upon an undertaking 
having been given. There are many High Courts where no 
undertakings have been taken. Therefore, if ex-Judges are to 
be prohibited from practising in the particular Court, it should 
be independent of any undertaking given. There is an Article 
in the Constitution prohibiting all ex-Judges from practising in 
any Court — not merely in the Court where he was a Judge but 
in all other Courts. I submit proviso (b) militates against that. 
This proviso would allow an ex-Judge to practise in a High 
Court if he has not given an undertaking. The Constitution, 
however, says that all ex-Judges are prohibited from practising 
in any High Court. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): Judges appointed after the 
coming into force of the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, that is the rule. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* Mr. Chairman: The question of amendments will come 
later. Perhaps it may be that after the Hon. the Law Minister 
has given his reply many of the doubts of the hon. members 
may be cleared up. Then we can think of the amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Most of the questions that have been 
raised in the course of speeches delivered by hon. Members 
have very little to do with the merits of the Bill. They deal 
with a subject which is more relevant to the unification of 
the Bar. As I said yesterday, this Bill primarily does not aim 
at the unification of the Bar. The aim of the Bill is a very 
limited one and is to remove the difficulties that are caused by 
enrolment of advocates by the High Court and by the Supreme 
Court in their independent jurisdiction. Clients have suffered 
on account of the fact that lawyers whom they engage in the 
Supreme Court are not permitted to appear in a High Court 
when the same matter is remitted by the Supreme Court 
to the High Court. That is the limited purpose of this Bill. 
But in view of the general desire that while achieving this 
limited purpose something might be done in the direction of 
unifying the Bar, I have accepted two proposals which really 
are outside the immediate object of the Bill. 

One is to permit all lawyers who are enrolled in the 
Supreme Court to practise in all the high Courts which of 
course means right to practise in all courts subordinate to 
the -different High Courts. 

The second point which I have accepted is to remove the 
restrictions originally placed in the Bill that the right to 
practise which is being given by this Bill to advocates enrolled 
on the Supreme Court shall be confined only to the appellate 
side. The clause is being deleted. 

I have listened to the various speeches and all that I can 
say is that I realise the difficulties and I have a great deal 
of sympathy with the point of view that has been expressed 
by the various Members. When there is an opportunity and 
time the Government of India will no doubt consider this 
matter and bring forth a comprehensive measure which would 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7140-42. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


305 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 305 

bring about the unification of the Bar in India which is a 
subject at the heart of many Members here. I will, therefore, 
not go into that aspect of the question. 

Then there remains only one question which was raised by 
my friend Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava which also, I think, is 
quite outside the merits of the Bill. There is no doubt about 
it that anything that we do here in Parliament must always 
be subject to the provisions of the Constitution. If article 22 
of the Constitution permits a legal practitioner to be engaged 
by an accused person to defend himself and if by the rules 
of enrolment enforced either by the High Court or by the 
Supreme Court a certain person does not become a legal 
practitioner within the meaning of the Constitution, in my 
mind there can be no doubt that the rules made by the High 
Court or by the Supreme Court would be at variance with 
the Article of the Constitution and the Constitution would 
prevail. At this moment all I would like to say is that I am 
not quite certain in my mind in what sense the term ‘legal 
practitioner’ is used in the Constitution. Whether it is used 
in the general popular sense that anybody who can go to a 
court of law and appear in any matter is a legal practitioner, 
or whether the Constitution uses the term in the technical 
sense that a legal practitioner means a person defined to be 
a legal practitioner either in the Legal Practitioners Act or in 
the rules made by the High Court or the Supreme Court, is 
a matter on which I do not propose to express any opinion. 
My friend Pandit Thakur Das will also realise that even the 
Legal Practitioners Act does not give the general right to 
practise to all those who are defined as legal practitioners. 
There are fields which are earmarked or rather which are 
limited to certain classes. For instance the pleaders and the 
mukhtiars are no doubt legal practitioners within the meaning 
of the Act, but as he knows they have no general right to 
practise, nor is their right to practise a permanent one. Their 
certificates are annual certificates and when these certificates 
are exhausted they cease to be legal practitioners. All these 
things to my mind are quite irrelevant for the purposes of the 
Bill and they will no doubt take care of themselves when the 
matter is raised before a court of law. I do not think there is 
any other thing that calls for any explanation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


306 


306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

“ That the bill to authorise advocates of the Supreme Court to 

practise as of right in any High Court be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 . — (Right to practise in any High Court) 

Mr. Chairman: May I know whether the Hon Minister, 
is accepting any of the amendments? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not accepting any amendment 
except No. 7 by Shri Ahmed Meeran to delete part (a) of the 
Proviso. But of course my friend will realise that some little 
redrafting will be necessary because if (a) goes (b) will have 
to be renumbered. 


* Mr. Chairman : I think the Hon. Minister wishes to 
reply so far as this part of the question is concerned. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My hon. Friend has really explained the 
position and I do not think I have very much to add : but to 
make it simpler than he has done, the position is this. Article 
220 of the Constitution applies to future Judges who have taken 
the position of High Court Judges after the commencement 
of the Constitution. Their going to practise either before the 
Supreme Court or before any Court, whether a High Court 
or subordinate court, cannot arise at all. 

Dr. Tek Chand: In India. 


Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, in India. Because, article 220 
specifically says so. We are really dealing with the case of High 
Court Judges who were Judges before the Constitution came 
into existence. As my hon. friend pointed out, those Judges of 
the High Court before the commencement of the Constitution 
may be divided for the purpose of argument, into two classes: 
those who had given an undertaking that they will not practise 
in their Court and those who had not given an underaking. 
All that this proviso seeks to do is to bind down those High 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7147-49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


307 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 307 

Court Judges who had already given an undertaking. That is 
the simple position. Of course, it would be perfectly possible 
for this House to widen the scope of the proviso and to say 
that no High Court Judge even though he may not have given 
an undertaking should be permitted to practise; that is within 
the power of the legislature. But, the point is this. Those 
people accepted the positions on the definite understanding 
that they will be permitted to practise after their retirement 
and it would be wrong and unfair now for us to make a 
retrospective piece of legislation and say that even though they 
did not give an undertaking, they will still be bound down 
to this new rule, namely, that they shall not practise. That 
is why sub-clause (b) is so restricted and is made applicable 
only to those who have given an undertaking. Therefore, it 
creates no kind of injustice. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmed: May I point out that the 
proviso (b) is not confined to those Judges who were Judges 
before the Constitution ? The proviso says “to practise in a 

High Court of which he was at any time a Judge , 

and not before the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The point is, the other question does 
not arise because it has been dealt with categorically by the 
constitution. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmed: That if what I say. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why do you want to do something that the 
Constitution has done ? There is no question of undertaking as 
such. That matter has been finally settled by the Constitution 
both in the case of the Judges of the Supreme Court and in 
the case of the Judges of the High Courts. We are dealing 
with a pass which was uncovered by law and was regulated 
only by promises, conventions and undertakings. 

Mr. Chairman : Would the Hon. Minister clarify one point 
more? Were those Judges who wanted to get their right of 
practice after the Constitution was passed, given an option 
to resign and cease to be Judges ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: They knew the position and some of them, 
when the Constitution was on the anvil. — I know two or three 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


308 


308 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

gentlement — resigned, because they would not accept that 
position. Everybody knows that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: May I say for the information of 
the House that Judges were given the option to resign and 
there have been some cases of resignation. There was one in 
Allahabad. One of the Judges of the Allahabad High Court 
resigned merely because of this new article. 

Mr. Chairman: There was one in Calcutta High Court 
also. 

Dr. Ambedkar: For the information of the House. I 
might mention that every Judge of a High Court now who 
has retired has given an undertaking not to practise. There 
are only two gentlemen, fortunately they are alive, who have 
not given that undertaking (An hon. Member: One is here) 
The scope of what was called a trouble is so limited. 

Mr. Chairman: Mr. Meeran may move the amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That has already been moved. 

Shri Venkataraman: I only spoke on it in the general 
discussion. 

Mr. Chairman : May I know whether hon. Members agree 
that this bill could be put through in five minutes? 

Several Hon. Members: Yes. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I would like to have a couple of 
minutes while clause 1 is taken up, because I have strong 
feelings on the subject. 

Mr. Chairman: The House will stand adjourned to 
2-35 p.m. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till thirty-five Minutes 
Past two of the Clock. 

The House reassembled after lunch at Thirty Five Minutes 
passed two of the Clock. 

(Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the chair). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


309 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 309 

*Mr. Chairman: And so only two amendments have been 
moved. I shall now put them to vote. 

Shri Meeran : And No. 7 may be put before No. 6. 

Shri Kapoor: With your permission, and if the Law 
Minister agrees, may I suggest that the “explanation” may 
be deleted ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, the explanation is necessary. I will 
explain why it is necessary later, when Mr. kapoor moves his 
amendment to another Bill. 

Clause 2 as amended was added to the Bill. 


**Mr. Chairman: Does the hon. Minister want to reply ? 
Dr. Ambedkar: A reply is unnecessary. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

“ That clause 1 stand part of the Bill. ” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“ That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*P.D. Vol. 10, Part-II, 20th April 1951, p. 7150 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


310 


310 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 30 ) 

*CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“ That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I introduce the Bill. 


**CODES OF CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

***The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1903, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, be taken into 
consideration.” 

This Bill seeks to make a change in the jurisdiction of the 
subordinate judiciary. As the House knows the Constitution 
gives courts in India the right to declare whether any particular 
law made by the legislature, Central or provincial, is intra or 
ultra vires of that legislature. This power is now being exercised 
by all the subordinate judges and members of Parliament must 
have been aware that some very curious decisions have been 
given by various subordinate courts holding certain laws to be 
ultra vires. It is felt that it would not be right to leave this 
power of declaring whether the laws made by the State are 
intra or ultra vires to the subordinate judiciary. 

First of all, without meaning any offence to members who 
are holding it, the subordinate judiciary cannot be said to be 

* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 18th December 1950, pp. 1834-35. 

** P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7153-76. 

***Ibid., pp. 7153-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


311 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 311 

qualified to deal with problems involving intra vires or ultra 
vires of a law. Secondly, the Bar which appears generally before 
the subordinate courts cannot also be said to be competent to 
help the courts to come to a correct decision on such points. It 
is therefore felt that in the interest of uniformity of decision 
on questions of constitutional importance it is right that the 
power to declare any law ultra vires should be withdrawn 
from the subordinate judiciary. The Bill follows the procedure 
which exists in some of the States in the U.S.A., where also 
by law the subordinate judiciary is prevented from giving 
judgments on questions of constitutional importance. 

Besides this there is nothing very special in this Bill. We 
propose to amend by this Bill section 113 of the Civil Procedure 
Code by the addition of a proviso whereby the subordinate 
judge is required, in case he is of opinion that any particular 
law is ultra vires, to refer the matter to the High Court and 
to await the decision of the High Court. It is also proposed to 
amend section 432 of the Criminal Procedure Code requiring 
a magistrate also to refer the case to the High Court if the 
magistrate thinks that the Act is ultra vires. 

This is all there in this Bill, which I commend to the House. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, be taken into 
consideration. .” 


*Dr. Tek Chand : I submit that this Bill is based 

on very sound principles and that it should be passed without 
further discussion. 

I have to say a word with regard to the observations 
made by my hon. friend Shri Shiv Charan Lai. He thinks 
that after the words “Act, Ordinance and regulation,” which 
are already in the Bill, should be added the words “rules or 
orders”, that is to say, when a question relating to the validity 
of a particular rule or particular order passed under an Act, 
Ordinance or regulation arises and this should also be referred 
to the High Court in the same manner as the Bill provides 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7172-76. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


312 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for points relating to the validity of an Act, Ordinance or 
Regulation itself. With respect, I would say that it is not 
necessary nor desirable that every little case in which is 
involved the validity of an order passed by a Collector or 
some other officer to whom power has been delegated to 
frame a rule or pass an order, be sent to the High Court. 
This will unnecessarily swell the number of cases in which 
references are to be made to the High Court. What the bill 
proposes to take there are three cases of major importance : 
(i) Act of the Central Legislature or Act of one of the State 
Legislatures, and (ii) Ordinances which stand on the same 
footing as Acts of the legislature and (iii) Regulations. It is 
not every Regulation but only those passed in Bengal, Bombay 
and Madras, or Regulations as defined in the General Clauses 
Act of 1897. These are Regulations of old days, promulgated 
before legislatures had been established but which have 
been retained on the Statute Book and, therefore, they have 
the same force and are on the same footing as Acts and 
Ordinances; as for instance Regulation III of 1818. The Bill, 
therefore, applies to those cases only in which the validity of 
an Act of a Legislature is involved and not the validity of an 
order passed by a Collector or by a Secretary to Government 
or some other officer, acting under power delegated to him. 
These do not come within the purview of the Bill and rightly. 

Sir, I think this is a salutary provision and the Bill should 
be passed as it is. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I be permitted to adopt the 
observations of my hon. friend Dr. Tek Chand in view of the 
fact that there is very little time and also because there is 
very little that I need say in addition to what he has already 
said here? We discussed these questions and he has now 
expressed what I would have expressed if I had the chance. 
I think that should suffice. If there is any point arising out 
of any amendment or things like that, then certainly I shall 
deal with them. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908 and the code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, be taken into 

consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


313 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 313 

Clause 2 . — (Amendment of Act V of 1908.) 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: I have an amendment to this 
clause which I shall move, in case the Hon. Law Minister is 
willing to accept it. Otherwise I will not move it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, it is not the intention to accept it. 

Shri K. Vaidya: Sir, Rule 2 of Order XLVI and Rule 5 
of the same Order seem to be inconsistent and I would like 
to have some clarification of the position from the Hon. Law 
Minister. I am referring to my amendments Nos. 2 and 3 of 
List No. 3. Amendment No, 1 I am not moving. I had already 
raised this point before and I would like to hear what the 
Hon. Law Minister has to say. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not prepared to accept the 
amendments proposed by my hon. friend because I do not 
think it is right and proper that all the proceedings in a case 
should be stayed. 

Mr. Speaker: But Mr. Vaidya is not moving his amendment 
No. 1 asking for that. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, Sir, but the other amendments he 

. „„ refers to are consequential to his amendment 

4-00 p m 

No. 1. If that is not moved then there is no 
substance in the other amendments. 

Shri K. Vaidya : They are not consequential because 

Mr. Speaker: Let him explain the position first. 

Dr. Ambedkar: As I understand it, the position is 
this. It is suggested that when a reference is made by the 
subordinate court to the High Court, all further proceedings in 
the matter should stay. That is the fundamental point of the 
hon. Member. That Court should do nothing until the High 
Court returns the papers with its interpretation. With that 
position I entirely disagree for this reason that a case might 
involve one issue of a constitutional nature and many other 
issues which may have nothing to do with the Constitution. 
And I do not understand why a magistrate who is required 
under this Bill to make a reference to the High Court on one 
of the many points which are involved in the case should be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

debarred from proceeding further with the other issues. 
Therefore I am not prepared to accept his first amendment 
whereby he wants : 

That in part (i) of clause 2, in the proposed Proviso to 
section 113 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the words 
“and shall stay the further proceedings in the case” be added 
at the end. 

The rest of them are purely consequential. 

Shri K. Vaidya: They are not, I submit, consequential 
because Rule 2 of Order XL VI as well as Rule 5 of Order 
XL VI relate only to cases where judgments are given and in 
a case where an issue has been referred to the High Court 
there will be no judgment. Under Rule 4 of Order XX the issue 
should be decided and only then can there be a judgment, and 
Rule 2 of Order XL VI refers only to cases in which judgment 
is given. Rule 5 also refers to cases where judgment is given. 
Therefore these two rules are inconsistent or inapplicable to 
this Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would point out that it is left to the 
discretion of the subordinate judge. He may make an order 
staying proceedings or he may not. My hon. friend wants 
that the discretion of the subordinate judge should be taken 
away and in all cases he should make an order staying the 
proceedings. Therefore I am not going to accept his amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: Is the hon. Member keen on moving his 
amendment ? 

Shri K. Vaidya: No, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: Then I shall put clause 2 to vote. The 
question is : 

“ That clause 2 stand part of the bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 . — Substitution of new section : Amendment made: 

In clause 3 for the words “said Code” substitute the words 
and figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


315 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 315 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: So far as the Civil procedure 
code is concerned, an Order has not got much importance. 
But so far as the Criminal Procedure Code is concerned, 
Orders have the same force as an Act. I may point out that 
under the Defence of India Act, so many orders were passed 
by the different state Governments and these orders had the 
force of law. So if you are placing the words “Act, Ordinance 
and Regulation”, then the word “ Order” also must be there, 
because in the Criminal Courts, these Orders have the force 
of law. I do not mean the ordinary Orders, but Orders like 
the Cotton Yarn and Cloth control Order, the Sugar Control 
Orders and other such orders which have the force of law. 
They are sometimes challenged in the courts whether those 
orders are valid or not. Simply putting the word “Act” before 
will not do. 

The other amendment of mine is that in sub-clause 2 of 
section 432 along with presidency magistrate if the words 
‘sessions judge are added that will give a great scope for the 
Sessions Judge’ also to refer the matter to the high court. 
If the Minister accepts the amendments I will move them, 
otherwise not. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the first amendment to 
clause 3 introducing the words “or order” the position is that an 
order is generally issued under a law made by the legislature. 
If the contention of a party is that the law under which the 
order is issued is ultra vires, then obviously the matter will 
have to be referred by the judge to the High Court, if he is 
satisfied with the contention. But if the contention of the party 
is that the law is valid but the order is not, then it is the 
deliberate intention of this Bill that such a matter should be 
decided by the subordinate judge or magistrate, because we 
do not propose to overburden the High Court with all kinds of 
litigation which can be easily determined by the subordinate 
judge and it does not affect the generality of the public but 
the particular individual affected by that legislation. 

With regard to the last amendment seeking to extend the 
privilege or the opportunity given to the presidency magistrate, 
to sessions judges, if he will refer, for instance, to sections 436, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

437 and 438 of the Criminal Procedure Code there is ample 
power given both to the magistrate and the sessions judge to 
deal with cases of this sort to correct the error or refer the 
matter to the high court to get the error corrected. There is 
ample provision already. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 3, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 3, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The title and the Enacting formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

“ That the Bill as amended be passed. ” 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“ That the bill, as amended, be passed. ” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


317 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


317 


( 31 ) 

* CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Amedkar): I beg to move : 

“ That the bill further to amend the code of Civil Procedure, 

1908, be taken into consideration. ” 

It is a very simple measure. Hon. Members will recall 
that after the partition of India certain difficulty has arisen 
in the matter of serving summonses and processes by courts 
in India to persons resident in Pakistan and issued by courts 
in Pakistan to persons resident in India. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair ] 

There are now two foreign territories and this matter has 
not been governed by any treaty so far. Consequently all 
processes had to be served through the post office which can 
never be depended upon as a sure method of communication. 
Recently an agreement has been made between India and 
Pakistan where both countries on a reciprocal basis have 
agreed that the processes issued by courts in one country 
may be sent to the courts in the other country and they 
will undertake to serve the summonses or the processes on 
the party resident there. The Bill seeks to give effect to this 
agreement. I might say that Pakistan has already given effect 
to this agreement and there is a law existing there. I hope 
the House will accept this Bill. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 

1908, be taken into consideration. ” 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : This is a welcome 
measure. Many of the displaced persons who have come here 
and who have claims over persons in Pakistan are confronted 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7176-78. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


318 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with the difficulty of not being able to recover the sums decreed 
on suits. I am glad that agreement has been arrived at between 
India and Pakistan and that Pakistan has also enacted a similar 
law. The question of serving a summons on the other side has 
been overcome. I want to enquire from the Minister in the event 
of a decree passed here against a person in Pakistan, is there any 
agreement arrived at by which they will see that it is executed 
and the amount is recovered and sent to the plaintiff in India. 
That is the main point involved in this question. Merely serving 
a summons will not do. The defendant may be indifferent and 
an ex-parte decree may be obtained. So long as there is no law 
regarding the execution of a decree why should the defendant 
spend money to engage a lawyer. Nothing is mentioned in that 
respect. I would like the Minister to enlighten us whether this 
question was considered in the discussion with Pakistan and if 
not, what will be the effect of the judgment of a court in India, 
which might pass a decree against a defendant in Pakistan? 
Without this provision the Bill will have no meaning. 

Dr. Ambedkar: As a part of the comity of nations every 
country agrees to execute judgments given by courts in other 
countries. Of course different countries have different rules of 
procedure but there is no difficulty with regard to the enforcement 
of the judgments. Some evidence that the judgment is a true 
one may be required. Section 13 of the Civil Procedure Code 
regulates it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): A foreign judgment 
cannot be executed in any country at all. The Civil Procedure 
Code does not provide for it. A foreign judgment gives only a 
right of suit and a fresh suit has to be instituted and a fresh 
decree has to be obtained. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is only a matter of procedure. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmed: The whole thing has to be fought 
out again. The point I am raising is that a foreign decree cannot 
be executed. 

Shri Sidhva: I want your guidance. I remember a case filed 
in India against a defendant in England. The decree was passed 
here but they could not execute it. A fresh suit had to be filed 
in London. I wonder whether without any such agreement a 
decree will have any value. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


319 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 319 

Dr. Ambedkar: Section 13 of the Civil Procedure Code 
does deal with the matter. There is no question about the 
enforcement of a foreign decree. The question is what procedure 
each country may adopt. 

Shri Sidhva: That has no meaning. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What has no meaning? It may say just as 
in the case of an award you will have to file an application 
when only it becomes enforceable. In the same way, section 
13 of our Civil Procedure Code says : 

“A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter 
thereby directly adjudicated upon between the same parties or 
between parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating 
under the same title except — 

(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent 
jurisdiction; ”. 

The question of jurisdiction is always fundamental. It can 
never be stopped. It must be proved that the court which has 
given the decree had the jurisdiction to make the decree. 

Shri Sidhva: That is all right. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What is all right? If you go to a subordinate 
court and get a decree beyond its jurisdiction nobody can 
execute it because it is not valid. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is : 

“That the bill further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the enacting formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


320 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 32 ) 

* JALLIANWALA BAGH NATIONAL 
MEMORIAL BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to provide for the erection and management 
of a National memorial to perpetuate the memory of those killed 
or wounded on the 13th day of April, 1919 in Jallianwala Bagh, 
be taken into consideration.” 

The event which is known as Jallianwala Bagh is well- 
known to every Indian and I do not think it is necessary to 
say anything more about it. What is relevant for purposes of 
this Bill is that soon after the incident certain well-known 
Indians decided to prepetuate the memory of those who were 
killed and wounded on that particular day. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): The session of the Indian 
National Congress held at Amritsar under the presidency of 
Pandit Motilal Nehru decided it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, and they collected an amount of 
money — some ten lakhs, I understand. 

Dr. Tek Chand: Yes, ten lakhs. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Out of that they purchased two or three 
pieces of land as are mentioned in the Schedule, which are 
being held as part of this trust. There is already a trust and 
trustees, but they are of informal character. It is now proposed 
to give this trust a statutory basis and the proposal is this, 
that the trustees will fall into three different classes : certain 
trustees who are to be life trustees, another set of trustees 
who are to be ex officio trustees, and three other persons who 
will be nominated by the Central Government. They will hold 
the land and the properties mentioned in the first part of the 
Schedule and the cash and movable property which according 
to my calculation comes to about Rs. 3,13,757-1-0. The object 
of the trust is to maintain this Memorial and to see that it 
is kept up and looked after properly. 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7179-81. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


321 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 321 

There is only one point that requires to be considered 
and that is that the original trustee mentioned in the Bill, 
the late Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel is now no more, and the 
House has to consider a substitute for him. The rest of the 
Bill is just as it was proposed by the original trustees who 
were acting as trustees for these purposes. 

Mr. Chairman: Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to provide for the erection and management 

of a National memorial to perpetuate the memory of those killed 

or wounded on the 13th day of April, 1919, in Jallianwala Bagh, 

be taken into consideration.” 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): It is in the fitness of 
things that a Bill of this nature has been brought before 
this House. It is over thirty years ago that this massacre at 
Jallianwala Bagh took place and hundreds of our countrymen 
and women were either killed... 

Dr. Tek Chand : Two thousand — not hundreds. 

Shri Kamath: Killed? 

Dr. Tek Chand: Yes, two thousand killed. 

Shri Kamath: thousands were either killed or 

wounded. The Congress, as the statement of objects and 
reasons shows, passed a resolution in 1919 proposing to 
acquire a piece of land and to build a memorial thereon to 
the martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh. We have not been told by 
the Law Minister who moved the Bill what amount exactly 
was collected for this purpose. He said “about ten lakhs”, but 
he has not got the exact figure with him 

Dr. Ambedkar: I said about ten lakhs — I can give the 
exact figure later. 

Shri Kamath : and how much of that amount has been 

utilised in acquiring the site whereon the proposed memorial 
is to be erected. It is wholesome that Government, the first 
Government of Free India, should take note of a resolution 
passed by the Congress many years ago and try to give effect 
to it. But, Sir, alongside of this certain other questions also 
arise. As I have already said, the Bill seeks to perpetuate the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


322 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

memory of the martyrs of Jallianwala Bagh and to 
implement the resolution of the Indian National Congress 
of December, 1919. That marked the beginning of the 
Gandhian era in our politics, and during that period the 
Congress raised, or has raised, several funds of different 
kinds. An important point, therefore in connection with 
this Bill which has been moved by the Law Minister 
is, how far the Government will take note of or take 
cognizance of other funds also raised by the Congress 
for a specific purpose. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): On a point of order, Sir, 
How far is that relevant to the Bill before us ? The hon. 
Member is referring to funds raised by the Congress for 
other purposes. Are we concerned with that in this Bill? 

Shri Kamath: Of course, it is a resolution passed by 
the Congress that is the genesis of this Bill. 

Mr. Chairman: There is no point of order. Let the 
hon. Member develop his argument. 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): After the 
speeches which have been delivered by my hon. Friend 
Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand, the Prime Minister and Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava, I do not think that there is any 
point left which requires any answer. They have dealt 
with all the questions that have been raised by the various 
speakers in the course of this debate, particularly with 
regard to representation of certain interests on this trust. 
I think they have been effectively answered and I have 
nothing more to add. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“ That the Bill to provide for the erection and management 

of a National Memorial to perpetuate the memory of those 

killed or wounded on the 13th day of April, 1919, in Jallianwala 

Bagh, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 20th April 1951, pp. 7229-33. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


323 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 323 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): (. English translation of 
the Hindi speech .) I beg to move: 

In caluse 2, for “National Memorial” substitute “Rashtriya 
Smarak”. 

My submission is that it is but in the fitness of things that 
the name of this National Memorial should be in the national 
language. We must give appropriate name to a thing and the 
name of the National Memorial which we are going to erect 
should be such as easily understandable to everybody in the 
country. By giving it a name in English, we shall be depriving 
a large number of people of easily understanding its importance. 
Therefore, I submit that it should be named Jallianwala Bagh 
Rashtriya Smarak. I hope and believe that the hon. Minister 
would agree to my humble request by accepting this amendment. 
I have nothing more to add in this connection. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid I cannot accept this amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I do not want to press it. If the hon. 
Minister does not accept it, he may put this name within brackets 
as is also done with the name of our country Bharat which is 
also written within brackets. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid, I cannot accept this. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Then I do not press it. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is. 

“That clause 2 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 . — ( Objects of the Trust ) 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): I beg to move: 

In part (c) of clause 3 for “raise and receive” substitute “raise, 

receive and administer”. 

The sub-clause, as it stand, reads thus: 

“ The objects of the Trust shall be — 

...(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the 

Memorial.” 

It stands to reason that the Trust shall be formed not only 
for the purpose of raising and receiving funds but also for the 
purpose of administering them. Otherwise the enumeration 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of its duties and functions would be incomplete. I therefore 
move this amendment and commend it for the acceptance of 
the House. 

Mr. Chairman: I wish to know whether any other amendment 
is going to be moved. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I beg to move : 

After part (c) of clause 3, insert new part: 

“ (d) to do any other thing in furtherance of the objects of 
the Trust ”. 

So that, there will be one more object added to it, not of 
any specific nature but merely of a general nature so that 
the trust may not feel handicapped at any time in regard to 
anything that it may like to do. I am sure this will be readily 
acceptable to the hon. Minister in charge of the Bill. Such 
a clause is almost invariably to be found in other similar 
enactments. 

Mr. Chairman: The wording of the amendment is self- 
explanatory and I do not think any further speech on it is 
necessary. 

Sardar B. S. Man: I beg to move: 

After part (a) of clause 3, insert new part and reletter 
subsequent parts accordingly: 

“(b) to start educational, social or such other public institutions, 
or to create funds or scholarships for the benefit of the public 
generally, or for those or their dependants, who were killed or 
wounded on the 13th day of April 1919 at the site, or for such 
other people who served, died or were permanently disabled in 
the national cause. ” 

The objects of the Trust as given in the Bill are merely, 
“to erect and maintain suitable buildings, structures and 
parks at or near the site of the Jallianwala Bagh in the city 

of Amritsar etc.” I feel that by the acceptance of this 

amendment it will be enlarging to scope and making it more 
a living memoral to the memory of those who have departed. 

Mr. Chairman: May I know whether any of the amendments 
are acceptable to the Hon. Minister? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think I can accept any of them. 
Perhaps a word might be necessary as to why I do not accept 
them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


325 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 325 

With regard to Mr. Kamath’s amendment the addition 
of the word “administer” is unnecessary. Every trust carries 
with it the power of the trustees to administer whatever they 
receive and raise. 

With regard to Mr. Kapoor’s amendment “ to do any other 
thing in furtherance of the objects of the Trust”, that again 
is unnecessary. When the objects are stated it carries with 
it the implied power to do anything in furtherance of these 
objects. 

With regard to Sardar Man’s amendment, I think it is 
agreed that this body of trustees should not convert themselves 
into a social service league. Their purpose should merely be 
to maintain this national monument. 

Shri Kamath: May I not ask whether the word “receive” 
also is unnecessary ? Whatever is raised must be received by 
the Trust. Therefore “received” may be deleted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That may be so, but I think “administer” 
is quite superfluous. 

Mr. Chairman: I would like to know whether hon. 
Members are pressing their amendments. 

Sardar B. S. Man: I am not pressing my amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: No. 

Shri Kamath: Well, it may go. 

Mr. Chairman: Does he want it to be put or not put? 

Shri Kamath: It need not be put. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That clause 3 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 4 . — ( Trustees etc.) 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): I have an amendment. 

Mr. Chairman: Is Dr. Ambedkar going to move any 
amendment ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


326 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mr. Sidhva is moving. 

Shri Sidhva: I beg to move: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 4, for the name of 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel substitute the name of Dr. Saifuddin 
Kitchlew. 

It is self-explanatory and I do not want to speak on it. 
Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 4, for the name of 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel substitute the name of Dr. Saifuddin 
Kitchlew. 

Is it acceptable to the Hon. Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept the amendment. 


*Giani G. S. Musafir: (English translation of Urdu speech) 
I wanted to move: 

After part (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause (4) insert new 
part and reletter subsequent parts accordingly: 

“(f) the president of the Punjab State Congress.” 

I have already said more than enough on that subject. 
Unfortunately for me the Prime Minister does not agree with 
me on this point. What is still more unfortunate is that he has 
already delivered his speech so that even those members who 
had promised to support me have become silent. Therefore, 
I feel it would be no use pressing it any more. Hence, I am 
not moving it. I do not agree, however, that the inclusion of 
the President of the Punjab Congress would turn this Trust 
into a party Trust. 

Mr. Chairman: May I know whether the hon. Minister 
accepts any of those amendments? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot accept any of these amendments. 

Shri Kamath: I want to press all the amendments. 

Mr. Chairman: I will put all these amendments to the 
House. 

Shri Kamath: One by one. 


* P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 21st April 1951, p. 7237. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


327 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 327 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 4, for the name of 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel substitute the name of Kumari 
Maniben Patel. 

The motion was negatived. 


* Dr. Ambedkar: The only amendment that I can accept 
is No. 79 seeking to omit the word “for” in part (f) of sub- 
clause (2). 

Mr. Chairman: Does Mr. Kamath press the other 
amendments? 

Shri Kamath: I press amendment No. 82 relating to 
penalty. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

(i) In part (f) of sub-clause (2) of clause 9, for “ injury ” 
substitute “damage”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Shri Kamath: I do not press my second amendment. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

(iii) In part (f) of sub-clause (2) of clause 9 omit “ for ”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

(iv) In sub-clause (3) of clause 9, for “ fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees ” substitute : 

“ imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or 

with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees or both. ” 

The motion was negatived. 


Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“ That clause 9. as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 
The motion was adopted. 

Clause 9. as amended, was added to the Bill. 


* P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 21st April 1951, pp. 7241-42. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 

The Schedule was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1. (Short Title) 

Amendment moved: 

In clause 1, for “ 1950 ” substitute “ 1951”. [Dr. Ambedkar] 
Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

“That clause 1. as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 1, as amended, was added to the Bill. . 

The Title and the Enacting formula were added to the Bill. 
Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move: 

That the Bill, as amended be passed. ” 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

“ That the Bill, as amended, be passed. ” 

The motion was adopted. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Three of the Clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


329 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


329 


( 33 ) 

The House re-assembled after Lunch at Three of the Clock. 
[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair ] 


CONSTITUTION (FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): I beg to move. 

“That the Bill to amend the Constitution of India be referred 
to a Select Committee consisting of Prof. K. T. Shah, Sardar 
Hukam Singh, Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru, Dr. Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee, Shri Naziruddin Ahmad, Shri C. Rajagopalachari, Shri 
L. Krishnaswami Bharati, Shri Awadheshwar Prasad Sinha, Shri 
T. R. Deogirikar, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Shri V. S. Sarwate, Shri 
Mohanlal Gautam, Shri R. K. Sidhva,- Shri Khandubhai K. Desai, 

Shri K. Hanumanthaiya, Shri Raj Bahadur, Shrimati G. Durgabai, 

Shri Manilal Chaturbhai Shah, Shri Dev Kanta Borooah, Shri 
Satya Narayan Sinha and the Mover with instructions to report 
on Monday the 21st May, 1951.” 

This Bill is not a very complicated one ; nor is it a big one. 
Nevertheless, I need hardly point out that it is of intrinsic 
and great importance. Anything dealing with the Constitution 
and change of it is of importance. Anything dealing with 
Fundamental Rights in corporated in the Constitution is 
of even greater importance. Therefore, in bringing this Bill 
forward, I do so and the government does so in no spirit of 
light-heartedness, in no haste, but after the most careful 
thought and scrutiny, given to this problem. 

I might inform the House that we have been thinking 
about this matter for several months consulting people, State 
Governments, Ministers of Provincial Governments, consulting, 
when occassion offered itself, a number of Members of this 
House, referring it to various Committees and the like and 
taking such advice from competent legal quarters as we could 
obtain, so that we have proceed with as great care as we could 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 16th May 1951, pp. 8814-15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


330 


330 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

possibly give to it. We have brought it forward now after 
that care, in the best form that we could give it, because 
we thought that the amendments mentioned in this Bill are 
not only necessary, but desirable, and because we thought 
that if these changes are not made, perhaps not only would 
great difficulties arise, as they have arisen in the past few 
months, but perhaps some of the main purposes of the very 
Constitution may be defeated or delayed. In a sense this 
matter of course, has been mentioned rather vaguely and has 
been before the public for some time. But in the precise form 
that it has been raised in this Bill, it came up only when I 
introduced this Bill in the House a few days ago. 

* Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): The Bill before us 
seems to be very simple, but it is nonetheless of a very far 
reaching character. It affects not merely the Constitution but 
also the spirit in which the Constitution is to be dealt with. 
A measure of such importance requires careful consideration 
and I think that we ought, all, to welcome the scrutiny to 
which it has been subjected by previous speakers. In order to 
justify the important changes that are sought to be made in 
the Constitution, Government should have taken care to supply 
us with full information on every point to tell us exactly why 
each particular amendment was needed. The Prime Minister 
spoke at considerable length but dealt, generally speaking with 
principles. When he dealt with specific matters he was very 
tantalizing; he did not throw much light on the reasons for the 
specific measure that the Government have placed before us. 
In view of this some other Member of the Government should 
have given us fuller information than the Prime Minister 
gave. Perhaps my hon. friend. Dr. Ambedkar would have been 
the fittest person to explain to us in detail the provisions of 
the Bill, particularly those which relate to the amendment of 
article 19 and the insertion of two new articles 31A and 31B. 
I have no doubt that he will take part in the debate. He will 
probably get up in the end in order to have the last word 
on the subject. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 17th May 1951, p. 8896. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


331 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 331 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): No, no. 

Pandit Kunzru: That may suit him and the Government 
of which he is an important member, but it is most unfair to 
the House that it should be called upon 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): What is the unfairness ? 

Pandit Kunzru: If Mr. Sidhva will have a little patience 
he will realise that every Member is not as enlightened as 
he is and that most of them require a little more instruction 
than he has ever done or ever will do 


*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): In the course of 
the debate yesterday, my friend Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru 
said that Government had done great injustice to the House 
by not explaining the necessity and the purposes of the 
various clauses in this Bill and that some one on the side of 
Government — and he referred particularly to me — should have 
got up to discharge that duty to the House. I do not know 
that any Member of the House will believe that a person of 
the intelligence of my hon. friend Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru 
is one who requires an explanation of this Bill. My friend 
Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee evidently did not require any 
explanation of the Bill. As soon as the Prime Minister finished, 
he stood up and opened his fire. And I do not think that my 
friend Pandit Kunzru is less intelligent than my friend Dr. 
Mookerjee. However, as Pandit Kunzru expressed the wish 
of many Members of this House, I thought it incumbent on 
my part to intervene in this debate and to clarify the position 
so as to dispel the two arguments which had been used in 
the course of the debate, that there was no necessity for the 
amendment of the Constitution, and secondly, that Government 
could wait and give the country and the public larger and 
longer time and should not rush through this measure. In 
the observations that I propose to make, I will take the Bill 
clause by clause and try to explain the necessity for making 
the changes which the Bill proposes to make. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 18th May 1951, pp. 9004-32. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


332 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I will begin with clause 2 of the Bill. Clause 2 of the 
Bill proposes to amend article 15. The necessity for the 
amendment of article 15 has arisen on account of the judgments 
recently-delivered by the Supreme Court in two cases which 
came up before them from the Madras State. One case was 
Madras vs. Shrimati Champakam Dorairajan and the other 
was Venkatraman vs. the State of Madras. In the case of 
Venkataraman the article involved was article 16, clause (4) 
and in the case of Shrimati Champakam the article involved 
was article 29, clause (2). In the one case the question involved 
was the reservation for backward classes in public services and 
in the other case, the question involved was the reservation 
for backward classes in educational institutions. The question 
turned upon what is known in the Madras Presidency and 
elsewhere as the Communal G.O. The argument on which the 
Communal G.O. of the Madras Government was declared to be 
void and invalid was this. It was said by the Supreme Court 
that article 29, clause (2), did not have a saving clause like 
clause (4) attached to article 16. As the House will remember 
under clause (4) of article 16, a special provision is made 
that article 16 shall not stand in the way of the Government 
making a suitable provision for the representation of backward 
classes in the services. Such a provision of course is not to 
be found in article 29. With regard to article 16, clause (4), 
the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that it involved 
discrimination on the ground of caste and therefore it was 
invalid. I have carefully studied both these judgments of 
the Supreme Court and with all respect to the judges of the 
Supreme court I cannot help saying that I find this judgment 
to be utterly unsatisfactory. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): Sir, on a point 
of order. Is it in order for any Member to express disrespect 
to the highest judiciary in the land ? It is the custom in 
Parliament not to speak disparagingly about the courts. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no disparagement of the learned 
Judges at all. 

Mr. Speaker: I myself felt that the word should not have 
been used but I think what the Hon. Law Minister meant 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


333 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 333 

was that judgment was unsatisfactory from the point of view 
of what the Government proposed to do. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The judgment does not appear to be in 
consonance with the articles of the Constitution. That is my 
point. 

Mr. Speaker: I am afraid the Hon. Minister will not be in 
order to pass any such structures on any judgment expressed 
by the Supreme Court. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am very sorry. 

Mr. Speaker: I was thinking whether what he expressed 
was not capable of a different interpretation viz. that the 
judgment was unsatisfactory from the point of view of what 
the Government proposed to do. 

The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopalachari): 

Will the hon. Speaker forgive my intervention ? I think 
really what the Hon. Law Minister meant is that a doubt 
has arisen on account of the judgment. 

Mr. Speaker: Let us now proceed. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My view is that in article 29, clause (2), 
the most important word is ‘only’. No distinction shall be made 
on the ground only of race, religion or sex. The word ‘only’ 
is very important. It does not exclude any distinction being 
made on grounds other than those mentioned in this article 
and I respectfully submit that the word ‘only’ did not receive 
the same consideration which it ought to have received. 

Then with regard to article 16, clause (4), my submission 
is this that it is really impossible to make any reservation 
which would not result in excluding somebody who has a 
caste. I think it has to be borne in mind and it is one of the 
fundamental principles which I believe is stated in Mulla’s 
last edition on the very first page that there is no Hindu 
who has not a caste. Every Hindu has a caste — he is either 
a Brahmin or a Mahratta or a Kunby or a Kumbhar or 
a carpenter. There is no Hindu — that is the fundamental 
proposition — who has not a caste. Consequently, if you make 
a reservation in favour of what are called backward classes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


334 


334 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which are nothing else but a collection of certain castes, 
those who are excluded are persons who belong to certain 
castes. Therefore, in the circumstances of this country, it 
is impossible to avoid reservation without excluding some 
people who have got a caste. On these points I do not think 
personally that the judgment is a very satisfactory judgment. 
In this connection I would like to state, notwithstanding what 
the House and some Members are saying, that I have often 
in the course of my practice told the presiding judge in very 
emphatic terms that I am bound to obey his judgment but I 
am not bound to respect it. That is the liberty which every 
lawyer enjoys in telling the judge that his judgment is wrong 
and I am not prepared to give up that liberty. I have always 
told the judges before whom I practised that that is my view 
of the matter. Now the point has to be borne in mind that in 
article 46 of the Directive Principles an obligation has been 
laid upon the Government to do everything possible in order 
to promote the welfare and the interest of what are called 
the weaker sections of the public by which I understand to 
mean the backward classes or such other classes who are for 
the moment not able to stand on their legs — the scheduled 
castes and the scheduled tribes. It is therefore incumbent 
not merely on the Government but upon this Parliament to 
do everything in its hands to see that article 46 is fulfilled 
and if that fulfilment is to come, I cannot see how one can 
escape an amendment so as to prevent article 29, clause (2), 
and article 16, clause (4) being interpreted in the way in 
which it has been interpreted and being made to block the 
advancement of the people who are spoken of as the weaker 
class. That is the necessity for amending article 15. 

I now come to the provisions of article 19, an article 
which gave rise to great excitement among the Members of 
the House. I first propose to take clause (3) (1) (a) of the Bill 
which amends the original clause (2) of article 19. As Members 
will see this sub-clause proposes to add three heads: 

1. Relations with foreign States, 

2. Public Order, 

3. Incitement to offence. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


335 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 335 

A question was asked as to what was the necessity for 
introducing three new heads. The necessity has arisen out of 
certain judgments which have been delivered by the Supreme 
Court as well as by the Provincial High Courts. I would like 
to refer in this connection to the judgments of the Supreme 
Court in Ramesh Thapar’s case and in Brij Bhushan’s case. 
These are the two judgments of the Supreme Court. Then I 
come to the judgments of the State High Courts. 

The following judgments of the Punjab High Court may 
be taken into consideration: 

1. Master Tara Singh’s case. 

2. Amarnath Bali versus the State of Punjab. 

There are two judgments of the Patna and Madras High 
Courts : 

1. Shilabala Devi versus the Chief Secretary of Bihar. 

2. Bynes versus the State of Madras. 

In Ramesh Thapper’s case what was involved was the 
validity of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order, 1949. 
Brij Bhushan’s case involved the validity of the East Punjab 
Public Safety Act, 1949. Master Tara Singh’s case involved 
the validity of sections 124A and 153 A of the Indian Penal 
Code. Amarnath Bali’s case involved the validity of section 4 
of the Indian Press (Emergency Powers) Act of 1931. Shilabala 
Devi’s case also involved the validity of section 4 of the Press 
Act and the same was involved in the case of Bynes versus 
Madras State. 

All these cases have resulted in the decision that they are 
void laws, that is to say, in view of the provisions contained 
in clause (2) of article 19, the courts have held that all 
these Acts, however valid they might have been before the 
Constitution came into existence, are bad laws now, because 
they are inconsistent with the Fundamental Rights. 

What I want to ask the House to consider is, what is the 
effect of these decisions of the Supreme Court and the various 
High Courts in the States ? In order to give the House a very 
clear idea I can read many of the sections of the Acts which 
have been declared to be null and void but in view of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


336 


336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

shortness of time I would content myself by reference to the 
Press Act, section 4, which has been called in question. This 
is what section 4 of the Press Act says: 

“Whenever it appears to the Provincial Government that 
any Printing Press, in respect of which any security has been 
ordered to be deposited under section 3 is used for the purpose 
of printing or publishing any newspaper, book or other document 
containing any words, signs or visible representations which” — I 
want the House to mark these clauses carefully — 

“(a) incite to or encourage, or tend to incite to or to 
encourage, the commission of any offence of murder or 
any cognisable offence involving violence, or 

(6) directly or indirectly express approval or admiration 
of any such offence or of any person, real or fictitious, 
who has committed or is alleged or represented to have 
committed any such offence. 

or which tend directly or indirectly. 

(c) to seduce any officer, soldier, etc 

The important point to which I wish to draw the attention 
of the House is (a) “incite to or encourage, or tend to incite 
to or encourage, the commission of any offence of murder 
or any cognisable offence involving violence.” It means that 
under the decisions of the Provincial High Courts to which I 
had referred it is now open to anybody to incite, encourage, 
tend to incite or encourage the commission of any offence of 
murder or any cognisable offence involving violence. 

The one question that I would like the House to consider, 
is this. Is it a satisfactory position that any person should 
now be free to incite or encourage the commission of offences 
of murder or any cognisable offence involving violence ? I 
want the House to consider the matter dispassionately. Is it 
a desirable state of affairs ( Several Hon. Members : No. no.) 
that our Constitution should leave us in this desperate position 
that we could not control the right of free speech which has 
been granted by clause (1) of article 19 and it should be so 
unlimited that any person should be free to preach murder 
or the commission of any cognisable offence. I have tried to 
put the matter in a nutshell. That is the position. 

The same thing has now occurred with regard to the public 
safety laws or the laws made by the various States for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


337 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 337 

maintenance of public order, because they also have been 
held by the Supreme Court to be not open to any limitation 
by virtue of the Constitution. The Supreme Court has 
made a distinction between the security of the State and 
the maintenance of public order. They say that it may 
be open for Parliament to make a law for the security 
of the State but it is not open to parliament to make a 
law for the maintenance of public order. There again I 
wish the House to consider the matter seriously. Is the 
House prepared to allow the right of freedom of speech 
and expression to be so untrammelled, to be so unfettered, 
that any man can say anything and go scot-free, although 
such speech creates public disorder ? If the judgments of 
the Supreme Court and the High Courts stand as they 
are, then the only consequence that follows is that we 
shall never be able to make a law, which would restrict 
the freedom of speech in the interests of public order and 
that we shall never be able to make a law which would 
put a restraint upon incitement to violence. I want my 
friend Dr. Mookerjee who — as coming events cast their 
shadow — played the part of a leader of the Opposition, 
whose business undoubtedly, from a party point of view 
is to oppose every thing to consider whether the void 
created in our legislation by the decisions of the Supreme 
Court and the Provincial High Courts should be allowed 
to remain in the name of freedom of speech. That is the 
simple question. I am sure in my mind that if my friend 
Dr. Mookerjee were to study the different decisions of the 
Supreme court and the Provincial High courts in the light 
of the observations I have made he will beyond question 
come to the conclusion that this is a situation which must 
be remedied and cannot be allowed to go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): He wants 
detention laws to be used for the purpose. 

Dr, Ambedkar: Detention laws are something quite 
different. That is in a nutshell (Shri Kamath: What a poor 
nutt!) the case for amending article 19 of the Constitution. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is next important to consider why the Supreme Court and 
the various State High Courts have come to this conclusion. 
„ a m Why is it that they say that Parliament has no 
right to make a law m the interests ot public 
order or in the interests of preventing incitement to offences ? 
That is a very very important question and it is a question 
about which I am personally considerably disturbed. For 
this purpose I must refer briefly to the rules of construction 
which have been adopted by the Supreme Court as well as 
by the various State High Courts, but before I go to that I 
would like to refer very briefly to the rules of construction 
which have been adopted by the Supreme Court of the United 
States — and I think it is very relevant because the House 
will remember that if there is any Constitution in the world 
of a country of any importance which contains Fundamental 
Rights it is the Constitution of the United States, and those 
of us who were entrusted with the task of framing our own 
Constitution had incessantly to refer to the Constitution of 
the United States in framing our own Fundamental Rights. 
There are many Members I know, who are familiar with the 
Constitution of the United States. How does the Constitution of 
the United States read ? I think hon. Members will realise that 
apparently there is one difference between the Constitution 
of India and the Constitution of the United States so far as 
the Fundamental Rights are concerned. The Fundamental 
Rights in the Constitution of the United States are stated 
in an absolute form; the Constitution does not lay down 
any limitation on the Fundamental Rights set out in the 
Constitution. Our Constitution, on the other hand, not only 
lays down the Fundamental Rights but it also enumerates 
the limitations on the Fundamental Rights, and yet what 
is the result ? It is an important question to consider. The 
result is this, that the Fundamental Rights in the United 
States, although in the text of the Constitution they appear 
as absolute, so far as judicial interpretations are concerned 
they are riddled with limitations of one sort or another. 
Nobody can in the United States claim that his Fundamental 
Rights are absolute and that the Congress has no power to 
limit them or to regulate them. In our country I find that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


339 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 339 

we are in the midst of a paradox; we have Fundamental 
Rights, we have limitations imposed upon them, and yet the 
Supreme Court and the High Courts say. “You shall not have 
any further limitations upon the Fundamental Rights.” 

Now comes the question ; how does this result come to 
be ? And here I come to the canons of interpretation which 
have been adopted in the United States and by the Supreme 
Court and High Courts in our country. As hon. Members 
who are familiar with the growth of the Constitution of the 
United States will know, although the Constitution of the 
United States is a bundle of bare bones, the United States 
Supreme Court has clothed it with flesh and muscle so that 
it has got the firmness of body and agillity which a human 
being requires. How has this happened ? This has happened 
because the U.S. Supreme Court, although it was the first 
Court in the world which was called upon to reconcile the 
Fundamental Rights of the citizen with the interests of the 
State, after a great deal of pioneering work came upon two 
fixed principles of the Constitution. One is that every State 
possesses what is called in the United States “police power”, 
a doctrine which means that the State has a right to protect 
itself whether the Constitution gives such a right expressly 
or not. The “police power” is an inherent thing just as our 
Courts have inherent powers, in certain circumstances, to do 
justice. It is as a result of this doctrine of “police power” that 
the United. States Supreme Court has been able to evolve 
certain limitations upon the Fundamental Rights of the United 
States citizens. The second doctrine which the United States 
Supreme Court developed and which it applied for purposes 
of interpreting the Constitution is known as the doctrine of 
“implied powers”. According to the decisions of the Supreme 
Court if any particular authority has been given a certain 
power, then it must be presumed that it has got other powers 
to fulfil that power and if those powers are not given expressly 
then the Supreme Court of the United States is prepared to 
presume that they are implied in the Constitution. 

Now, what is the attitude which the Supreme Court has 
taken in this country in interpreting our Constitution ? The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


340 


340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Supreme Court has said that they will not recognise the 
doctrine of the “police power” which is prevalent in the 
United States. I do not wish to take the time of the House in 
reading the judgments of the Supreme Court, but those who 
are interested in it may find this matter dealt with in the 
case known as Chiranjit Lai Chowdhuri versus the Union of 
India otherwise known as the Sholapur Mills case. You find 
the judgment of Mr. Justice Mukherjee expressly rejecting 
this doctrine which in the text of the judgment which I 
have, occurs on page 15. They say they will not apply this 
doctrine. The reason why the Judges of the Supreme Court 
do not propose to adopt the doctrine of “police power” is this, 
so far as I am able to understand, that the Constitution has 
enumerated specifically the heads in clause (2) under which 
Parliament can lay restrictions on the Fundamental Right 
as to the freedom of speech and expression and that as 
Parliament has expressly laid down the heads under which 
these limitations should exist, they themselves now will not 
add to any of the heads which are mentioned in clause (2). 
That is in sum and substance, the construction that you will 
find in the case of Thaper’s judgment which was delivered 
by Mr. Justice Patanjali Sastri. He has said that they will 
not enlarge it and therefore as the Constitution itself does 
not authorise Parliament to make a law for purposes of 
public order “according to them Parliament has no capacity 
to do it and they will not invest Parliament with any such 
authority. In the case on the Press Emergency Laws also 
they have said the same thing — that in clause (2) there is 
no head permitting Parliament to make any limitations in 
the interests of preventing incitement to an offence. Since 
section 4 of the Press (Emergency Powers) Act provides for 
punishment for incitement to the commitment of any offence, 
Parliament has no authority to do it. That is the general line 
of argument which the Supreme Court Judges have adopted 
in interpreting the Constitution. 

With regard to the doctrine of implied powers, they have 
also more or less taken the same view. Personally myself, I 
take the view that there is ample scope for recognising the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


341 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 341 

doctrine of implied powers, and I think our Directive Principles 
are nothing else than a series of provisions which contain 
implicitly in them the doctrine of implied powers. I find that 
these Directive Principles are made a matter of fun both by 
judges and by lawyers appearing before them. Article 37 of 
the Directive Principles has been made a butt of ridicule. 
Article 37 says that these Directives are not justiciable that 
no one would be entitled to file a suit against the Government 
for the purpose of what we call specific performance. I admit 
that is so. But I respectfully submit that that is not the 
way of disposing of the Directive Principles. What are the 
Directive Principles ? The Directive Principles are nothing 
but obligations imposed by the Constitution upon the various 
Governments in this country — that they shall do certain 
things, although it says that if they faill to do them, no one 
will have the right to call for specific performance. But the 
fact that there are obligations of the Government, I think, 
stands unimpeached. My submission is this; that if these 
are the obligations of the State, how can the State discharge 
these obligations unless it undertakes legislation to give effect 
to them ? And if the statement of obligations necessitates 
the imposition and enactment of laws, it is obvious that all 
these fundamental principles of Directive Policy imply that 
the State with regard to the matters mentioned in these 
Directive Principles has the implied power to make a law. 
Therefore, my contention is this, that so far as the doctrine of 
implied powers is concerned, there is ample authority in the 
Constitution itself to permit Parliament to make registration, 
although it will not be specifically covered by the provisions 
contained in the Part on Fundamental Rights. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee (West Bengal): Even though 
they may become inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a different matter. 

Shri Kamath: That is a vital matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What I am saying is this that the various 
provisos attached to the various fundamental articles need 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not be interpreted as though they were matters of strait -jacket 
as if nothing else is permissible. 

Shri Kamath: You yourself made it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The point that I was trying to make to the 
House is that on account of the declaration by the Supreme 
Court that this Parliament has no capacity to make a law 
in certain heads, the question before the House is this : can 
we allow the situation to remain as it is, as created by the 
judgments, or we must endow Parliament with the authority 
to make a law ? 

At this stage I do want to make a distinction and I do so 
for the special reason that Dr. Mookerjee came and said that 
we were taking away the freedom which people enjoyed. I think 
it is necessary to make a distinction between the capacity to 
make a law and the enactment of a particular law. All these 
matters as to whether a particular law encroaches upon the 
freedom of the people is a matter which can be discussed 
when the law is being made. Today we are not dealing with 
a law ; we are only dealing with the capacity of Parliament 
to make a law. 

[Shrimati Durgabai in the chair] 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : May I ask one question with 
regard to this point that you are only asking Parliament to 
endow you with power to make a law ? But according to the 
changes which have been proposed, all the laws which were 
invalidated will become valid retrospectively. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I know that is a point on which my friend 
Pandit Bhargava laid great stress and it would be very wrong 
on my part to leave it unexplained. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : And the much-hated emergency 
laws will become good laws. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is not quite so. 

Shri Kamath: Almost; 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far I have dealt with two heads, 
namely, public order and the incitement to an offence. There 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


343 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 343 

remains the third category, namely friendly relations. We 
have at present on our statute book a law enacted in 1932 
dealing with friendly relations with the foreign States. It is 
true that that law has not come for any adjudication before 
High Courts or the Supreme Court and it has so far not 
been declared to be ultra vires. But the fact remains that in 
view of rules of interpretation adopted by the Supreme court 
that nothing is within the capacity of Parliament unless that 
particular head of legislation is mentioned in clause (2) and 
as “friendly relations with foreign States” is not mentioned in 
clause (2) I do not think it requires an astrologer to predict 
that when that question comes before the judiciary they will 
follow the same line of interpretation. 

Shri Kamath: Dr. Ambedkar is quite enough for the 
purpose. 

Dr. Ambedkar: And it is for that reason that we have 
thought it necessary to include in the new heads this head 
of friendly relations with foreign states. 

My friend Dr. Mookerjee asked whether there was any 
country where such a law prevailed. Well, I have searched for 
a precedent and I can tell him that I find no country which 
has not such a law. In the case of England it is a rule of 
Common law. No statutory law is necessary. The Common Law 
is operative not only in England but in all the Dominions. 
Therefore that same rule prevails there. In fact, the common 
Law rule has been amended and made more stringent by a 
statutory provision in Canada. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): Will my hon. Friend 
explain a little more the position in England ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, I will. I do not know — I must leave 
some time for the Prime Minister. 

Hon. Members: Take your own time. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is some confusion. I think, in the 
minds of the people 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: And the framers of the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


344 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, I do not think so. You will presently 
see that we have no such confusion. At any rate my mind is 
very clear about it. 

Shri Kamath: Government as a whole, not you. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What does maintenance of friendly 
relations imply ? Most Members are under the impression that 
if this category was added they would not be in a position to 
criticise the foreign policy of the Government. I like to say 
that that is a complete misunderstanding and a misconception. 

Shri Kamath: That is your opinion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The underlying principle of this category, 
namely maintenance of friendly relations with a State, is 
nothing more than an extension of the principle of libel and 
defamation, that you shall do nothing, you shall say nothing, 
you shall circulate no rumour which will involve a foreign 
State in any kind of ignominy. Beyond that there is nothing 
in this category. Even the English Common Law is based upon 
this, namely that it is a part of the law of defamation — that 
you shall not defame a foreign State which has a friendly 
relation with this country. Now, I want to know from Dr. 
Syama Prasad Mookerjee whether he thinks that even asking 
him or others that they shall not defame a friendly nation 
is such a serious inroad upon the liberty of speech that it 
should be condemned. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Why not specify it? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is understood that this is so. I know my 
friend is a great reader, but if he were to read the debates that 
took place in this Assembly in 1932 when this law was enacted, 
if he will read the Statement of Objects and Reasons — which 
I have read — and also the Report of the Select Committee 
on that Bill he will find that in this particular law there is 
nothing more than what I have stated. 

Shri Kamath: Is not the expression “running dog” used 
by the Peking Government libellous or slanderous ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There the Peking Government ought to 
make a law. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


345 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 345 

Shri Kamath: If someone retaliates here ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: This policy of tit for tat is not good for 
the State. 

Shri Kamath: What about reciprocity ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It may involve us in great deal of trouble. 
If we are responsible to our friendly neighbours that our 
citizens shall not defame them, in the same way the Chinese 
Government is responsible that the Chinese citizens shall not 
defame India and the remedy must be left for each Government 
to adopt in accordance with its own executive authority. 

Prof. Ranga (Madras): And sense of honour. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, and sense of honour. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: But the present law of 
defamation will protect foreign States also. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My friend has provoked me to do something 
more which I did not want to do ! Now, let me read to 
him — this is very important — the law in the United States. 
Incidentally I would like to remind my friend Dr. Syama 
Parasad Mookerjee who so vehemently asked ( Is there any 
country which has such a law ?’, well, I point to the United 
States of America. I have got this big volume with me Foreign 
Relations and Intercourse. 

Shri Frank Anthony (Madhya Pradesh): Is it part of 
the Bill of Rights. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It says — this is an important point — 
“Notwithstanding the fact that the United States does not 
permit the Congress to make a law on this particular subject, 
the Supreme Court on the basis that every State has a police 
power to protect itself has permitted such a legislation to be 
on the statute book.” 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri (Assam): But not on the 
Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: “What is the law ?” — my hon. friend 
Mr. Naziruddin who asked the question may read it. It goes 
much beyond our Indian law. The first clause says that “anybody 
wilfully and knowingly making any untrue statement, either 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


346 


346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

orally or in writing, about any person shall be punished by 
imprisonment for not more than ten years and may, in the 
discretion of the court, be fined not more than five thousand 
dollars”. I want him to compare the punishing clause of our 
law with the punishing clause of this law. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I raised a different question. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Let me read it again. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order ; I do not think that too 
many interruptions help the debate. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not mind replying if I can understand 
what they ask. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I raised a different question 
altogether. My question was whether our law of defamation 
does not protect foreign States also. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It does not. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I think it does. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, it applies only when one person 
defames another. That is the point. Then the second clause 
in that law is about “wrongful assumption of character of a 
diplomatic or consuler officer”. That also is made punishable 
under the law relating to foreign relations. One more important 
clause is about “conspiracy to injure property of a foreign 
Government”. There again the punishment is imprisonment 
of not more than three years or fine of not more than five 
thousand dollars or both. Therefore, our law is a very mild one. 

Shri Kamath : If all untrue statements are tabooed it 
will put an end to all diplomacy. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are talking of citizens doing harm to 
the Government of the foreign State. 

Shri Kamath: Not Government-to-Government. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With the explanation that I have given 
so far, Members of the House, I think will agree that there 
is a necessity for amending article 19 in the way in which 
sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill makes provision for it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


347 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 347 

Some Hon. Members: No. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: If it is only for protection against 
defamation, why are you having it separately ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sometimes it is better to separate a 
certain category. 

Shri Kamath: Expediency. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Which is the Constitution in the 
rest of the world where such a separate provision is made ? 
You contradicted me. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The whole point is that the British 
Constitution is an unwritten Constitution and therefore 
nothing is necessary; Parliament is supreme. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: What about the American 
Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are no Fundamental Rights in the 
United Kingdom. That is the difficulty. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: In any written constitution does a 
similar provision exist ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It does not, but in the United States of 
America according to the canons of interpretation adopted 
by the Supreme Court such a law is possible. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: That is a different matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is not different at all. 

Now I come to clause 3, sub-clause (1)(6). This clause 
seeks to amend clause (6) of article 19 which deals with 
trade, profession, etc. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi): Before the Hon. 
Minister goes to clause 3(1) (b), may I ask him one question ? 
The words are “defamation or incitement to an offence” and 
all laws existing today will become 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have not come to that. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: I want you to answer that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : I will not answer it now. I will answer it 
at my own time. I have noted it and I think it is a question 
to which some answer should be given. There is no ground 
for running away from it. It may be that the House may not 
accept my explanation, but that I have no explanation to offer 
is not the presumption that should be made. 

With regard to this clause it will be noticed that the latter 
part of clause (6) has been separated into two parts, one 
dealing with the qualifications for practising any profession, 
and the second part dealing with the actual carrying on of 
any trade etc. The important part of that second part lies in 
this that it permits the State to make a different classification 
between private members carrying on the trade and the State 
carrying on the same trade. This clause and the necessity for 
its introduction has arisen on account of the judgment of the 
Allahabad High Court reported in 1951 A.I.R. (Allahabad) 
257, Full Bench, known as Motilal versus the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh. As hon. Members will remember, U.P. 
Government have introduced a scheme of nationalisation of 
motor transport. They were proceeding with their scheme 
piecemeal, territory by territory; certain territory they had 
said would be subject to their monopoly and that no private 
individual would be entitled to run their buses within that 
territory; certain territory which they thought in the beginning 
they could not cope with they left to private bus owners. In 
doing so, they said that it would not be necessary for the 
State to obtain a licence for the running of their buses within 
the territory that they had ear-marked for themselves, but 
required the private owners to obtain licences from the State. 
This question was raised before the Allahabad High Court 
on the ground that they involved discrimination. It seems 
to me that if nationalisation is a desirable thing and in the 
best interests of the country, then it must also be admitted 
that it may not be possible for the State to undertake 
nationalisation all throughout the country at one and the 
same time. It involves administrative problems ; it involves 
many other problems and consequently, in order to fully carry 
out the scheme and to consolidate it, it may be necessary for 
the State to define a territory and to leave others to carry 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


349 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 349 

on for the time being. Such a process should not be hampered 
by the doctrine of non-discrimination. It is to get rid of this 
doctrine of non-discrimination in the matter of nationalisation 
that this particular amendment has been introduced and I 
do not think that the House will very seriously object to this 
kind of doing. 

An Hon. Member: The same thing from the High Court. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Now I come to clause 3, sub-clause (2) 
about which 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Why have you omitted the word 
‘reasonable’ from the existing clause ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The word ‘reasonable’ was not there. That 
is a matter which may be discussed. (An Hon. Member ; In 
the Select Committee.) In the House, everywhere. 

Now I come to clause 3, sub-clause (2). In order to 
understand what this amendment precisely does, I think it 
is necessary to go back to article 13. It is only in the light 
of article 13 that one can have a clear idea of this particular 
sub-clause 31. As hon. Members know, article 13 declares that 
if any law is inconsistent with the Fundamental Rights, that 
law shall be declared to be void and inoperative. As I have 
shown in the course of my observations, certain provisions 
of laws, such as sections 153A and 124A of the Indian Penal 
Code, certain provisions of the Press (Emergency Powers) 
Act and the Public Safety Acts have now been declared to be 
void by the Supreme Court and by the various High Courts. 
In view of this, what are we to do ? It seems to me that 
there are three alternatives which we could pursue. The first 
alternative is to refuse to amend the constitution and to let 
the void provision remain as it is. I do not think that any 
Member of this House would like this alternative. (An Hon. 
Member : It would be disastrous). The second alternative is 
to amend the Constitution, and then under this, there are 
two courses open. The first course open to us is to re-enact 
this law in consonance with the amended article. That is 
one way. Parliament and the various State Legislatures 
should call in their sessions and tackle with these laws once 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


350 


350 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

again. The second course is to revive these laws and to say 
that the revival of these laws shall be subject to the provisions 
contained in the amended Constitution. I cannot see what 
else one can do. The Bill adopts the second course. The Bill 
says: let the laws which have been declared by the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts to be null and void be deemed to 
be alive, but subject to one proviso, and that proviso is that 
they shall not be alive in their original body and flesh but 
they shall be alive only in such degree and in such manner 
as may be consistent with the amended article 19. That is the 
position. Now, I would like to ask the House whether they will 
seriously contemplate the posibility of either this Parliament 
or the various Legislative Assemblies in the Provinces to again 
sit and re-enact these laws. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Why not ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Is there time for it ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: What is happening? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know what time it might take. 
But I am sure about that if my hon. friend Dr. Mookerjee 
were to be a member of the Bengal Legislative Assembly, he 
will prevent such a law being passed there for at least six 
months. His argument, his eloquence, all that would stand as 
a formidable Chinese Wall against any re-enactment of these 
laws. Therefore, it seems to me not to be a very unnatural 
presumption that in the present circumstances in which this 
Parliament is situated or the local Legislative Assemblies are 
situated, you cannot presume that there would be immediately 
the time available for the re-enactment of these laws. I cannot 
think of it myself. We have so much legislation here. 

Shri Sarangdhar Das: Why not the new Parliament ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If it is the new parliament, it means 
that for six, seven or eight months on a year, there will be 
no law for public order; there will be no law for incitement 
to an offence and no law for friendly relations with foreign 
States. If Members of Parliament can contemplate such a 
contingency, they are welcome to it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


351 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 351 

Ch. Ranbir Singh (Punjab): The new Parliament can 
repeal these laws if they so want. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have dealt with article 19. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Why are you giving retrospective 
effect ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Unless you give retrospective effect, these 
laws cannot be revived. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): Is that legal ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why not ? If these laws are to be in 
operation, they must be in operation on the date when this 
law comes into existence. You can give it a new beginning 
if you can re-enact; but I do not see how you can re-enact. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Because the Hon. Law Minister 
is going to another article, may I ask a question with regard 
to this article ? The power sought to be conferred refers to 
incitement to an offence. Section 4 of the Press (Emergency 
Powers) Act, to which the Hon. Law Minister has referred, 
involves incitement to murder or to an offence involving 
violence. I want to know. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Do you want to advocate it ? 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: No. I want to know whether 
under the wide powers that are sought to be taken, it is not 
possible to advocate even non-violent disobedience to any order 
which may be against the liberties of the people, and which 
will constitute an offence under other enactments. I want an 
explanation. For instance, section 144 prevents the holding of a 
meeting for unlawful purposes. Some district magistrate issue 
an order. A newspaper, tomorrow, advises the people that this 
order is absolutely obnoxious and it may be disobeyed. Will it 
or will it not constitute an offence although it is neither an 
incitement to violence nor incitment to murder ? 

Shri Rajagopalchari: May I submit that such extensively 
detailed discussion may be reserved for the Select Committee. 
The principles have been explained. Otherwise, we will have 
no time. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: If the Hon. Minister gives an 
assurance that it will be modified, it is enough. 

Mr. Chairman: Whatever it may be, the hon. Members 
who are frequently interrupting, I think, have had their say 
already, and their points of view have been taken note of. 
Now, let the Hon. Law Minister, who is now speaking have 
his say. 

Shri Kamath: Does it mean that those who have not had 
their say can interrupt? 

Mr. Chairman: No ; that does not mean that. Most hon. 
-Members will do well to take note of this. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: Only one question. Will it be 
legal to give retrospective effect ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Oh yes ; undoubtedly. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: May I ask one direct 
question ? Is the Hon. Law Minister satisfied with the terms 
of article 19(2) as he seeks to amend it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have explained the principle. If as I 
said, the language requires to be modified to give effect to 
the principle, there can be no objection. But, the principle is 
that they shall be revived. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: The Hon. Minister has not 
thrown any light on the removal of the word ‘reasonable’. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is not removed; it was not there. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: But the other things 
were there. You have taken away all those safeguards. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a different matter. That will be 
considered by the Select Committee. 

Now, I come to clause 4 of the Bill. This clause introduces 
a new article 31 A. Let us understand, first of all, what this 
article does. What this article does is to permit a State to 
acquire what are called estates. Secondly, it says that when 
any legislation is undertaken to acquire estates, nothing in the 
Fundamental Rights shall effect such a legislation. The merits 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


353 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 353 

of this article, I think have to be judged in the light of one 
question, and it is this. Is there anything revolutionary in 
this article ? 

Shri Frank Anthony: It is reactionary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Is there anything in this article which 
is not to be found in article 31 ? It is from this point of view 
that I want the House to consider this question. The House 
would remember that later clauses of article 31 provided 
that certain laws which were then on the anvil and had 
not been passed, shall not be questioned on the ground of 
compensation if a certificate was issued by the President. That 
is the gist of those clauses of article 31. The new amendment 
to article 31 not only removes the operation of the provision 
relating to compensation, but also removes the operation of 
the article relating to discrimination. In this amendment, I 
am emphasising the word ‘estate’. The new article is a very 
limited one. It does not apply to the acquisition of land. It 
applies to the acquisition of estate in land which is a very 
different thing. What is an estate has been defined in this 
particular article namely, the right of a proprietor, sub- 
proprietor, tenure-holder, or other intermediary. Of course, 
the terminology is different in different provinces. It does 
not refer to the acquisition of land. That is a point to be 
borne in mind. Therefore, all that article 31 A does is this. 
When any law is undertaken with regard to the acquisition of 
property, two questions can properly arise. One is the amount 
of compensation ; the second is discrimination as between the 
various proprietors as regards the amount of compensation. 
These are the only two questions that can possibly arise and 
give rise to litigation. With regard to one part of it, dealing 
with compensation, we have already excluded the acquisition 
of proprietory and zamindari interests by the original article 
31. By this article, we are excluding the operation of the 
discriminatory provision. That is all what we are doing by 
this article. 

It seems to me that we really cannot adopt the said two 
articles of the Fundamental Rights relating to compensation 
and discrimination with regard to this land question. I have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


354 


354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

paid considerable attention to this subject. I may say that 
I have studied with great care the situation in Ireland, a 
country which resembles very closely our own. In Ireland, the 
peasantry is hungering for land. Land in Ireland has been 
unevenly distributed. Some have very large estates ; some 
have very small. There are many who are landless. What has 
the Irish Constitution done ? I want the Members who are 
representing the landed interests to consider this case in a 
comparative manner. Now, so far as the Irish constitution is 
concerned, property in land particularly is not a Fundamental 
Right. Article 43 of the Irish Constitution clause (2), states 
that the exercise of the right mentioned, that is the right on 
land, should be regulated by the principles of social justice. 
It does not say that land shall not be taken except on the 
basis of full compensation or without any discrimination as 
between landlords. What the Irish law does is this. They have 
appointed what is called the “Congested Board”, as they call 
it, or congested Areas board. It is a separate organisation 
created by law and this Board has been given the power to 
acquire land, to break up holdings, to equalise land, to make 
uneconomic holdings economic ones by taking land from a 
neighbouring owner and the right of assigning compensation 
has been given to this Board of congested areas. There is no 
judicial authority to interpret the action of this board. 

An hon. Member: And no appeal? 

Dr. Ambedkar: And no appeal at all. Some people have 
of course, taken appeals to the courts, but the courts have 
held that no appeals lie with any court. 

Now, I can, speaking for myself, say without any hesitation 
that I am not at all an admirer of the new schemes that 
have been drafted by these States who have acquired land. It 
is, in my judgment, not a very good thing to create peasant 
proprietors in this country. Our difficulty in this country has 
arisen by reason of the fact that we have small landlords 
holding half an acre of land or an acre or two acres, with no 
money, no measure, no bulls, no bullocks, no implements, no 
seeds and no arrangement for water. And yet they are the 
landlords and the holders of the land. Looking at the future, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


355 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 355 

I feel very aghast as to what is going to happen to this country 
and its national production of food, if this kind of agricultural 
system continues. I would have very much liked if the State 
had acquired all these properties and kept the land as State 
land and given it on permanent tenancy to cultivators so 
that the State would have had the right to create collective 
farming and co-operative farming on the basis of supplying 
the materials and so on and so forth. But now we have a 
large ‘number of landless labourers in this country, and I 
think their number will exceed even five crores. But when you 
make these laws, making the tiller of the soil the owner of it, 
what provision can you make for the welfare of these landless 
labourers ? They will remain where they are — high and dry — 
notwithstanding the abolition of the zamindars. I am, therefore, 
not very happy at what is being done. But that is a different 
question altogether. The question we are considering now is 
whether the intermediaries should be allowed to continue. 
That is the point, and on the point, I think there can be no 
dispute that the intermediaries should be liquidated, without 
any kind of interference from the Fundamental Rights either 
on the ground that there is no adequate compensation or that 
a discrimination has been made. I have got with me a very 
interesting paper which I secured from the Government of 
West Bengal. Hon Members will remember that there was a 
Commission called the Floud Commission, appointed for the 
purpose of liquidating the zamindars in Bengal. After that 
Commission had reported, the Government of Bengal appointed 
a special officer in order to find out how effect could be given 
to the recommendations of the Floud Commission and that 
officer has made a very interesting report. I have got a copy, 
but as I said, I have not got the time now to go through 
the whole of it. But that officer himself recommended that 
equality of compensation would be wrong. It would be neither 
just nor equitable, though it may be administratively smooth. 
He has worked out a scheme of compensation which is very 
interesting, and the scheme is one of graded compensation. In 
the case of profits up to Rs. 2,000 the compensation should be 
fifteen times the net profit. From Rs. 2,000 up to Rs. 5,000 
it should be twelve times but not less than the maximum 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


356 


356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

amount given under the previous item. From Rs. 5,000 up to 
Rs. 10,000, the compensation should be ten times but not less 
than the maximum under the Rs. 2,000 — Rs. 5,000 category 
and for profits above Rs. 10,000 it should be eight times 
but not less than the maximum under the last-mentioned 
category. It is all a graded thing. And I am afraid that we 
should not get mixed up with this question of compensation 
which is a very ticklish problem. If you want the betterment 
of agriculture, I am convinced that these intermediaries must 
be liquidated. The original article exempted compensation for 
the acquisition of zamindari rights. We are now dealing with 
exemption from discrimination. I do not see why article 31 
should now continue to operate, when there is a law for the 
purpose of acquiring these estates. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: What about article 14 about 
discrimination ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The whole chapter is excluded from 
operation. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal): When the Hon. 
Minister is prepared to go far, why does he not go further ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not revolutionary enough. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: But you yourself suggested that 
the State should acquire the land? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, but I am a progressive radical. 

Now, I come to article 31 B. This article enumerates in 
the Ninth Schedule certain laws which have been passed. 
Great objection has been taken that this is a very unusual 
procedure. Prima facie, it is an unusual procedure. But let 
us look at it from another point of view. What are these 
laws ? What are the principles on which these laws are made 
which are being saved by the Ninth Schedule. All the laws 
that have been saved by this Schedule are laws which fall 
under article 31 A. That is to say, they are laws which are 
intended to acquire estates. And when we say by article 31A 
that whenever a law is made for the acquisition of an estate, 
neither the principle of compensation nor the principle of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


357 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 357 

discrimination shall stand in the way of the validity of it. I 
admit that sentimentally there may be objection. But from the 
practical point of view. I do not understand why we should 
not declare them valid pieces of legislation. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : They are bad laws and so 
they have to be declared valid! 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): May I enquire 
whether these laws that are now sought to be validated will 
cover, only land reforms or whether there will be interference 
with other laws like the Transfer of Property Act and other 
Act ? Has this aspect of the matter been investigated by the 
Government? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall be quite frank about it. The only 
11-00 am ot h er method to adopt would be to give power to 
the President to revise these laws and to reconstruct 
them and to bring them strictly in conformity with the 
provisions of article 31. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Under article 31 we 
decided that if President certifies certain laws, they will be 
valid. Now that safeguard has been taken away. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The reason why that has not been done 
is this. Just imagine the amount of burden that would be cast 
upon myself, on the Law Ministry, the Food and Agriculture 
Ministry and other Ministeries involved if we were to sit here 
and examine every section of each one of these Acts to find 
out whether they deviate. I think that is impossible. 

Shri Kamath: Appoint a Committee for the purpose 

Dr. Ambedkar : That will mean postponement of this Bill. 

Now I come to clause 6 which seeks to amend article 85. 
In article 85 the word used is ‘summon’. This word has given 
rise to some difficulty. The word ‘ summon’ has a technical 
meaning, viz. sitting of Parliament after a prorogation 
or dissolution. It does not cover the case of the sitting of 
Parliament after adjournment. The result is that although 
Parliament may sit for the whole year adjourning from time 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


358 


358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to time, it is still capable of being said that Parliament has 
been summoned only once and not twice. There must be 
prorogation in order that there may be a new session. It is felt 
that this difficulty should be removed and consequently the 
first part of it has been deleted. The provision that whenever 
there is a prorogation of Parliament, the new session shall be 
called within six months is retained. That is the difference 
between the old article and the new, viz., the summoning 
has been dispensed with. Parliament may be summoned once 
and it may continue to go on after short adjournments from 
time to time. 

Another difficulty with regard to clause (2) is — it was 
contended by some that according to the letter of this 
article it is necessary that both Houses should be prorogued 
simultaneously and not at different times. That certainly was 
not the intention of the Constitution. The Constitution intended 
that one House may be summoned at one time, another may 
be summoned at another time, one may be prorogued at one 
time and another may be prorogued at another time. It is to 
make this possible that clause (2) has been amended. 

With regard to article 87, which is sought to be amended 
by clause 7, the position is this. Under the old article the 
provision was that whenever Parliament was summoned, 
there was to be an address by President. Now as Parliament 
will be summoned only once and it will continue either by 
prorogation or by adjournment, it is not necessary to retain 
this provision. Similarly 

Shri Kamath: How can it continue after prorogation ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If it is prorogued, then it will be summoned. 
If there are two summonings, the address by President will 
be only once. With regard to precedence for debate, that also 
has been deleted — not that there will be no time given but for 
the simple reason that there may be some urgent business 
which may require to be disposed of earlier 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Supposing the President 
wants to address the House, this will be a limitation imposed 
on him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


359 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 359 

Dr. Ambedkar: Now I come to articles 341 and 342. As 
the House knows, to-day the power of issuing scheduled castes 
and the scheduled tribes order so far as part A and Part B 
States are concerned is given only to the President while the 
power to issue such orders with regard to Part C States is 
given to Parliament. That position is now being altered and 
the power is given to President even to make an order with 
regard to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in respect of 
Part C States also. 

Then article 372 invests the President with the power to 
make adaptation in existing laws in order to bring them in 
conformity with the provisions of the Constitution and that 
power is given only for two years. This House will remember 
on account of the pressure of other business it has not been 
possible for Government to examine all the existing laws in 
order to find out how many of them are inconsistent with 
the provisions of the Constitution. It is therefore felt that the 
President’s power to make such adaptation in the existing laws 
in order to bring them in conformity with the Constitution be 
extended by one more year so that means may be adopted in 
order to find out which laws are inconsistent and a consolidated 
order may be issued thereafter. 

Shri Kamath: The article also provides that once 
Parliament is elected under the new Constitution, the President 
shall not exercise this power. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If this article gives the power, then that 
of course overrides. 

Shri Kamath : How can that be ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Then I come to article 376, clause 13. A 
good deal of objection was taken to this particular clause. It 
deals with the appointment of persons who are not citizens 
of India to the posts of Chief Justice and Judge of any High 
Court. The position is this. Article 217, clause (2) says that 
a Judge of the High Court must be a citizen of India. Article 
376 provides that existing Judges including Judges who were 
not citizens on the date when the Constitution came into 
operation shall continue as Judges if they so choose. Now it 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

so happens that we have in our country some four High 
Court Judges who were on the date of the Constitution, 
Judges of Certain High Courts but were not citizens of 
India. They chose to remain at their posts and did not 
retire. We were therefore bound to carry them over under 
the provisions of article 376. A question has arisen and it 
is this. Can such a person be appointed as a Chief Justice 
either in the Court in which he is serving or in some other 
Court ? Another question that has arisen is this. Can such a 
Judge be transferred to another High Court, the point being 
whether the appointment of a Chief Justice or the transfer 
of a Judge from one High Court to another High court is 
a new appointment ? If it is a new appointment, obviously 
the provisions of article 217(2) would apply. This was felt 
as a great difficulty, because it could not be presumed that 
parliament intended merely to continue them but their 
prospects should be blocked. Such evidently was not the 
intention. Consequently the President under the powers 
vested in him under article 392, clause (1) for the purpose 
of removing difficulties, issued an order regularising the 
position. That order in some quarters has been questioned 
as being outside the power of the President, there being no 
defficulty whatsoever. In order to remove these doubts it is 
thought better to make a provision in the Constitution itself 
and that is why clause 13 is included in this Bill. 

Mr. Chairman: Will the Hon. Minister explain why was 
not originally the transfer contemplated ? Is it not a new 
situation created by this clause ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is what I interpret to be the 
intention of article 376 viz., that once they were carried 
over, they were carried over for all purposes, either transfer 
or promotion. 

But some people have found this difficulty 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The idea was that 
the Chief Justice shall not be a non-national. What is the 


reason now ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


361 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 361 

Dr. Ambedkar: The reason is obvious. When you accept 
a man as a Judge you certainly accept him for your own 
convenience and you should be in a position to transfer him 
to some other court. For the benefit of and in fairness to that 
individual he should not be debarred from promotion. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Would you like the Prime 
Minister of India to be a non-national ? 

Dr. Ambedkar ; We are dealing with these four exceptional 
cases. ( Interruption ). The provision is very clear and I do not 
think anybody can quarrel with it. 

I believe I have exhausted all the points raised in the 
course of the debate. If anything remains I shall be prepared 
to deal with it when the Bill is taken up clause by clause. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

CONSTITUTION (1ST AMENDMENT) BILL 1951 

*Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: Now, it has become 

a convention — I cannot immediately say whether it is 
anything more and whether it is in the Constitution 
itself — that anything coming under the concurrent list 
of legislation, any law passed by a State Assembly, has 
to come up here for examination and for the President’s 
approval. Is that so ? 

An hon. Member : Not until this House has passed 
a law. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): If it is 

inconsistant. 

An hon. Member: Not until this House passes a law. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: What I mean was, if there 
is obvious repugnance then, of course, it does not come 
into effect. That is obvious. But in order to examine that 
there is no repugnance, in order to see that it is what 
the legislative lists contemplate, it comes up here of the 
President’s assent. Therefore, in effect 

Shri Bharati (Madras): Not necessarily, 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I do not say it is necessary, 
in the sense that the law does not take effect. But I am 
told that it is practically automatic and anyhow it has 
been in practice automatic. And such laws have to come 
up here, every one of them, for they come up daily, first 
of all to the Home Ministry to examine and to the Law 
Ministry also to examine and it comes before the President 
to see whether he expresses his approval or not. So it can 
be taken for granted that, especially in a matter of this 
kind it must inevitably come. I go beyond that and if the 
House wishes I am perfectly willing to add that clause 
about the President’s assent to article 19. It is for the 
House to decide. 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 31st May 1951, p. 9610. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


363 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 363 

*Dr. S. P. Mookherjee : Before I take my seat, I 

once again request the Prime Minister to consider the main 
purpose of my two amendments with regard to the substitution 
of the word ‘Parliament’ in the place of ‘State’ or if that is 
not possible, at least to provide that the laws passed by the 
States in this behalf will be subject to the President’s assent. 
If that is done, it will, to a great extent, remove the difficulties 
which stand in our way. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): My only excuse 
for intervening in this debate is to clear certain points which 
relate to the constitutional provisions which are necessarily 
involved in the amendments which have been tabled. In 
the first place, I propose to deal with the two amendments 
together : the first amendment is that Parliament should 
have the exclusive power to make laws under the provisions 
which are now being introduced in the proposed clause (2) of 
article 19 and the second is that, if that is not possible, the 
President should have the power to give his assent to any 
law made under this new proposed clause and unless that 
assent was given, that law should not be deemed to be valid. 

With regard to the question of bringing in Parliament, there 
are two aspects to the matter which, I think, it is desirable to 
consider carefully. One is this: Is it possible to give exclusive 
power to Parliament to make a law in a field which is covered 
by the new clause (2) ? On this matter, I should like to invite 
the attention of the House to article 368 which deals with the 
amendment of the Constitution. That article specifies certain 
classes of amendments to the articles “of the Constitution 
which would require the ratification of the States before the 
amendments could be deemed to have been validly passed. 
I do not propose to go over all the different categories that 
have been set out in article 368 . I content myself by reference 
to only one and I refer to Chapter I of Part XL Article 368 
says that if any article which forms part of Chapter I of Part 
XI is amended, then such an amendment will require the 
ratification of the State. It will be noticed that article 246 
clause (3) falls in Chapter I of Part XI. That article says that 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 1st June 1951, pp. 9861-69. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


364 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the States shall have the exclusive power to make laws in 
relation to any entry in List II, which means that Parliament 
shall not have the power to make laws with regard to any 
item in List II. If Members of this House would refer to 
List II, they will notice that Entry 1 in that List refers to 
public order. Public order is one of the categories of heads 
of legislation which we are introducing for the first time in 
clause (2) of article 19, by this amending Bill. It is therefore 
quite clear that if you were to give Parliament power to make 
law in respect of public order which is included in List II, and 
which according to article 246(3) confers exclusive legislative 
jurisdiction upon the States, then it is obvious that such an 
amendment would require the ratification of the States. Now 
the intention of the Government as well as of this House, I 
think on this point is quite clear, namely, that we do not 
propose to make any amendment to any clause which would 
require the assent or the ratification of the States. From 
that point of view, I think, all those who have tabled this 
amendment would agree that it is not possible to accept that 
amendment without involving this particular Bill in a great 
difficulty which it would not be possible for this House to 
overcome within the time within which we propose to carry 
through this measure. 

As the Prime Minister said yesterday, all of us have 
sympathy with the proposal, namely, that if it were possible 
Parliament should be given the power to legislate. We have 
also sympathy with the suggestion that the President may 
have the right to give his assent before the Bill becomes law. 
But the question that has to be considered is, is such a thing 
necessary ? Is it not contained in the very provisions of the 
Constitution ? Now, let me refer hon. Members to the heads 
of legislation we are introducing in the present clause and 
the place, they have in the various entries in Schedule Seven. 

Take the security of the State. There is no particular entry 
of this nature — security of State — for the simple reason that 
the security of the State can be affected by a variety of entries 
and the power is necessarily distributed under different heads. 
At the same time hon. Members will see that entry 1 of List 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


365 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 365 

1 is a very relevant entry so far as the security of the State 
is concerned. Take the second head — friendly relations with 
foreign States. That is covered by entries 9, 10 and 14 in 
List 1. Take the third head — public order, decency and morality. 
That is in entry 1 in List II. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: What entry? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is entry 1 in List II to some extent. 
And so far as newspapers, books etc. are concerned it is also 
related to entry 39 in List III. Contempt of court comes in 
entry 95 in List I and also in entry 14 in List III. Defamation 
is in entry 1 in List III. Incitement to an offence is in entry 1 
in List III. 

Now having had this information before the House, I 
think the House will understand that in the large majority 
of the cases since the entry either falls in List I or in List 
III, Parliament has in some cases the exclusive authority to 
make law, in some cases concurrent authority to make them. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Will the Hon. Minister be more 
specific ? Where is the concurrent power to pass laws regarding 
public order ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to public order, there is 
another entry — 39 in List III — which speaks of books and 
newspapers. Newspapers are very much concerned. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: The Hon. Minister is arguing that 
with regard to certain matters — in fact with regard to all the 
matters either Parliament has concurrent jurisdiction or has 
exclusive jurisdiction. I would like him to be more specific. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am giving the entries. 

Dr. S. P. Mookrjee: Public order? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The large head for public order is entry 
1 in List II. Newspapers may also come under public order. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: It is not. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The point is this. Some law has to be 
related to some entry. How is the authority of Parliament 
or the authority of a State to be determined to make a law ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. S. P. Mookrjee: Will the Hon. Minister admit that 
Parliament has no concurrent jurisdiction in respect of laws 
relating to public order except newspapers ? Let us have it 
clearly. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister does not say 
that every item is in the Concurrent List. 

Dr. Ambedkar: A large majority of them is exclusively 
in the jurisdiction of Parliament and in some cases the 
jurisdiction is also concurrent. Therefore my submission to 
the House is this — that nothing is necessary for the purpose 
of investing Parliament to make a law in the fields which are 
mentioned here as exclusive right of legislation. Parliament 
has, in certain cases, got also concurrent power so that it can 
check any abuse that the Provincial Legislatures may make 
of the power that we are conferring. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: What is the power regarding 
incitement to offence under the Concurrent List ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It comes under the Penal Code. Incitement 
to offence is a specific offence in the Penal Code. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: The Hon. Minister should read to 
the House entry 1 of 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot yield to him just like he did not 
yield to the Hon. Home Minister. This is not a lecture room 
and I am not lecturing to the students either. I am making 
my point. If my hon. friend wants an exposition we can meet 
somewhere in the Constitution Club — and I shall be prepared 
to lecture to him. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All that I can say is the hon. 
Member contends that entry 1 in List II — State List — only 
relates to public order and this is not covered. Incitement 
to offence is in the Penal Code. If he is not satisfied, he can 
draw his own inferences. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is open to you to say that this does 
not cover public order. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


367 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 367 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All that the Hon. Minister wants 
to show is that with respect to the majority of the offences, 
they are either in the Union List or in the Concurrent List. 
The minority may be more important than the majority. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: The Hon. Minister stated that 
incitement to offence comes under entry 1 in the Concurrent 
List but that item reads like this : 

“Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian 
Penal Code at the commencement of the Constitution but excluding 
offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified 
in List I or List II and excluding the use of naval, military or 
air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the 
civil power ”, 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will not give in. I would like to finish 
my speech before one o’clock 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: It means that there will be no 
incitement to any offence which comes under public order in 
List II 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not running away from that point. 
I am very much interested in it. 

Dr. S. P. Mookrj ee: I know you are. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, I am. 

I now come to the President’s assent. Under article 200 
of the Constitution the Governors or the Rajpramukhs of 
the different States are empowered to withhold their assent 
from any particular Bill and refer it to the President. That 
provision already exists. Naturally the Governor has to act 
on the advice of his Minister and if he felt that a measure 
should be reserved for the consideration of the President, the 
power is already there. No new power is required. But it may 
be argued that this power is in a sense nugatory, because it 
depends upon the advice given to him by the Ministry and 
the Ministry which has been a party to a measure cannot 
be expected to give their advice to the Governor to refer the 
matter to the President. 

There is also another article 254 which deals with the laws 
in the concurrent field and that article says that if there is 
any inconsistency between any law made by Parliament and a 
similar law on the same subject made by a State Legislature, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


368 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

then to the extent of the repugnancy and inconsistency the 
law of the State shall be void. There is in addition to that a 
further provision in clause (2) of that article that if such a 
law, which is inconsistant with the law made by Parliament 
on the subject, is reserved for the assent of the President and 
the President gives his assent, notwithstanding the repugnancy 
the law shall remain void so far as that State is concerned. 
So far as our experience in the Law Ministry goes almost 
every State has got the fear that their law may be declared 
to be inconsistent and hence void. In order to prevent this 
contingency the States have always taken the safest course to 
refer all these measures to the President for his consideration 
and assent and his assent has generally been given either in 
the form in which the Bill stands or with some modifications. 
Therefore my submission is that so far as the Constitution is 
concerned articles 200 and 254(2) contain enough safeguards 
to see that such measures do reach the President and receive 
his consideration and assent. 

Shrimati Durgabai : Under what procedure ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I was just referring to it. Under article 
254(2) 

Shrimati Durgabai : How ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I know some people have got a bee in 
their bonnet. On all these three counts I submit that all these 
amendments are quite unnecessary. 

I propose to deal with some of the points raised by my 
friend Pandit Kunzru. So far as his amendment dealing 
with change of words is concerned, his words I suppose are 
merely poetical alliterations and I do not think there is any 
substance in them, whether you call it friendly relations or by 
some other words : the substance and the head of legislation 
remaining what it is. I am therefore not prepared to spend 
my time in dealing with them. 

But he has been making a great deal of capital with regard 
to the American case which he can never forget namely Near 
versus Minnesota. It is true that the U. S. Supreme Court 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


369 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 369 

nullified a law which had made previous restraint as 
unconstitutional. But with regard to that case I think it is 
not desirable to fix our banner and standard by the decision 
that was given, because I would like to draw my learned 
friend’s attention to some of the incidents with regard to that 
particular case. I have a book with me and I shall give the 
name. I know that Dr. Mookerje is very careful in pursuing 
these matters. The book is Free Speech in the United States. 
There are various other books also which he must have known. 
Now with regard to this particular case the first point which 
the American writers have themselves noted is that it is a 
decision which was arrived at by a bare majority of one single 
judge ; it was a decision which was given by five to four. The 
second thing is that at page 380 the writer himself has said 
that on account of this very narrow majority — 

“The Near case had ho immediate effect beyond voiding the 
Minnesota statute, which is said to have grown out of a nasty 
local situation.” 

I would also like to read to him a portion of the judgment 
delivered by the chief of the dissenting judges which I think 
is worth quoting. This is what Mr. Justice Butler who headed 
the minority said: 

“It is well known that existing libel laws are inadequate 

effectively to suppress evils resulting from the kind of business 
and publications that are shown in this case. The “doctrine that 
measures such as the zone before us are invalid as previous 
restraints exposes the peace and good order of every community 
and the business and private affairs of every individual to 
the constant and protracted false and malicious assaults of 
any insolvent publisher who may have purpose and sufficient 
capacity to contrive and put into effect a scheme or programme 
for oppression, blackmail, or extortion.” 

That also is a demand which must be taken into 
consideration in dealing with the liberty of the press. The other 
thing which my friend has been harping upon all along is the 
phrase used by Justice Holmes in dealing with cases relating 
to freedom of speech which is called “clear and present danger”. 
I have been trying to find out whether that is a very new 
doctrine so far as we are concerned. I suppose our judges also 
adopt the same doctrine. Supposing, for instance, a professor 
delivered a lecture on Communism in the Delhi University 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


370 


370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to the students. I do not suppose, although he may mention 
to them the violent methods that the communists adopt in 
order to achieve their object that anybody would hold that 
merely because he delivered a lecture to the students he 
was guilty of any offence. There was no “clear and present 
danger” and I have no doubt about it that our judges also 
would uphold the same line of reasoning. Therefore, as I said, 
I do not understand why our friends are abiding so much by 
certain catch phrases and certain decisions of the courts in 
the United States. 

I will now deal with the question of confining “incitement” in 
violence and I want my friends, Dr. Shyama Prasad Mookerjee 
and also Pandit Kunzru to pay some attention to what I am 
saying — and I will take some very particular cases. First of all, 
I would like to know whether they are in a position to give a 
precise definition of the meaning of the word “violence”. What 
is “violence” ? Is it to be confined merely to physical violence ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Violent words are excluded. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not talking of violent words. Have 
they been able to give us any precise definition which would 
enable the legislature and the court to know that this is 
violence and this is not violence ? I cannot find any. 

Shri Kamath: Put it as “as defined by law”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is only postponing the trouble. Some day 
when we make the law we shall have to give the definition 
of “violence”. 

I come now to specific instances. Supposing, for instance, 
there is trouble — I am giving some concrete cases which have 
happened — and there is trouble between the Scheduled Castes 
and caste Hindus in a particular village and the caste Hindus 
conspire together to proclaim a social boycott on the Scheduled 
Castes, preventing them from obtaining any kind of supplies, 
preventing them from going into the fields, preventing them 
from going into the jungles to collect fuel, then I want to 
know from Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee and Pandit Kunzru 
whether they want this, as an offence, to be regarded by the 
State as such or not. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


371 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 371 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Doctors differ in this respect. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall give another illustration which 
was recently reported in Bombay. In a place near Thana there 
was trouble going on between caste Hindus and the Scheduled 
Castes over the taking of water from a particular well. With 
the help of the police the Scheduled Castes there were able 
to secure their right to take water from that well along with 
the caste Hindus. The caste Hindus did not like the matter. 
They wanted the well to be exclusively used by them. Two 
days ago there was a report in the Bombay Press wherein it 
was stated that some caste Hindus incited some of their men 
to drop into it some kind of poisonous weeds. The result was 
that the whole water was poisoned and some of the Scheduled 
Caste people who drank the water suffered from the effect of 
the poison. I want to ask both of them whether they would 
limit their definition of incitement to violence, or whether 
they would extend it to cover where one community does 
something in order to harm and injure another community. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: In such a case you and I will go 
there to prevent it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You and I cannot go everywhere. You 
will be engaged in fighting the elections and I may be doing 
something else and we will have no time to go to the rescue 
of those people. It is no use taking the responsibility on our 
shoulders. It is much better that the law provides for it. 

Then with regard to particular laws, I and my colleagues 
or the Treasury Benches have been shouting time and over 
again that in this Bill what we are doing is to merely confirm 
capacity on Parliament to make laws for certain purposes. We 
are not enacting particular laws. We are not even protecting 
the laws as they exist today. But somehow Members who 
are determined to oppose. Members who are determined to 
take the opposite view — if they will forgive me — out of pure 
obstinacy are not able to make this distinction between capacity 
to legislate and making a particular law. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: The obstinacy is yours not to 
understand. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Three of the Clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
The House reassembled Half Past Three of the Clock. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair ] 

* Shri Hussain Imam: I wish to draw the attention of the 
House that no zamindar in his senses objects to the dictum 
laid down by the Constitution or by the Hon. the Prime 
Minister. The whole quarrel arises whether the intention of 
the Constitution is carried out or something is being foisted 
on us in the name of the Constitution which is not covered by 
the terms of the Constitution as embodied in the Constitution 
Act. And secondly 

An hon. Member: We are amending the Constitution. 

Shri Hussain Imam: No. What we are doing is, according 
to the Prime Minister to carry out the intentions of the 
Constitution which our wording had failed to do. And there 
I am at one with him, that as a member of the Constituent 
Assembly, I am as much a party in this — though I was not 
present on that day — as anybody else is. There were two 
cardinal principles of the Constitution — firstly about the Acts 
which are passed after the Constitution came into effect and 
those Acts which were passed upto 18 months before the 
Constitution was brought into effect. Now I ask you, the 
House and the Law Minister to certify that the eleven Acts 
are covered by these two categories. Only four Acts come 
under the category that are passed after the Constitution and 
had received the assent of the President. Seven Acts are not 
covered by this. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They were assented, I understand. 

Shri Hussain Imam : None, except the four. They are 
the Bihar Act, U. P. Act, Madhya Pradesh Act and the other 
Act. All the rest have not been assented to. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): Madras Act has been assented to. 

Shri Hussain Imam: Madras Act I of 1950 has been 
assented to, not the 1948 Act. I refer to this fact because 
in the beginning I spoke on the subject and suggested that 
ample time should be given to the House and to the Select 
Committee to examine these thoroughly 


* P. D., Vol. 12., Part II, 1st June 1951, pp. 9906-07. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


373 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 373 

The other thing to which I would like to draw attention 
is to the dictum laid down by the Hon. Prime Minister that 
we must pay fair, adequate compensation and not too much 
and I agree with that dictum. But do consider the things as 
they are existing. I am one with the Government in abolishing 
zamindari but on fair terms. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The words ‘fair compensation’ do not 
appear in article 31. 

Shri Hussain Imam : It was the wording of the Hon. 
Prime Minister. As far as article 31 is concerned, my charge 
is that the seven Acts that you are thrusting down our throats 
are not covered by the original provisions of article 31. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They are governed by new article 31A. 

Shri Hussain Imam : I was referring to the fact that we 
must face the facts. The Socialist party says that they are not 
going to honour the instialments that are going to be fixed 
by the Congress Government. The Communists have declared 
from the housetops that they are not going to honour it. Why 
be in a fool’s paradise and believe that it will be paid in 40 
years ? Half a loaf is better than nothing and if you have to 
give you should give now. You should realise the plight of 
small landholder of zamindar who has an income of 500 or 
600 or 1,000 rupees. He is not a bloated capitalist. I aver that 
at least the lower income group should be given compensation 
in lump sums so that they may start some business. 


*Dr. Ambedkar: As to my own amendment I do not 
think that any argument is necessary in, order to support 
the same. The amendment is merely an amplification as to 
the meaning of the word “estate”. Some people felt that while 
we had taken note of the laws that prevail in Part A States 
with regard to the definition of the word “estate”, we had not 
taken sufficient notice of the definition of the word “estate” 
operating in Part B States. In order to remove that doubt I 
felt that it was necessary to take note of it and to amplify 
the definition of the word “estate”, which I propose to do by 
my amendment. 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 1st June 1951, pp. 9912-15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

My principal ground for rising to take part in the debate 
is to deal with the point that was raised by my hon. friend, 
Ch. Ranbir Singh. His argument, if I understood it correctly, 
was this that while in some States in India the word “estate” 
is used in a limited sense so as to include only what we call 
intermediaries but not to include what we call the ryotwari 
estates, that is, people holding it in their own right without 
there being any intermediaries between them and the State, it 
is quite true that there are some States where the definition 
of the word “estate” is a wide one and might possibly include 
holders under ryotwari or occupants under the Bombay Land 
Revenue Code, or ryots in other parts of India. At one time I 
thought that it might be possible to give a limiting effect to 
the word “estate” by the addition of an explanation, but on 
further consideration I find that it is more or less impossible 
to give an explanation which would cover the point. But I 
would like to say this, that there is no intention on the part 
of Government that the provisions contained in article 31 A 
are to be employed for the purpose of dispossessing ryotwari 
tenents. 

Shri Hussain Imam: However big they might be ?” 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, that is a different matter. We are 
making a distinction between intermediaries and ryotwari 
holders. 

Now, that is certainly not the intention of the Government: 
I know that friends who are interested in this matter would 
hardly be satisfied with any expression of intention on the 
part of Government, but I think there is much more than 
mere intention in the Bill itself. If my friend Ch. Ranbir 
Singh, would refer to the proviso attached to article 31 A 
which requires that every such Bill shall be reserved for 
the consideration of the President, I think he will see that 
there is a certain amount of safeguard in it, and, as I hope 
the Prime Minister in his speech in reply to this debate will 
also make it clear, there is no such intention on the part of 
Government and I believe that whenever any such measure 
before the President for consideration, the undertaking given in 
this House would be binding upon the President in giving his 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


375 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 375 

sanction so far as any such measure is concerned. Therefore, 
I submit there is no ground for any fear of any such thing 
happening and I believe that there is also no justification for 
any kind of propaganda that may be carried on by interested 
parties that this Bill proposes to give power to Government to 
expropriate everybody including the ryotwari tenants. I hope 
that this will satisfy my friend, Ch. Ranbir Singh. 

With regard to the question that has been put to me by 
Durgabai...’ 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri (Assam) : Shrimati Durgabai. 

Dr. Ambedkar: These encumbrances I do not think are 
very necessary. I feel terribly embarrassed when somebody 
calls me Shri. Shri means wealth — I have none of it. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: May I mention that sufficient 
mischief has been caused by my friend, Dr. Ambedkar, calling 
me by my short name the other day ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I thought you agreed, that that did not 
change your sex? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: That is how jealousy has been 
created in the minds of some sections of the House. 

Shrimati Durgabai: At least not in my mind. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Now with regard to that, the relevant 
provision in the Madras Act is section 45. That section 45 
deals with impartible estates. It does not deal with ordinary 
estates and the provision, so far as I understand it, is that 
the matter of deciding whether and how the compensation is 
to be distributed is left to a tribunal. This Bill does not add 
to the powers of the tribunal; this Bill does not take away 
any of the powers that are given to the tribunal for that 
particular Act. I think within that ambit things will proceed 
in the way the Madras Act has determined. 

Dr. Deshmukh: May I ask a clarification of the Hon. 
Law Minister? The Hon. Doctor has told us that there is no 
intention to dispossess or limit the ryotwari tenures. There 
are six Acts of Bombay in the Schedule. If any of these Acts 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

do limit the ryotwari tenure, how far would it be proper 
to add those to the Schedule and how far does it cover the 
intention of Government not to bring in the ambit of this 
amending Act the ryotwari tenure or to limit their extent ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I know something of these Acts, coming 
from Bombay as I do and having practised in the High 
Court. Having had to deal with many cases, I have no 
doubt about it that the Khoti Abolition and other Acts to 
which my hon. friend has referred deal only with what we 
call intermediaries. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : My colleague the Law 
Minister has dealt with many of the points that heve been 
raised, 


* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): On listening 
to the debate I believe the House desires that the powers 
of adaptation vested in the President should continue and 
that it is a very useful instrument which has been forged 
by the Constitution for the purpose of bringing the laws 
already passed into conformity with the provisions of the 
Constitution. On that, I do not see any kind of difference 
of opinion. The only question that has been raised is this : 
why is it that the President has not been able to make 
modifications in the laws that appear to be inconsistent with 
the provisions of the Constitution during the period that has 
elapsed between now and the passing of the Constitution 
and why is it that further time is necessary. That seems to 
be the only point which requires clarification. 

It has been stated that the Law Department has been 
very lax. Some friends have said that it has gone to sleep. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar): That is right. 

Shri Hussain Imam (Bihar): Dozing. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know whether such statements 
are mere matters of imagination or whether there is any 


* P.D., Vol 12, Part II, 2nd June 1951, pp. 10007-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


377 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 377 

substance behind them — I think all hon. Members will agree 
that the Law Department is the smallest Department in the 
Government of India. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: Why ? 

Shri T. Husain (Bihar): There is the Department of 
Parliamentary Affairs. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The Department of Parliamentary Affairs 
has nothing to do with the Law Ministry ; it is quite separate 
from it. 

I should like to say that in the Law Ministry there are 
only three draftsmen. I have pressed on the Finance Ministry 
the necessity of increasing the number of draftsmen ; but I 
have failed. 

Shri Kamath: A Deputy Minister ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: A Deputy Minister cannot do anything in 
this matter, because no Minister can do drafting. 

The House also will remember the amount of legislation 
that is being put forth before it ever since the Constitution 
came into existence. I believe, I am speaking from memory, 
that in each session there are something like 30 or 40 Bills 
which are presented. Some of them are (carried) through and 
some of them are left over. Out of those that are left over, 
some are converted into Ordinances and the House again sits 
to convert the Ordinances into laws. Now, it might well be 
imagined whether it is possible for three draftsmen to draft 
40 or 50 Bills for each session, and yet have spare time for 
doing something else. That is a point which I think the House 
should consider in judging the work. 

Shri P. Y. Deshpande (Madhya Pradesh): Who is 
responsible for there being only three ? 

Shrimati Durgabai: May I ask a question ? Is it only a 
question of drafting or changing the substance of the laws ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that; please do not be 
in a hurry. 

Therefore, the normal work of the Law Ministry is so heavy 
and it is very difficult to cope with it. The adaptation work 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is something abnormal and something that is new that has 
been thrown upon the Law Ministry. There has been no 
expansion of the staff to cope with this new work. That is one 
point which I think the House will remember when criticising 
the Law Ministry for not completing the work of adaptation. 

The work of adaptation obviously fails into two categories. 
There are adaptations which are merely of a formal character. 
For instance, in the existing laws, the expression used is 
‘Provincial Government’. Today, the expression that is used 
for the corresponding, purpose is “State Government”. These 
are formal amendments. These amendments have already been 
carried out and I do not think any part of that work remains. 
But, the other part of the adaptation work, namely, making 
substantial modifications in the existing laws in order to bring 
them into conformity with the provisions of the Constitution is 
a totally different business from the formal kind of adaptation 
to which I have referred. 

Now, let us consider how it is possible to proceed 
methodically with regard to making modifications of a sub- 
stantial character in the existing laws of the country, in order 
that they may be brought into conformity with the provisions 
of the Constitution. Obviously there must be some officer 
somewhere at the Centre whose duty it would be to, what we 
call, note on the Acts in the various States and Acts made by 
the Centre, in order to ascertain for himself whether there is 
anything in any of the existing laws — whether they are made 
by the Centre or by the Provinces — which he thinks at the 
initial stage requires consideration from the point of view of 
adaptation. After that work is done, the matter may come 
to the Law Ministry for further examination whether there 
is any substance in the note made by that particular officer. 
There again the matter cannot end. Obviously, there must 
be further correspondence between the Law Ministry and the 
Law officers in the States in order to find out whether they 
agree with the view that certain of their laws are inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Constitution. If they agree, well 
and good; action may be taken. But, if they do not agree, 
then, obviously, the matter has to be referred to the Advocate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


379 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 379 

General of the State and also the Attorney-General of the 
Government of India, because, in this matter, they are the 
final advisers of the Government and on whose advice alone 
the Government could act. The number of Acts in the Provinces 
are legion : the number of Acts made by the States are equally 
large. One can well imagine the amount of time which would 
be necessary in order to go through the process which I have 
detailed here before the Central Government could come to 
the conclusion that a particular law must be declared to be 
null and void or must be modified in certain parts in order 
that it may be brought into line with the Constitution and 
the President may accordingly issue an Order. It is therefore 
not quite so easy as some people in the House seem to think. 
It is a very elaborate and labourious process. 

After all, what is the President in this matter? The 
President is a law making authority. His authority is practically 
co-extensive with the authority of Parliament. But, in order 
that it may be done in an expeditious manner, we have vested 
the President with this particular power. I am sure that so 
important and so crucial a power of law-making practically 
could not be exercised in a hurried manner and to make 
some kind of a change may be absolutely inappropriate and 
quite unjustified. These are the reasons why it has not been 
possible for the Law Ministry to complete the task and why 
the Law Ministry thinks that perhaps one more year may be 
necessary. It should also be remembered in this connection 
that the Law Ministry has been now for the last three 
months practically busy with the work of elections, preparing 
the two Representation of the People Bills, delimitation of 
constituencies, considering the amendments that are coming 
to the Order of the President delimiting the constituencies etc. 
They will also be busy with making rules and all sorts of 
other things relating to the elections and these are matters 
which are now outstanding before the Law Ministry. And 
especially in view of the limited staff of the Law Ministry, 
I cannot see how any spare staff can be found or how time 
can be found to be devoted exclusively for the purposes of 
carrying out the object laid down in article 372. Therefore, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


380 


380 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

further time is necessary. And that is the reason why this 
amendment has been moved. 

With regard to the point made by my friend Ch. Ranbir 
Singh relating to the declaration that the Punjab Land 
Alienation Act is invalid and inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Constitution, I should like to say this. The point that he 
raised was that it was wrong on the part of the Government 
of India to have abrogated the whole of that legislation that 
has been operating there. Well, this matter also was considered 
in the Law Ministry, whether it was possible to modify some 
of the provisions of that Act and leave the rest intact. But I 
should like to tell the House that with all the goodwill in the 
world, so far as that Act was concerned, both the Attorney- 
General here and, if I remember correctly, the law officers of 
the Punjab Government agreed that every one of the provisions 
of that Act was inconsistent with the Constitution. Therefore 
we had no remedy left except to declare the whole Act invalid. 

Now, I have given the justifications to the House why 
this amendment is necessary and I hope the House will be 
satisfied with the explanation that I have given. 

Shri Kamath: What about the suggestion to have a 
Committee of this House to help the Law Ministry ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. With regard to that, there again, 
as I said a Committee of the House might help at a much 
later stage. But unless I am in a position to place before any 
Committee of this House material which has already been 
examined by somebody, the Commiittee, in my judgment, could 
not come to any conclusion. Preliminaries will be necessary 
and I myself have got an idea in my mind that it may be 
desirable to appoint a small Committee of some retired High 
Court judges to examine the matter and report to us as to 
what are the laws which require consideration from the point 
of view of article 372. 

Shri Kamath: Members of the House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I thought my friend said lawyer Members. 
Yes, they may be co-opted. After the report is received, they 
may be taken into confidence and the matter may be decided. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


381 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 381 

Shrimati Durgabai: I would like to get one point 
cleared by the Hon. Law Minister. We have been told that 
whenever a law is made by a State Legislature on any 
item in the Concurrent List, it would come to the Centre 
automatically for consultation, advice and all that. I would 
like to know when such a proposed legislation is sent to 
the Centre, whether the matter is left to the draftsmen to 
decide whether the law is inconsistent or not ? What is the 
procedure ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The lady is thoroughly confused. I am 
sorry to say. 

Shrimati Durgabai: That does not matter. The Law 
Minister may clear up the confusion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Adaptation applies to existing laws. 
It does not apply to future laws. All the laws that come 
to us for such consultation are future laws. The article 
deals with the existing laws which were made when there 
was no Chapter on Fundamental Rights anywhere in the 
Government of India Act and which have now become subject 
to the Fundamental Rights, and therefore inconsistent. So 
the inconsistency has to be removed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The point is, with respect to any 
law that is being now made. If it is in the Concurrent List, 
it is reserved for the President’s consent. When such a law 
comes up, it is left to the draftsmen to find out whether it 
is inconsistent or not? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The draftsman certainly plays his part; 
but the Law Ministry takes the responsibility and the Cabinet 
also takes the responsibility. 

Shri Husain Imam : May I know what is the position with 
regard to those Acts that are in the Schedule ? Have they been 
adapted or are they proposed to be adapted ? For instance 
the Bombay Act LXVII has certain reservations on the lines 
of the Punjab Land Alienation Act which has been declared 
ultra vires. Do Government propose to modify this Act ? It 
is item 2 in the Ninth Schedule. The Bombay Tenancy and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 does not deal with abolition 
of zamindaries, but says that transfer shall not take place 
between certain classes. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The answer of the House is that these 
Acts shall be validated by the Constitution without the 
necessity of adaptation. I am bound by the decision of the 
House. This point should have been raised yesterday. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I raised that very point 
yesterday, but you rejected it. 

Shri Rajagopalachari: Further questions may be 
postponed to the interpellation programme, and the present 
clause may be got through. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have had sufficient 
discussion. 

The question is: 

“That clause 12 stand part of the Bill.” 

The House divided: Ayes, 232: Noes, 9. 


* Prof. S. L. Saksena: It hurts me very much that 
this amendment should be made to our Constitution. After 
all, when we framed our Constitution we were very careful 
to see that our judiciary is above suspicion and that it 
is independent and able to interpret the Constitution in 
the best manner possible. Still we have found the Law 
Minister accusing the Supreme Court the other day of 
having wrongly interpreted the purpose of one of the 
provisions. The Prime Minister also has been saying that 
the intention of the makers of the Constitution has not 
been brought out by the interpretation of the judges of 
the Supreme Court and of the High Courts. I think this 
is a very unfair criticism : if the Supreme Court judges 
who have given these rulings were foreigners probably 
there might have been some suspicion, that they were not 
patriotic and therefore did not interpret our laws correctly. 
I personally feel that if you... 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 2nd June 1951, pp. 10020-21. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


383 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 383 

Dr. Ambedkar: I should like to repudiate any such 
suggestion as my hon. friend is making. We impute no bad 
motives to the Judges. 

Prof. S. L. Saksena: I am glad that he has said it today. 
Apart from the reasons given by my friend, Prof. Shah, 
that we should not change the Constitution for the sake of 
four persons, still even on principle I think that a foreigner 
sitting in the place of the Chief Justice will not have the 
independence and courage to give a judgment which will be 
above suspicion. The Law Minister said that nobody has cast 
an aspersion on the Judges. I have carefully read the speech 
of the Prime Minister 

Mr. Chairman : May I just remind the hon. Member 
that the point at issue is not what the Law Minister or the 
Prime Minister has said in some other connection ? We are 
considering this clause and their view is not relevant to its 
consideration. The only point relevant is whether this clause 
should be accepted. I would beg of the hon. Member to confine 
his remarks to this question alone. 


* Shri Rajagopalachari: The hon. Member wants to know 
what prohibition there was which we are trying to remove. 
Article 217 contains the prohibition against any Judge being a 
non-citizen. All the Judges would be covered by that provision. 
That is sought to be removed by a transitory provision. 

Mr. Chairman: If a person cannot become a Judge of a 
High Court how can he become the Chief Justice ? 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: Transfer is covered by article 222. 
Therefore, for transfer it is not necessary that the Judge should 
be a citizen and it is not necessary to have this amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, if it satisfies the House I would like 
to propose an amendment to clause 13 which would read thus : 

In page 4, lines 8 and 9, “or of the Supreme Court”. 

Shri Kamath: That is one of my two amendments that 
I have moved. 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 2nd June 1951, p. 10024. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


384 


384 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, I am prepared to accept yours, if 
you like. I do not think any further reply is necessary from 
me if the House is satisfied with the deletion of the words 
“or of the Supreme Court”. 

Mr. Chairman: I shall now put the amendments to the 
House. (Prof. Shah’s amendment was negatived.) 


*Mr. Chairman: The next is seeking to omit the words 
“or of the Supreme Court”. It is the same amendment that 
Dr. Ambedkar has proposed. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: It is exactly the same. 

Shri Kamath: But I have moved it and Prof. Shah has 
also moved it. 

Mr. Chairman: The amendment is there and I am bound 
to put it to the House. 

An hon. Member: It may be withdrawn. 

Prof. K. T. Shah: Why should I withdraw it ? 

Mr. Chairman: The qustion is: 

In page 4, lines 8 and 9, omit “or of the Supreme Court”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

In page 4, after line 9, add: 

“Provided that such Chief Justice or other Judge of a High 
Court shall acquire citizenship of India within three months of 
such appointment; and provided that no one who is not a natural 
born citizen of India shall be appointed Chief Justice or Judge 
of the Supreme Court of India.” 

The motion was adopted. 


** Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: This, as the Prime Minister has 
said, is a consequential change. Apparently, it refers to the 
Hyderabad Regulations which the House incorporated on an 


* P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 2nd June 1951, p. 10024. 
**Ibid., pp. 10035-36. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


385 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 385 

amendment moved on the floor of the House. What about the 
last part of the clause ? It says : 

“ each of the said Acts (and Regulations, if this is 

accepted) shall, subject to the power of any competent legislature 

to repeal or amend it, continue in force.” 

So far as .these Regulations are concerned, they cannot 
be repealed or amended by any Legislature when there is no 
Legislature in Hyderabad. There also, it should be altered by 
saying ‘legislature or other competent authority’. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Whatever legislature there is, it will have 
the right to amend. 

Mr. Speaker: There is confusion about the meaning of the 
word * legislature’. A legislature is conceived as consisting of 
a Chamber with elected representatives and so on. I believe 
the legislature here means, the Rajpramukh who is himself 
the legislature. That I think is the constitutional meaning. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Mr. Speaker: If that is so, there is no difficulty. 

The question is : 

In page 2, 

(i) line 35, after “Acts” insert “and Regulations”. 

(ii) line 36, after “Acts” insert “and Regulations”. 

(iii) line 39, after “Acts” insert “Regulations”. 

(iv) line 42, after “Acts” insert “Regulations”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Kamath: Is it not necessary to put this clause, as 
amended, to the House ? 

Mr. Speaker: Is it really necessary ? The position will be 
like this. “That the Bill, as amended, be passed” will be the 
motion I am going to put to the House. There is no particular 
clause again to be put to the House. The hon. Member will note 
that clause 5 was voted upon and the House has assented to it. 
Votes were taken separately on that clause. This amendment 
comes in as a consequential amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: Under rule 94. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


386 


386 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: It is for you to consider this. With 
regard to clauses, you have ruled deliberately for the sake 
of safety that every clause should be put separately and the 
votes of two-thirds of the Members present and voting should 
be recorded. Now, clause 5 has been passed in accordance 
with that direction. Now, we are amending clause 5. Is it not 
desirable and safe that clause 5, as amended, should be put 
separately and votes recorded ? 

Mr. Speaker: That would be an irregular procedure. 
That clause, in the clause by clause consideration at the 
second reading, has been already accepted by the House. 
The proposition before the House is that the entire Bill, as 
amended, be passed. The amendment is merely a consequential 
or verbal amendment, which is permissible at this stage. No 
substantial amendment is permissible at this stage. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


387 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 387 

Orissa Order 

* Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1] 

West Bengal Order 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1] 

Madhya Pradesh Order 
**Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1] 

Rajasthan Order 
Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1] 


Part C States Order 
*** Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1. 


**** REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (NO. 2) 

BILL — contd. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, with your 
permission, I would like to move certain formula and consequential 
amendments to the Representation of the People (No. 2) Bill as 
it has emerged from the second reading. I beg to move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill as amended, be passed.” 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): Before the Law Minister 
proceeds to move these amednments may I remind you of what 
I requested the hon. Speaker yesterday that this House is 

*P. D., Vol 12, Part II, 4th June 1951, p. 10110. 

**Ibid., p. 10111. 

***Ibid., p. 10112. 

****Ibid., 5th June 1951, pp. 10202-03. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


388 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

entitiled to have notice of amednments. I must record my 
protest against this in the most emphatic terms that these 
lists of amendments were received not even last night but 
only this morning at about seven O’Clock — just an hour before 
we left home for Parliament. I feel that in the circumstances 
the Law Minister may put of moving his amendments till 
tomorrow and that Members be given adequate time to 
scrutinize and examine the amendments and to give notice of 
any amendments to these amendments I must request you to 
hold that these amendments have come very late and House 
must be given at least a day for examining the amendments 
and for submitting amendments to them. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): I associate myself 
with the suggestion made by Shri Kamath that as these 
amendments have been sent to us this morning, we might be 
given some reasonable time to see whether in our opinion they 
fit in with the scope and object of the Bill. I do not mean to 
raise any technical objection. I am never in that habit 

Shri Kamath: Mine was not a technical objection either. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Therefore, I am associating with Shri 
Kamath’s suggestion. We are very particular about this Bill 
and are anxious to see that no amendemnt — even though 
it might have been carefully looked into by the hon. Law 
Minister — should be allowed to be incorporated in the Bill 
unless we have had a reasonable opportunity of analysing it. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): I think the suggestion 
made is quite reasonable and I hope that you will be pleased 

to accept it Under those circumstances, it is but fair that 

hon. Members of this House should have an opportunity of 
seeing what consequential amendments are proposed and if 
there is any necessity for the same. They should have a fair 
opportunity of giving notice of any amendments they wish 
to move. There are many other measures that can be taken 
up today. 

Mr. Chairman: I would like to know the reaction of the 
Hon. Law Minister. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


389 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 389 

Dr. Ambedkar: I contend that these amendments are 
purely formal and consequential. There is nothing which 
raises the question of substance. However, if Members think 
that they need some time, I have no objection to the matter 
being taken up tomorrow subject to the other business of 
Government. 

The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs (Shri 
Satya Narayan Sinha) : The next item on the agenda may 
be taken up. 

Mr. Chairman: I quite see the reasonableness of the 
request. 

*[For text of the motions See Appendix XXXIII, Annexure 4.] 
Madhya Pradesh Order 

Shri M. A. Hassan Madhya Pradesh): I beg to move: 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, Annexure 4] 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, Annexure 4] 
Uttar Pradesh Order 

Pandit Balkrishna Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): I beg to 
move: 

[For text of the motions see Appendix XXXIII, Annexure 4] 


Mr. Speaker: I do not know what the Government proposes 
to do about the motions in respect of the U. P. Order. The 
motions have to be moved to-day. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am in a difficult situation, because the 
revised order is not yet ready. 

Mr. Speaker: Will it be ready by one o’clock to-day ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: We are trying our best and I shall let 
the House know and let you also know before one o’clock how 
the position stands. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 7th June 1951, pp. 10342-43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


390 


390 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: The point is that before one o’clock the 
motions must be made in the House. Otherwise, perhaps, 
the motions will not be admissible at all. Threfore, I would 
suggest the motions may be moved and examined and then it 
will be possible to suggest amendments in the motion. That 
would be one of the courses open. The Hon. Law Minister 
may consider that, I mean amendments so far as language 
and other such things are concerned and not amendments 
of substance. 


* MOTIONS Re. DELIMITATION OF 
CONSTITUENCIES ORDERS, 1951 —contd. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I should like 
that the Assam order be first taken into consideration. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes. A number of amendments 
have been tabled to this. For the purpose of convenience 
is it not possible to ascertain what amendments the Hon. 
Law Minister is prepared to accept, in which case the other 
amendments may not be pressed ? Of course, if there are 
any Members who want to press their amendments we can 
deal with them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to Assam I have many 
amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Therefore, if the Hon. Minister 
moves his amendments first, whatever is not covered we can 
address ourselves to it later. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My amendments are in Suppl. List 4, 
Nos. 1 to 8. They are purely technical amendments and there 
is no point of substance involved. On further consideration I 
propose to withdraw Nos. 1 and 2 of my amendments. 

The amendments, by leave withdrawn. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 8th June 1951, p. 10500. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


391 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 391 

* Shri Chaliha: I also like to press my motion No. 2 in 
supplementary List No. 2. I do not press No. 1. 

In the constitution it is provided that the Shillong 
constituency will be open as a general constituency. Article 
332(6) says : 

“No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of 
any autonomous district of the State of Assam shall be eligible 
for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from 
any constituency of that district except from the constituency 
comprising the cantonment and municipality of Shillong.” 

I think Dr. Ambedkar has accepted this and it is said that 
was a printing mistake and that it will not be reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes but that it will be a general constituency. 
Through mistake or otherwise it has been reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes. It should not be reserved for them. It 
should be open for the general population. This has been 
specifically provided in the Constitution as I have already 
pointed out. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I had said that the office has treated it as 
a printing error and that we propose to issue a corrigendum. 
Probably it has already been issued. 

Shri Chaliha: In that case I would like to withdraw 
that motion (No. 2 in Supplementary List No. 2 relating to 
Assam Orders). 

The motion was, by leave, withdrawn. 


** Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to accept the following 
amendments : 

Consolidated List I — parts 1 and 2. 

Consolidated List I — amendments 1 to 4. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That means 50 per cent, of 
Mr. Das’s amendments. 

* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 8th June 1951, p. 10503. 

** P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 4th June 1951, p. 10510. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


392 


392 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Biswanath Das : I gave notice of other amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: None here. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Even these amendments represent 
only the few that I had to give notice of after persistent 
requests from the members of different districts, I had 
another amendment. After they were accepted by the Hon. 
Minister I thought they would give notice of them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have given the amendments that I 
have accepted. 


* Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

[For text of the motions see Dr. Ambedkar’s amendments 
Nos. 1 to 3 (Orissa Order) in Appendix XXXII, annexure 1]. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: To that extent the President’s 
order is modified. 

The question is : 

That the following modification be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Orissa) Order, 
1951 laid on the Table on the 16th ay 1951, namely: 

1. That at page 1, in Table A — Parliamentary Constituencies, 
in column 1, for the entry “Dhenkanal” the entry “Ganjam- 
South” be substituted “. 

1. That at page 1, in Table A — Parliamentary Constituencies, 
in column 1, for the entry “Ganjam-South” be substituted”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My own amendment is in Supplementary 
List 2, Nos. 1 to 5. I accept the one in the name of 
Mr. Biswanath Das 1 and 2, the second with the modification 
“North East Ganjam” as “Ganjam South”. The other amendment 
which I have accepted is in Supplementary List No. 1, 1 to 4 
as modified. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 4th June 1951, pp. 10511-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


393 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 393 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Orissa) Order, 
1951, laid on the Table on the 16th May 1951, namely: — 


1. That at page 1, in Table A — Parliamentary Constituencies, 
for the entry “Koraput in column 1, and all the entries against it 
in columns 2, 3, 4 and 5, the following be substituted, namely: — 


1 2 

3 4 

5 

Nowrangpur Nowrangpur sub-division, and the 
Padua, Pottangi, Simliguda and 
Nandapur police stations of of 
Koraput sub-division. 

1 


2. That at page 1, in Table A — Parliamentary Constituencies, 
for the entry “Kayagada-Phulbani” in column 1, and all the 
entries against it in columns 2, 3, 4, and 5, the following be 
substituted, namely: — 

1 2 

3 

4 5 


Rayagada- The entire Rayagada sub-division and the 1 
Phulbani police station of Kora-put, Dashmantpur, 


Laxmipur and Narayanapatna of 
Koraput sub-division as also the district 
of Phulbani except police stations of 
Manmunda and Bondh. 


3. That at page 1, in Table B — Assembly Constituencies, for 
the entry “Nowrangpur” in column 1, and all the entries against it 
in columns 2, 3, 4, and 5, the following be substituted, namely: — 

1 2 3 4 5 

Nowrangpur Police stations of Nowrangpur 2 ... ...1 

Kodinga, Moidalpur, Dabugaon, 

Omerkot and Jharigaon. 


4. That at page 1, in Table B — Assembly Constituencies, for 
the entry “Omerkot-Moidalpur” in column 1, and all the entries 
against it in columns 2, 3, 4, and 5, the following be substituted, 
namely: — 


1 


2 3 

4 

5 

Jeypur 

Police stations 
Borigumma, 
Tonulikhunti. 

of Jeypur, Kotpad 2 
B. Singhpur and 

1 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


394 


394 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: So the President’s order stands 
modified by these amendments. 

Several hon. Members: It is time to adjourn, Sir. 

Shri Kamath : Before the House adjourns may I bring to 
your notice the understanding arrived at about the question 
list for the 2nd, which had been postponed to the 9th. I 
trust that arrangement stands and that list will be taken 
up tomorrow. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That will stand. 

Will the Law Minister indicate the order in which he is 
going to take these delimitation orders ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think the House will complain 
that they were taken by surprise, if sometimes I take some 
orders out of turn. All of them have been before them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All the orders will be completed 
tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the Clock 
on Saturday, the 9th June 1951. 


*Shri P. G. Sen : There is one inter-district 

constituency known by the name of D a r b h a n g a - c wm - B h a g a 1 p u r , 
vide Delimitation Order, page 3. In page 4 there is another 
constituency as Purnea-cwm-Bhagaipur. 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order, hon. Members may carry on 
their consultations elsewhere and not disturb the House. 

Shri P. G. Sen: My point in moving the motion is that 
the common ground is Bhagalpur. It can be amalgamated 
either this way or that. The question of amalgamation and 
the formation of the constituency is the question which I 
want to raise 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have understood the point and I can 
reply to it in one sentence. 


* P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, pp. 10518-19. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


395 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 395 

Shri P. G. Sen: Yes, Dr. Ambedkar can answer in a word 
or in a sentence. 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. The hon. Member will address 
the Chair. 

Shri P. G. Sen: Certainly Dr. Ambedkar is a better 
orator than myself. 

In bringing this motion before the House the question that 
arose in my mind was: am I doing injustice to Bhagalpur, 
or am I doing injustice to Darbhanga, or to Purnea ? Not 
at all. The river Kosi divides the two districts of Bhagalpur 
and Purnea, and sufficient public money has been spent in 

undertaking aerial flights over this area Just imagine 

the state of those flood-devastated Kosi area for which this 
House has on more than on occasion been pressing to hurry 
up with the construction of the Kosi Project. 

Dr. Ambedkar: This is becoming an irrigation department 
event. 

Shri P. G. Sen: Another point I wish to submit is 
that I wish to amalgamate the entire area of Bhagalpur 
with Darbhanga and make it a plural constituency with 
reservation for a scheduled caste seat. The scheduled caste 
voters in Darbhanga are nearly 2,50,000 and Bhagalpur 
portion of Purnea-cum-Bhagalpur constituency has 71,000 
voters (Scheduled Caste) so if that entire area of Bhagalpur 
in Purnea-cum-Bhagalpur Constituency is amalgamated with 
this Darbhananga-cwm-Bhagalpur area a plural-member 
constituency can be formed. It would not be out of place to 
mention here that there is a topographical error in amendment 
No. 1 of Supplementary List No. 2 where in column 3 it is 
shown as “2” whereas in column 4 it is shown as nil; in 
column 4 “1” should be inserted. 


* Shri P. G. Sen: May I submit to you Sir, that this is 
the only House where one can demand some justice done ? 


* P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, p. 10521. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


396 


396 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order, I may tell the hon. Member 
that the House will certainly do justice, but to have what one 
wants is not necessarily justice — though it may be so from 
one’s own point of view, he has to leave it to the good sense 
of other people also who have no interest in doing injustice 
to anyone. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is only one point that I would like 
to mention in connection with the motion made by my friend, 
and it is this that the constituency that he proposes will have 
a total number of electors of 4,43,524 as against the maximum 
limit of 3,87,929. That objection itself is fatal to his proposal. 

Shri P. G. Sen: But it is a plural-member constituency. 

Dr. Ambedkar: So that is fatal to his proposal. 

Mr. Speaker: So I am going to put the motion of Shri P. G. 
Sen to vote. (No. 1 in Supplementary List No. 2 — Bihar 
Order). The question is : 

[For text of the motion see Amendment No. 1 S. L. 2 printed 

in Appendix XXXIII, Annexure 1.] 

The motion was negatived. 


Dr. Ambedkar: Amendment No. 3 part 3 in Supplementary 
List No. 6, that is the amendment of Shri Jajware as modified 
by the amendment of Shri S. N. Das. 


* Mr. Speaker: Now, I would like the House, at the end 
of the motions relating to each province, to pass a sort of a 
motion to the effect that consequential amendments in respect 
of the order relating to that particular State may be made 
under the authority of the Speaker, so that the draftsman 
and the Department will examine all these and set them 
right. The amendments will be strictly consequential and not 
substantial. 

Dr. Ambedkar: For that purpose I shall be moving a 
separate amendment conferring upon you the power to permit 


* P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, pp. 10528-32. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


397 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 397 

the draftsman, in consultation with you, to make certain 
consequental amendments. 

Mr. Speaker: So we shall do it by one comprehensive 
motion at the end of the orders. 

As regards the other motions I take it that hon. Members 
who have moved them will have the leave of the House to 
withdraw them. 

The amendments were, by leave withdrawn. 


Bombay Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I am prepared to accept the following 
amendments : 

Supplementary List No. 1, Amendments No. 1 to 8 of Shri Shankar Rao 
Deo and others. 

They are purely consequential amendments. 

List No. 2, Amendment No. 2 of Shri Nijalingappa and Shri Munavalli; 
subject to the modification that in the entry against South Satara for “Item 
(15)” the words “Item (57)” be substituted. 

Then I propose to accept: 

In List No. 3, amendment No. 3, parts (1) and (2) by Shri Deogirikar and 
Shri Kumbhar. 

In List No. 6, amendments Nos. 1 and 2, subject to the modification that 
against the entry Kolhapur-cum-Satara the words “The whole” at the beginning 
of the entry in column 2 are to be omitted. 

In List No. 7, amendment No. 2, part 2, by Shri Hiray and Shri Deogirikar. 

Then in List No. 8, I propose to withdraw amendments Nos. 1, 2 and 4 
because they have already been covered by amendment No. 2 of List No. 6. 

Then I propose to accept: 

In List No. 8, amendments nos. 3 and 5 to 11. 

In amendment No. 11, page 11, under item (64) for “Mahagond” substitute 
“Mamewadi” — which is a verbal change being a change of name — and 
“Gajargaon” at the end. 

Then I accept: 

In List No. 10, amendments 1, 2 and 3 by Shri Nijalingappa. 

Mr. Speaker: In the list that he has given only 2 and 3 
are mentioned. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


398 


398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: It was a mistake. I am accepting 1, 2 
and 3. 

Shri Kumbhar (Bombay): The amendment in list No. 6 
is in my name. But my name is droppd. 

Mr. Speaker: The name is there and the motion has 
already been made. Nothing further has to be done in respect 
of it now except the voting. Let him not worry about his name. 
We will see that it is properly put in. 

Shri Kumbhar: There is another one excluding Kagal 
Taluk. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, those are changes which could be 
done by the draftsman on your authority. 

Mr. Speaker: If they are consequential amendments. If 
we accept the substance they will be made. 

Shri Bhatt: rose — 

Dr. Ambedkar : My friend, I know, Sir, is particular about 
the mentioning of Santa Cruz’ and so on. I have told him that 
those amendments will be made on your authority by the 
draftsman under the resolution I am proposing at the end. 

Mr. Speaker: As regards the details of mentioning Santa 
Cruz or this road or excluding Kagal or bringing it in, let all 
the proposals by the hon. Members be made to the draftsman 
and let them discuss with him. He will consider them and, if 
necessary, I will pass orders. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is what I propose to ask. 

Shri Bhatt: That is what I wanted to ask, whether changes 
in names would be made by your orders. 

Dr. Ambedkar: As I said, I am going to move a motion. 
The substance of the motion will be that you will be empowered 
to instruct the draftsman to make certain changes of a purely 
formal character. When the House passes the motion the 
Speaker will have the necessary power to do the needful. 

Mr. Speaker: This difficulty arises because some of the 
Members are not present from time to time and therefore they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


399 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 399 

miss the whole thing. Is there any other member wishing to 
move any other amendment ? 

Shri Hiray (Bombay): Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: In addition to what the Law Minister is 
accepting ? 

Shri Hiray: Yes. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What has happened on account of the 
decision relating to Dangs is that one more seat has been 
added to Maharashtra and that seat belongs to the Tribal 
people. Therefore a seat has to be provided in the constituencies 
that have been delimited so far as Maharashtra is concerned. 
This is the proposal which stands in the name of Mr. Hiray. 
Either he may move it or I may move it. 

Mr. Speaker: It is better if the Hon. Minister moves it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

In Table B, page 8, Nasik District, in column I, for the words 
“Nasik urban” and “Nasik rural cum Igatpuri”, substitute the 
words “Nashik Igatpuri “and against the same constituencies. — 

(1) In column 2, omit all the words beginning with “Nasik 
Municipal” and ending with “Iatpuri Municipal area” and 
substitute “Nasik and Igatpuri Talukas including all Municipalities 
therein”. 

(2) In columns 3, 4, 5 omit the figurs given therein and 
substitute 3, 1, 1 instead respectively. 

Shri Kanhayala Desai (Bombay): There is a consequential 
amendment relating to Pardi. One scheduled tribe seat which 
is at present in Pardi Taluka should be removed and it should 
become a general seat. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That becomes consequential. That you 
can do, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: Let it go on record that a specific point 
was raised. 

* Mr. Speaker : The amendment of Dr. Ambedkar about 
Dangs, (as mentioned above). 

The motion was adopted. 


* P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, pp. 10534-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


400 


400 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Hiray : There is my consequential amendment in List 
No. 11. 

Mr. Speaker: That is with reference to having one seat from 
Maharashtra. That is purely consequential and we will accept it 
as such. 

The Hon. Law Minister wishes to have the leave of the House 
to withdraw amendments Nos. 1, 2 and 4 in List No. 8 and all 
the other hon. Members wish to have the leave of the House 
to withdraw the various amendments and motions standing in 
their names. 

The amendments were by leave withdrawn. 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair] 

Madhya Pradesh Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: The amendments I am prepared to accept 
are these: 

List No. 1 . — Amendments Nos. 6 and 8 in the name of Kishorimohan Tripathi 
and others. 

List No. 2 . — Amendment No. 1, parts 1 to 5 of Dr. P. S. Deshmukh and others 
together with two consequential amendments to be moved by Dr. Deshmukh. 

List No. 3 . — Amendment No. 2 in the name of Shri Kishormohan Tripathi and 
others together with a consequential amendment to be moved by Shri Tripathi. 
(Amendment No. 2 is to be slightly modified so as to read “Khamaria R.I.C. of 
Khamaria Tehsil)” for “Khamaria Tehsil”. 

List No. 6 . — Amendment Nos. 1 to 5. 


* Shri Jangde: Sir, I want to withdraw my amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I will later ask leave of the House for 
the withdrawal. I will now put amendments No. 1 to 5 in list 
No. 6. Have they any consequential amendments ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There, are no amendments to these 
amendments Nos. 1 to 5. 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

[For text of the motions see Dr. Ambedkars amendments Nos. 1 to 5 in List 
No. 6 printed in Appendix XXXIII, annexure No. 3.] 

The motion was adopted. 


* P. D. Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1950, p. 10541. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


401 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 401 

*Dr. Deshmukh: I have to move my amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, That is with reference to 
amendment No. 1 in List No. 2. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are amendments to his amendments 
Nos. 1 to 5 of List 2. 


**Mr. Deputy Speaker: To this extent the President’s 
Order stands modified. Leave may be granted to all the 
Members to withdraw their amendments. All the other 
amendments moved by other hon. Members were, by leave 
withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Madhya Pradesh Order is over. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are other friends who are pressing 
me that their matter may be taken up first, that is West 
Bengal and Hyderabad. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am taking up Madras. 

Madras Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the Madras Order, I am 
prepared to accept the following amendments: — 

List No. 4 . — Amendmnt No. 1, part 3, second alternative, and part 4, of 
Shri Kala Venkatarao. 

Amendment No. 2, parts 1 and 2, of Shri Keshava Rao. 

List No. 6 . — Amendment No. 1, Parts 1 and 2, of Shri Sanjivaya, subject 
to the recast of part 2 as follows : 

“That for all the entries against “Erode” in columns 2, 3, 4 

and 5 the following be substituted : 

I 2 3 4 5~~ 

Erode ... Erode taluk, Bhavani taluk, Dhara-puram taluk 2 1 

[excluding such of the villages of Kundadam 
Firka as are specified in item No. (19) of 
the Appendix] and Kugalur Firka and such 
of the villages of Gobichetti-palayam Firka 
of Gobichettipala-yam taluk of Coimbatore 
district as are specifed in item No. (18) of 
the Appendix ; and Karur taluk Kattalai, 

Kulithalai and Panjarpatti Firkas of Kulithalai 
taluk of Tiruchirapalli district. 


* P. D. Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1950, p. 10543. 
** Ibid., pp. 10545-47. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


402 


402 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

List No. 11 . — Amendment No. 2, parts 1 to 3, by Shri Kodandarama 
Reddy and others. 

List No. 12. — Amendments Nos. 1 to 13, subject to amendment No. 6 
being modified by Hon. Minister of Law as follows; — 

That for all the entries against “Tiruppur” in volumns 2, 3, 4 and 5the 
follwoing be substituted : — 

1 2 3 4 5 

Tiruppur The Kollegal, Gobichettipalayam and Tiruppur 1 

taluks and Savur and Avanashi firkas of Avanashi 
taluk (excluding the Kugalur firka and such of 
the villages of Gobichettipalayam firka of the 
Gopichetti-palayam taluk as are specified in item 
No. (18) of the Appendix and the the Varapatti 
firka of Tiruppur taluk) of the Coimbatore District. 

I beg to move: 

(i) At page 4 in Table A. — Parliamentary Constituencies, against 
the entry ‘Dharmapuri “for the words “and Edappadi firka of 
Tiruchengoda taluka of Salem District” substitute the words 
“and Edappadi firka and such of the villages of Sankagiri firka 
of Tiruchengode taluk of Salem District as are specified in item 
18A of the Appendix”. 

(ii) At page 4, in Table A. — Parliamentary Constituencies, against 
the entry “Tiruchengoda” for the words “(excluding Edappadi 
firka of Tiruchengoda taluk)” substitute the words “(excluding 
Edappadi firka and such of the villages of Sankagiri firka 
of Tiruchengode taluk as are specified in item 18A of the 
Appendix)”. 

(iii) At page 11 in Table B. — Assembly Constituencies, against the 
entry “Tiruchengode”, for the entry in column 2, substitute the 
following: 

“Tiruchengode taluk (excluding Edappadi firka and such of the 
villages of Sankagiri firka and of the Tiruchengode firka as are 
specified in items (18A) and (16) respectively of the Appendix)”. 

(iv) At page 11 in Table B. — Assembly Constituencis, against the 
entry “Edappadi”, for the entry in column 2, substitut the 
following:". 

Edappadi firka and such of the villages of Sankagiri firka 
of Tiruchengode taluk as are specified in item (18A) of the 
Appendix and the Mettur and Nangavalli firkas of Amalur 
taluk”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


403 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 403 

11-00 A.M. 

Sir, I want to move all the amendments in List No. 10. 
They are only a corrigenda. 


* Shri A. Joseph: In the interest of the 

organisation to which I belong and in the interest of 
the Government I appeal to the House to provide plural 
member constituencies with distributive voting without 
reservation. If the Law Ministr is not in a position to 
agree then I oppose his motion and I would ask you 
to record my disagreement with the proposal for single 
member constituencies without giving any facilities for 
th minorities. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot accept the amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Were similar plural member 
constituencies created in the U.P. ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, Sir. Nowhere has an exception 
been made. 

West Bengal Orders 

**Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the West Bengal 
Order, I am prepared to accept the following amendments: 

Consolidated List No. 2 — Parts 1 to 6 of Shri Samanta and Shri B. 
K. Das. 

Supplementary List No. 1: Amendment No. 1 — Parts 1 and 2 and 
Amendment No. 2 — Parts 1 to 8 of Shri Himatsingka and Mr. Haq, 
as modified by Supplementary List No. 5, Amendments 1 to 4 of Shri 
Jhunjhunwala and Shri Sinha.) 

I withdraw amendments Nos. 4 and 12 to 15 from the Supplementary 
List No. 3. The rest of them I move. 

Shri Chattopadhyay (West Bengal): I would like to 
move the amendment appearing in Supplementary List 
No. 2, It covers 108 items, of which I do not want to 
press item No. 30. 


*P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, p. 10548. 
** Ibid., p. 10554. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


404 


404 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Dr. Ambedkar: If I may say a word, in view of the fact 
that there is such a keen difference of opinion, I am prepared 
to suggest that it may be left to the Speaker to treat this 
matter as a sort of a nomenclature matter, without touching 
the substance. This matter may be kept open. Those Members 
who care may approach the Speaker and convince him that 
this is a matter of nomenclature and formally they may be put 
in without in any way disturbing the areas that are included 
in the particular constituencies. 

Pandit Maitra: I am afraid we cannot agree to this 
because if one single member is keen on having a change 
in the nomenclature, another Member may suggest another 
thing and 

Shri Chattopadhayay: Why are you afraid ? 

Dr, M M. Das: That would be inconvenient. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): The point raised by 
Mr. Chattopadhyay is appealing to most of us. We do not want 
that at this late stage there should be any substantial change. 
The changes that he suggests could easily be made in the 
manner suggested by the Law Minister and an overwhelming 
majority of the House will, I should say, support that. 

Shri S. M. Ghose (West Bengal): How could this Order 
be finalised by the Speaker ? My hon. friend has suggested 
some nomenclature. Other Members may suggest some other 
names. There will be no end to that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Speaker has to be here. 
He has to invite other Members together and ascertain from 
them what their wishes are. What about the Order ? Are we 
to say that the Order has to be modified to that extent or 
not ? Nomenclature is a part of the Order, it is not something 
like the marginal notes. I think there will be some difficulty 
in the matter. I leave it to the House. 

Shri Chattopadhayay: With a heavy heart, Sir, I am 
forced to withdraw them. 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 


*P. D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, pp. 15568-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


405 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 405 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Now, I shall put the amendments 
of Dr. Ambadkar in Supplementary List No. 3. the question is: 

(For text of the motions see amendments Nos. 1 to 3, 5 to 11 

and 16 to 19 in Supplementary List No. 3 as printed in Appendix 

XXXIII annexure 1). 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The other hon. Members desire to 
withdraw their amendments. 

All the other amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

12-00 Noon. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order regarding 
West Bengal stands modified to the extent of the amendments 
moved and accepted in the House. 

Hyderabad Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am prepared to accept the following 
amendments. 

Consolidated List. Amendment No. 1 parts 1 and 5 by Shri 

Ramachar others. 

Amendment No. 2, parts 1 to 6, parts 10 to 12 and parts 15 

and 16, by Shri Ramachar and others. 

Amendment No. 3 parts 1 and 2 by Shri Ramachar and others. 

The motion was adopted. 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order regarding 
Hyderabad stands modified to the extent of the amendments 
moved and accepted in the House. The other Members desire 
to withdraw their amendments. 

All the other amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Madhya Bharat Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendments Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9 
and 11 in List No. 3 by Shri Radhelal Vyas. Also in List No. 1, 
Appendix I. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

[For text of the motions see Amendments Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9 

and 11 in List No. 3 printed in Appendix XXXIIII, annexure 2.] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


406 


406 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The motions were adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

[For text of the motion see List 1, Appendix I (as modified 

by the previous amendments in List No. 3 printed in Appendix 

XXXIII, annexures 1 and 2.) 

The motion was adopted. 

Mysore Order 

Dr. Ambedkar : I accept amendments Nos. 1 and 2 in 
List No. 1 by Shri Rudrappa. 

Mr. Deputy Spaker: The question is: 

[For text of the motion see Amendments Nos. 1 and 2 in List 

No. 1 printed in Appendix XXXIII, annexure 3.]. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy speaker: All the other amendments are 
desired to be withdrawn. 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order regarding 
Mysore stands modified to the extent of these amendments 
now accepted. 

Then the Punjab Order? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, Sir, The Punjab Order will have to be 
kept back for some time now. We may take up the P.E.P.S.U. 
Order. 

P.E.P.S.U. Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendment I, parts 2 and 3 
of Sardar Sochet Singh in the Consolidated List and also 
amendment No. 1 of Sardar Ranjit Singh as amended by 
amendments Nos. (i) and (ii) of Supplementary List No. 3 
by Sardar Man. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us take them in order and 
finish first the Consolidated List. 

Dr. Ambedkar: All right. I accept parts 2 and 3 of 
amendment No. 1 of Sardar Sochet Singh and others. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


407 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 407 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

[For text of the motion see Consolidated List, Amendment 

No 1, parts 2 and 3 printed in appendix XXXIII, Annexure I.]. 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept, in Supplementary List 2, 
amendment No. 1 of Sardar Ranjit Singh, as amended 
by amendment No. 1, parts (i) and (ii) in Supplementary 
List 3 by Sardar Man. 

So the amendment in Supplementary List 3 may be 
put first. 


The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order 
regarding P.E.P.S.U. stands modified to the extent of the 
amendments now adopted. 

Rajasthan Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendment No. 1, parts 1 to 
5 in the name of Shri R. C. Upadhyaya in Consolidated 
List as modified by amendment No. 1 of Shri Ghule in 
Supplementary List No. 4. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is. (For text of 
the motion, see Amendment No. 1 by Shri Ghule in S. 
L. No. 4). 

The motion was adopted. 

*Dr. Ambedkar: I accept the amendments in the 
name of Shri R. C. Upadhyaya and others, Parts 1 to 19 
on pages 2 to 5 of C.L. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

[For text of the motion see amendment 3, parts 1 to 19, 

C.L. printed in Appendix XXXIII, annexure 1.] 

The motion was adopted. 


* P.D., Vol. 13, Part II, 9th June 1951, p. 10574. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


408 


408 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Amendment No. 1 of Supplementary List 
No. 2 and also No. 2 of S.L. No. 2, as modified by amendment 
No. 2 in Supplementary List No. 4, standing in my name 
may be accepted. 


*Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendments Nos. 1 to 3 of 
Supplmentary List No. 5 by Shri R. C. Upadhyaya. 

The motion was adopted. 

The other amendments were, by leave of the House, 
withdrawn. 

Saurashtra Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendments Nos. 1 and 2 of List 
No. 1 by Mr. C. C. Shah and Shri Hathi. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: To the extent of these amendments 
the Saurashtra Order of the President stands modified. 

There is no other amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: As regards the Travancore and Cochin 
Order there is no amendment. A corrigenda has been issued. 

Shri R. Velayudhan (Travancore-Cochin): There were 
some discrepancies in printing. 

Shri Lakshmanan (Travancore-Cochin): They have all 
been covered by the corrigenda. 

Part C States Order: Delhi 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendment No. 2 in consolidated 
List (in the name of Shri Kesava Rao and others). 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There are no other amendments, 
I suppose. The President’s Order relating to Part C States 
stands modified to the extent of the amendment just new 
carried. Other amendments by Dr. Ambedkar and others, if 
any, are to be withdrawn by the leave of the House. 

The other amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 


*P.D., Vol. 13, Part II, 8th June 1951, pp. 10597-607. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


409 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 409 

Dr. Ambedkar: Only two other provinces remain, namely 
U.P. and Punjab. Several amendments have come just now 
and I have not had time to apply mind to them. If the parties 
concerned are prepared to go by the original arrangements then 
I am prepared to proceed further. But I find that some changes 
have been introduced and I must have a clear understanding 
of what is sought to be done. I personally think that half an 
hour in the afternoon would be more than enough for both 
the Provinces. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: There might be difficulty then 
with regard to the quorum, because Members of other States 
may be absent from the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Only two more orders relating to 
U.P. and the Punjab are outstanding. If there is unanimity in 
the House we can meet as late as possible, for I do not want 
to give the impression that I have muzzled them if anybody 
wants to speak. 

Shri Amolakh Chand: Can we not adjourn for half an 
hour and then continue for the simple reason that at 4-30 
p.m. Members may not come? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Minister must have sufficient 
time to consider the amendments. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): Is there no other 
business ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No other business except passing 
these two orders. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Four of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled at Half Past Four of the clock 
[Mr. Speaker in the Chair \ 

Punjab Order 

Mr. Speaker: We will now proceed with the Punjab Order. 
May I know the Nos. of the agreed amendments ? I think we 
will follow the same procedure as in the morning. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


410 


410 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: The agreed amendments are as follows : 

List 7. — Amendment No. 2, part 5, sub-part (i) and sub-part 
(ii) of Shri B. L. Sondhi, Chaudhari Ranbir Singh and others. 

List 9 . — Amendment No. 6, parts 2 and 3, of Prof. Yashwant 

Rai. 

List 10 . — Only the first amendment in the list I move. 

I do not move the second and the third amendments as these 
are superseded by amendments Nos. 5(i) of List 7 and 3(6) of 
List 12. 

List 12 . — Amendment No. 1, parts 1 and 2, of Shri B. L. 
Sondhi, Ch. Ranbir Singh and others. 

Amendment No. 2 of Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man and 
others, as modified by amendment in List No. 13, of Ch. Ranbir 
Singh and others. 

Amendment No. 3, parts 4, 5 and 6 (second part) of Shri 
Sondhi, Ch. Ranbir Singh and others, with minor consequential 
changes in part 6 (second part) as follows: 

6. That at page 6, in Table B. — Assembly Constituencies, for 
the entries ‘Ludhiana Sadar’, ‘Jagraon’ and ‘Raikot’ in column 1 
and all the entries occurring against them in columns 2, 3 and 
4, the following be substituted, namely: — 


1 

2 

3 4 

Jagraon 

Jagraon Tehsil 

2 1 

Ludhiana Sadar 

Nurpur Bet, Baddowal, Dhandra, Lalton, 
Kalan, Gill and Dhandari Kalan Zails of 
Ludhiana Sadar thana, and Shankar and 
Han Zails of Delhon thana and Dakha Zail 
of Dakha thana of Ludhiana Tehsil. 

1 ... 

Delhon 

Pakhowal and Andlu Zails of Raikot thana 
and Delhon thana (excluding Shankar and 
Hans Zails) of Ludhiana Tehsil. 

1 ... 


Amendment No. 4, parts 1 and 2, of Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava and Chaudhari Ranbir Singh. 


These are the amendments I am prepared to accept, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : I take it no other hon. Member wishes me 
to put any of his motion to the House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


411 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 411 

Well, then I shall dispose of these amendments first. 
The question is : 

[For text of the motion see ) 

List 7 — Amendment Nos 2, part, 5, sub-part (i) and sub-part 
(ii), of Shri B. L. Sondhi, Chaudhari Ranbir Singh and others. 

List 9 — Amendment No. 6, parts 2 and 3, of Prof. Yashwant Rai. 

List 10 — Only the first amendment in the list. 

List 12 — Amendment No. 1, parts 1 and 2, of Shri B. L. 
Sondhi, Ch. . Ranbir Singh and others. 

Amendment No. 2 of Sardar Bhopinder Singh Man and 
others, as modified by amendment in List No. 13, of Ch. Ranbir 
Singh and others. 

Amendment No. 3, parts 4, 5 and 6 (second part) of Shri 
Sondhi and others, with minor consequential changes in part 6 
(second part) as follows: 

6. At page 6, in Table B. — Assembly Constituencies, for the 
entries ‘Ludhiana Sadar’, ‘Jagraon’ and ‘Raikot’ in column 1, 
and all the entries occurring against them in columns 2, 3 and 


4, substitute the following : — 

1 

2 

3 4 

Jagraon 

Jagraon Tehsil 

2 1 

Ludhiana Sadar 

Nurpur Bet, Baddowal, Dhandra, Lalton, 
Kalan, Gill and Dhandari Kalan Zails of 
Ludhiana Sadar thana, and Shankar and 
Han Zails of Delhon thana and Dakha Zail 
of Dakha thana of Ludhiana Tehsil. 

l ... 

Delhon 

Pakhowal and Andlu Zails of Raikot thana 
and Delhon thana (excluding Shankar and 
Hans Zails) of Ludhiana Tehsil. 

1 ... 

printed in 

appendix XXXIII, annexures 3, 4], 



The motions were adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: To this extent the President’s Order is 
modified. 

Now leave is asked for to withdraw amendments Nos. 
2 and 3 in List No. 10 and all the other motions that have 
been moved. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


412 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh: There is a clerical error here, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: As I have pointed out, all technical errors 
and apparent mistakes may be brought to the attention of 
the Hon. Minister of Law and they will be put through as 
consequential amendments. 

Now, let us go to the U.P. Order. 

Uttar Pradesh Order. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, the agreed amendments are as follows: 

List 1 — Amendment No. 1 of Pandit Shiv Charan Lai. 

List 7 — Amendment No. 2, parts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, of Shri C. 
D. Pande. 

Amendment No, 5 of Shri Sohan Lai and others subject to 
substitution of “Basti District (Central East)-cum - Gorakhpur District 
East” for “Basti District (Central East)-cum -Hasanpur Pargana”, 
in col. 1. 

Amendment No. 6, part 2, of Shri Satish Chandra. 

Amendment No. 9 of Babu Gopinath Singh and Pandit Balkrishna 
Sharma, subject to the insertion of “I.A.F. Domestic Camp” after 
“Chakeri Aerodrome” in the entry in col. 2 against Kanpur (East). 

List 8 — Amendment No. 4, parts 1 and 2, of Shri K. C. Sharma. 
Amendment No. 5 of Shri Beni Singh and others. 

Amendment No. 7, parts 1 to 4, of Shri Amolakh Chand. 
Amendments Nos. 8 and 10 of Shri Beni Singh and others. 
Amendment No. 12, parts 1 and 2, of Shri K. C. Sharma. 
Amendment No. 14 of Shri T. N. Singh. 

List 9 — Amendments Nos. 1, 4, 5 and 6. 

Amendments Nos. 2, 7 and 8 subject to the following modifications 
proposed by me : 

That in the motions in List No. 9 (Uttar Pradesh Order) standing 
in my name the following amendments be made : — 

1. That in motion No. 2, at page 3 of the List, against the entry 
“Allahabad District (East)-cwm-Jaunpur District (West)” for the 
words “(excluding the Municipality and Cantonment of Allahabad” 
in column III, the words “Chail tehsil (excluding the Municipality) 
and cantonment of Allahabad” be substituted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


413 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 413 


2. That in motion No. 2, at page 3 of the List, after the entry 
“Allahabad District (West)” the following entry be inserted : — 

I 

II 

Ill 

Gorakhpur District 

such of the Patwari 

such of the Patwari 

(Central). 

circles of Haveli 

circle and forest 


pargana of Pharenda 

areas of Haveli 


tehsil of Gorakhpur 

Pargana of Pharenda 


District as are 

tahsil of Gorakhpur 


specified in item (94) 

district as are 


of the Appendix. 

specified in item (94) 
of the Appendix. 


3. That in motion No. 8, at page 12 of the List, for items Nos. 
(38) and (39) of the proposed Appendix, the following items be 
substituted : — 


“Patwari circles of Akbarpur Tehsil 

(38) 

Singhpur Saholi, Nevada Deorani, Jaitpur Sheoli, Hiraman 
Sheoli, Dhakan Sheoli, Saraiyan, Baridaryao, Baghpur, 
Sobhan, Baghwat, Nehuta, Rastpur, Kakar, Dahi, Bairisawai, 
Marag, Rampur, Sheoli, Kandri, Bhewan, Nunari Bahadurpur, 
Baragaon, Baranpur Kahinjari, Kashipur Deepchand, Kashipur 
Hiraman, Kashipur Jagamman Shah, Kashipur Bhurshah, 
Hatika, Manda, Kekarmau, Naubasta, Bhaupur, Pitrapur, 
Ant, Raipalpur, Baluwapur, Lalpur and Aliapur. 

Patwari circles of Derapur Tehsil 

( 39 ) 

Nandpur, Sargaon Khurd, Mungisapur, Derapur Khas, 
Salimpur, Sabdalpur, Kurhawal, Maujpur, Agwasi, Ursan, 
Padnai, Korawa, Amauli Kurmian, Hathuma, Mukbilpur, 
Daryapur, Netarah, Garhiya Sikandra, Mohammadpur : 
Sultanpur, Jagannathpur, Sandalpur, Haswan, Jamaura, 
Revan, Hawaspur, Ankna, Pendarathu, Sahnipur, Chamrawa, 
Kasolar, Achhrauli, Dharampur, Indrukh, Sargaon Buzurg, 
Jignis, Galuwapur and Baragaon Bhikhi.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


414 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

4. That in motion No. 2, at page 1 of the List, the entries 
relating to “Almora District (W e st) - c u m - Gar h wal District (East)” 
be deleted. 

5. That in motion No. 2, At page 2, the following be deleted. 

(i) The entries relating to “Kanpur District (North)-cum- 
Farrukhabad District (South-East)-c«m-Tehsil Etawah 
District (East)” to the two places where they occur. 

(ii) The entries relating to “Etawah District (West)”. 

(iii) The entries relating to “Kanpur District (South)” 

6. That in motion No. 7, at page 6 of the List, the entries 
relating to “Kanpur City (South)”, “Kanpur (Central)”, “Ghatampur 
(West)-cwm-Bhognipur (East) “and “Bhognipur (South-East)-cum- 
Akbarpur (South) “be deleted. 

7. That in motion No. 8, in the Appendix, item No. 17-A 
relating to Patwari circles of Meerut. Pargana be omitted. 

I withdraw amendment No. 3 in List No. 9. 

Amendment No. 3 in List No. 9 was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker: So I am taking all of them together. Do the 
hon. Members wish to take any one of them independently ? If 
that is so I have no objecrion. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): I want to know what 
is the principle on which all these amendments have been 
accepted. I find that one of the amendments has been tabled 
by a member of the Committee, Shri T. N. Singh. I would, in 
particular like to know what that amendment is. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Those amendments on which there was 
general agreement were accepted. In regard to the particular 
amendment referred to by the hon. Member it is No. 14 in 
list No. 8. 

Pandit Kunzru : My Hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar says that 
those amendments have been accepted about which there was 
general agreement. I do not know what he means by “general 
agreement”. If he meant among the members of the majority 
party, obviously there could have been agreement on many other 
points. If that was the only basis on which the modifications 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


415 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 415 

were to be made, there was no need for the appointment of a 
Delimitation Advisory Committee. But I should like to know 
whether apart from the fact that there was agreement on 
those points, there was any other reason for their acceptance. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, I think the Hon. House knows that 
we have been proceeding upon the basis of the decision of 
Members of the various Committees which were appointed 
by the Speaker to delimit the constituencies and whenever 
the Members have agreed to make a change, I have thought 
it fit to accept that change. No. 14 which I am accepting is 
one such amendment. 

Pandit Kunzru: Does he mean Members of the majority 
party or does he mean the Members of the Committee 
appointed by the Speaker ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : With regard to that, I should like to point 
out that so far as delimitation is concerned, no distinction has 
been observed between Members of the majority party and 
Members of any other party. All Members have been invited to 
place their views before this Cabinet Sub-Committee which was 
appointed to examine this matter. Any Member, irrespective 
of the party to which he belonged, had the freedom to come 
and plead his cause. Some Members did come. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, as my name has 
been brought in I would ask your permission to say a few 
words. It is only this that the amendment to which my hon. 
friend referred is only a consequential amendment which 
should have been made and which by error was not made 
in the report of the Committee. I can explain the details 
personally to him, as it is not possible to explain it here. 

Mr. Speaker: Does any other Member wish to take up 
his motion independently? 


* Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I hope this matter was discussed 
in the committee and I told Mr. Kapoor that his amendment 
was incomplete and therefore could not be accepted without 


* P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 9th June 1951, p. 10607. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


416 


416 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

causing disturbance to other constituencies. He was not able 
to give a complete scheme where the thing would be fitted 
in with the rest. That is the reason why this amendment 
was not considered. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: rose — 

Mr. Speaker: The hon. Member has no right of reply. 
Dies he wish me to put these to the House now ? 

Shri J R. Kapoor: Of course, though it may be rejected. 

Mr. Speaker: I shall place them before the House. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: No. Sir, I would like to withdraw 
them. 

The amendments of Shri J. R. Kapoor were, by leave, 
withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker: I will now put all the agreed amendments 
which the Law Minister has placed. 

All amendments were adopted. 


* Mr. Speaker: Has the Hon. Member, as also the other 
hon. Members who have moved amendments, the leave of 
the House to withdraw their amendments ? 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker: That disposes of all the motions. Now I 
shall take up consequential amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That with reference to the amendments to the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Orders moved 
and accepted by the House necessary consequential, drafting and 
other formal changes be carried out in the said Orders under 
the authority of the Honourable the Speaker.” 

Dr. Deshmukh: I have given notice of a similar 
amendment. I beg to withdraw it. 

Mr. Speaker: It has not been placed before the House. 
So there is no need to withdraw it. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 9th June 1951, pp. 10610-12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


417 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 417 

Shri Chattopadhyay: I have an amendment to this 
amendment. I beg to move: 

In the Consequential Amendment standing in the name of 

Dr. Ambedkar, after the words “formal changes”, insert the words 

“including nomenclature of Constituencies”. 

Mr, Speaker: Does the Hon. Minister accept it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot accept it in this formal and 
binding character. 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): I take it, 
Sir, that if a name is wrongly spelt it will be correctly spelt. 
That does not need a formal amendment. If there are minor 
errors I take it that they can always be corrected. 

Shri Chattopadhyay: There was good deal of discussion 
this morning over this and there was some difference of opinion 
too in this matter and Dr. Ambedkar said “Let this matter 
of nomenclature be left to the Speaker”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I admit. But I said if the Speaker thought 
that the change in nomenclature of a place is a formal change; 
then it will be covered by my amendment. 

Shri Chattopadhyay: It is for this reason that I have 
tabled this amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: What does he want me to do now ? 

Shri Chattopadhyay: I would like that after the words 
“formal changes” the words “including nomenclature of 
Constituencies” should be inserted. It is not formal. It is in 
my opinion very substantial, because in some cases 

Mr. Speaker: I understand his point. If he urges that it 
is a substantial thing, no amendment can now be made. If it 
is a formal or consequential amendment which will include 
also sometimes, as Dr. Ambedkar said, even a change in 
nomenclature, then matters will stand differently. Therefore 
it is no use having this amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Do we take it that the change of 
the name of a constituency, if it does not materially or even 
slightly change the extent of the constituency, is covered by 
Dr. Ambedkar’s motion? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


418 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is in the discretion of the Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker: The House has accepted certain modifications. 
The House is going to give powers to the Speaker to make 
amendments of a consequential or formal character because, 
as was said, I believe, in the morning, there may be a mis- 
description of a boundary. Instead of “east” it might have 
been stated as “west”. Only such amendments will be put 
through. There can be no further amendments now. Even 
by the unanimous decision of the House the Chair cannot go 
beyond the decisions of the House. The Chair will do only 
what is absolutely necessary to give effect to the decisions 
already arrived at by the House. That is the spirit in which 
the consequential amendments will take place. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


419 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 419 

^PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 

Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Orders 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to lay 

on the Table the following Orders made by the President 
on the 15th May, 1951, under sub-section(3) of section 13 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950: 

(1) The Delimitation of parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Assam) Order, 1951. 

(2) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951. 

(3) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Orissa) Order, 1951. 

(4) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951. 

(5) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Hyderabad) Order, 1951. 

(6) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Madhya Bharat) Order, 1951. 

(7) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Patiala and East Punjab States 
Union) Order, 1951. 

(8) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Rajasthan) Order, 1951. 

(9) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Saurashtra) Order, 1951. 

(10) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Travancore- Cochin) Order, 1951. 

(11) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Part C States) Order, 1951. 

[Placed in Library. See No. P-169/ 51], 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 16th May 1951, pp. 8810-11. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


420 


420 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 

Delimitation of Parliamentary and 

Assembly constituencies Orders 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Under sub-section 
(3) of section 13 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
I beg to lay on the Table the following Orders made by the 
President on the 18th May, 1951; 

(1) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Bombay) Order, 1951. 

(2) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Madhya Pradesh) Order, 1951. 

(3) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Madras) Order, 1951. 

(4) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Madras) Order, 1951. 

(5) The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951. 

(6) Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Mysore) Order, 1951. 

[Placed in Library, See No. p. 169/51]. 

Mr. Speaker: That exhausts all the Orders. I believe? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Mr. Speaker: I have to inform hon. Members that copies of 
certain Orders made by the President regarding Delimitation 
of Constituencies, which have just now been laid on the Table, 
will be placed in the parliamentary Notice Office as soon as 
they are received from the Press, hon. Members may obtain 
a copy each of these Orders on request. 

• • 


* P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 18th May 1951, pp. 9065-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


421 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 421 

BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE 

*Mr. Speaker: I will see what is possible in this 
direction. I do not promise anything. 

The House may adjourn now 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): It will be 
very difficult to finish the Bill by 1 o’clock. If the work is 
not finished by 11 o’clock. I have never seen a Bill being 
guillotined. 

Mr. Speaker: If there is no agreement. If there is 
agreement certainly, we can finish. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I would therefore beg 
of you to give more time to come to an agreement. 

Mr. Speaker: If the hon. Members are so agreed that 
they will finish the whole Bill by 1 o’clock, they may 
assemble at five minutes to one and finish. I do not mind. 
The only point is there must be some time limit. We must 
sit with an effort to finish. Otherwise, the discussions will 
be unending. 

The Minister of law (Dr. Ambedkar): I do not know 
what the arrangement is. 

Mr. Speaker: We are now adjourning and meeting 
again at 11-30. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My view is this. That may not prove to 
be an easier solution. Therefore, the suggestion that I was 
making was this. I should be prepared to get on with some 
of the clauses about which there is no dispute at all. There 
is one clause, only one I think about which there is not 
yet any agreement. I am afraid it will take a pretty long 
time to reach an agreement. I thought the better course 
would be to proceed with the clauses about which there 
was no dispute at all. There, we shall see whether after a 
short adjournment, we are able to reach an agreement or 
whether we would require postponement of the consideration 
of that particular clause to some other date. 


* P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9476-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


422 


422 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: Anyway, there is a strong desire in the House 
to adjourn now to have informal discussions. I have accepted 
that position. It has not yet been declared as a decision from 
the Chair, but it has been unnounced from the Chair. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would press on the House to reconsider 
the matter. 

Mr. Speaker: Let us not now take it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are some clauses which can just 
be gone through without any speech. 

Mr. Speaker: In respect of them too. If the clauses can 
be gone through immediately, there is no special point in not 
adjourning now. When we meet at 11-30 those clauses may 
be put through. 

The House will now adjourn and reassemble at 11-30. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past 
Eleven of the Clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


423 


SECTION V 

18th April 1951 

TO 

19th May 1951 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


424 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


425 


SECTION V 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Pages 

34. Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill ... 427-508 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


426 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


427 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


427 


( 34 ) 

* REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Representation of the 

People Act, 1950, be taken into consideration.” 

This is a very short Bill and it seeks to amend the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 which was passed 
by this House some time ago. The object of the Bill is to 
provide for the representation in the House of the People for 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Part C 
States. As the House will remember under Articles 313 and 
332, there is provision made by the Constitution itself for the 
representation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in Part A and Part B states. So far as Part C States 
are concerned, the matter has been left to Parliament and 
to the President. Article 82 of the Constitution says that so 
far as the representation of the people in Part C States is 
concerned, it shall be dealt with by Parliament and so far 
as the administration of Part C States is concerned, that is 
a matter which is left to be dealt with by Article 239. When 
the People’s Representation Bill was before the House, it 
should have, as a matter of propriety also contained the 
provisions which are now included in this present Bill. But 
unfortunately, Government at that time had not got sufficient 
information as to the number of seats that were going to be 
allotted to Part C States in the House of the People, nor were 
they in possession of the tribes and the castes which were 
to be included in the provisions relating to Part C States. 
Consequently, these provisions had to be held back and they 
are now brought forth before this House. 


* P. D., Vol. 10., Part II, 18th April 1951, pp. 7021-39. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


428 


428 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There are really two points which require, I believe, 
some explanation. As the House knows, there are altogether 
ten Part C States. It has not been possible for Government 
to provide representation for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in all the ten Part C States and the reason 
is this. We have had to consider two different propositions. 
One was whether the Part C States in which a provision was 
to be made for the representation of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes had sufficient number of seats, so 
that if a seat was reserved for the Scheduled Caste or for 
the Scheduled Tribe, the result would not be the complete 
disenfranchisement of the general population. Obviously, 
there are some States which are included in Part C States 
where the total representation given to that particular State 
is only one seat in the House of the People. For instance, 
Bilaspur is one such State. Coorg is one such State where 
one that is given. Obviously, it is not possible to apply the 
principle of reservation in cases of that sort, where a seat 
could be allotted to the Scheduled Castes, the result of which 
would be total negation of the representation of the general 
population. Therefore, in providing representation for the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Part C States, we 
have had to select only those States where there is room for 
both to be represented in the Lower House. 

The second principle that we have had to take into 

consideration was the totality of the population of the 

. nn Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in any 

4-00 p.m. 

particular Part C State. Where the population 
was very small, we have not thought it proper to give any 
representation. But, where the population is considerable 
having regard to the total population, we have thought that 
a seat might be given in those areas. Consequently, what the 
Bill does is this. It reserves seats for the Scheduled Castes 
in Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Vindhya Pradesh, one seat 
in each of these three Part C States. Here, the House will 
see that there is no great resulting injustice for the simple 
reason that Delhi has four seats, Himachal Pradesh has three 
seats and Vindhya Pradesh has six seats. We have felt that 
these States could well afford to allow one seat to be given 
to the Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


429 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 429 

With regard to the Scheduled Tribes, we have selected 
Manipur and Vindhya Pradesh. There again, it does not seem 
that the reservation of seats to the Scheduled Tribes would 
cause any injustice to the general population. Manipur has 
got two seats. It is proposed in this Bill to reserve one to the 
Scheduled Tribes as you know the population of Scheduled 
Tribes in Manipur is very large. Secondly, we propose to 
give one seat to the Scheduled Tribes in Vindhya Pradesh 
which has got six seats. The rest of the States will have no 
representation either for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes. 

Now, I come to the question of the Schedule of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. I might say that in this mater 
I have really no opinion of my own. These castes have been 
supplied to us by the Home Department and the Census 
Commissioner who has made a most recent investigation into 
the matter. 

[Shrimati Durgabai in the Chair \ 

I hope that the list that is given in the Bill is an exhaustive 
one and that no important community which can be included 
either in the Scheduled Castes or in the Scheduled Tribes has 
been omitted. If any hon. Member draws my attention to any 
omission or to any addition of a community which ought not to 
be there, I have an open mind and I shall certainly consider 
any suggestion made to me on that account. I do not think 
that there is anything more that requires explanation. With 
these words, Madam, I commend my motion to the House. 

Mr. Chairman: Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Representation of the 

People Act, 1950 be taken into consideration.” 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): I have listened to the 
speech just made by the Hon. Law Minister with attention. I 
have also carefully read the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
of this Bill, and I have also carefully persued the various 
clauses of this Bill, But I must confess that I have not been 
able to appreciate the necessity of this Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


430 


430 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay): You will never. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: To me, the Bill appears to be an 
absolutely unnecessary one. I am afraid, the valuable time that 
will be spent in the consideration of this Bill could have been 
more appropriately devoted to the consideration of the many 
other important Bills that are pending before us. I will just 
explain why I say so and I hope I will be able easily to bring 
conviction to my hon. friend who has somewhat impatiently 
interrupted me. We are hard-pressed for time and I consider 
it not only unfair but improper that we should be called upon 
to indulge in this sort of luxury legislation, if I may say so. 

What is it, after all, that this Bill seeks to provide? It seeks 
to provide, firstly, reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes on the House of the People. Secondly, 
it seeks to provide for specification of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. If I draw the attention of the House to 
Article 330 of the Constitution, it will be apparent that the 
Constitution itself specifically provides for reservation of seats 
for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Article 330 
states : 

“(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for — 

(a) the Scheduled Castes; 

( b ) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the 
tribal areas of Assam; and 

(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of 
Assam.” 

Para. (2) of Article 330 runs as follows : — 

“(2) The number of seats reserved in any State” — 

Not in a Part A State or Part B State, but in any State 
which obviously includes Part C States also — 

“for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under 
clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion 
to the total number of seats allotted to that State...” 

I need not read the rest. My contention is that this article 
330 specifically provides that seats for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes shall be reserved in the House of the People 
in respect of any State. This word ‘State’ has been defined in 
Article 1 of the Constitution which reads thus : 

“1. (1) India, that is, Bharat, shall be a Union of States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


431 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 431 

(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be the States and their 
territories specified in Parts A, B and C of the First Schedule.” 

Therefore, Madam, it should be obvious that Article 330 
read with Article 1 does specifically provide for reservation 
of seats in the House of the People for Part C States also. 

Mr. Chairman: For the hon. Member’s guidance, Article 
330 covers only Part A and Part B States. The Constitution 
does not provide specifically for the Part C States. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: My contention is that Article 330 
is not confined to Parts A and B States, but it extends its 
provisions to any State and according to the definition of 
‘State’ in article 1, a Part C State is also covered. Therefore, 
my contention is that Article 330 is obviously wide enough 
to cover all States, Parts A, B and C. 

Therefore, Madam, there is absolutely no necessity for 
bringing forward a Bill specifically again providing for the 
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in respect of the Part C States. 

And then, Madam, I find from the Bill that it seeks not 
only to make this unnecessary provision for the reservation 
of seats in respect of the Part C States, but it goes further 
and even fixes the number of members who should be elected 
to fill up the reserved seats. According to clause 2 of the Bill 
we are asked to agree to a new section, section 3A which 
runs thus : 

“Of the seats in the House of the People allotted under section 

3 to each of the States of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Vindhya 

Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes; and 

of the seats so allotted to each of the States of Manipur and 

Vindhya Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.” 

Now, that means that we are called upon to commit 
ourselves for all times, unless of course amending legislation 
is brought forward before the House to give one seat and 
no more and no less than one — of course there cannot be 
less, than one — to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes of Part C States. In respect of Part A and the Part B 
States we may remember we have not specified either in the 
Constitution or in any Bills we have passed so far in respect 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


432 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the representation or election of Members to the House 
of the People, as to how many seats shall be allotted to the 
Scheduled Tribes and how many to the Scheduled Castes. No 
doubt sub-clause (2) of Article 330 gives us the formula for the 
reservation of the seats, that it shall be in accordance with the 
population of the Scheduled Castes and Tribes in that State. 
That is reasonable, logical and understandable. But here it is 
sought to specifically fix the number. Obviously, in the case of 
Parts A and B States this calculation is presumably left to be 
done by the Election Commissioner. But here the Hon. Law 
Minister wants to arrogate to himself or to this House this 
function which normally, in the case of the Part A and Part 
B States has been vested in the Election Commissioner. I do 
not grudge the arrogating to this House of this right. But I 
feel that this is a wrong way of legislation. Suppose five years 
later, the number of the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled 
Castes increases in all these Part C States it becomes very 
much more than their present strength and they require 
according to Article 330 much more than the one or two seats 
that you are now providing here, what will happen? They will 
then be entitled to more seats but the present Bill will stand 
in the way. Therefore, I submit that this is an ill-conceived 
clause which is being incorporated here, which first of all 
unnecessarily asks us to reserve the seats and then makes 
us commit ourselves to a specific number of seats. 

The second thing that this Bill seeks to provide for is 
to specify the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
who should be taken into consideration for the purpose of 
determining how many reserved seats should be provided 
for. Here also, I must submit that ample provision is made 
in the Constitution itself whereby merely by a notification 
of the President this thing could well be done. Article 341 
provides that: 

“The President may, after consulation with the Governor or 
Rajpramukh of a state, by public notification, specify the Castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes 
which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to 
be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State.” 

Similarly article 342 relates to a notification in respect of 
Scheduled Tribes. Of course, it might be said that in Part C 
States you have neither a Rajpramukh nor a Governor to be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


433 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 433 

consulted by the President. But to that my reply is that, 
visualising some such difficulty in the working of the 
Constitution, a specific article — Article 392 — has already been 
incorporated in the Constitution itself which says : 

“The President may, for the purpose of removing any 
difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition from the 
provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the provisions 
of this Constitution, by order direct that this Constitution shall, 
during such period as may be specified in the order, have effect 
subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, 
addition or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or 
expedient:” 

Therefore all the words, “addition”, “omission” and 
“modification” are there. Therefore, I say that immediately any 
such difficulty is experienced, the President may be requested 
to issue a notification under article 341 adapted or modified 
by article 392, saying that for the purpose of reservation of 
seats for Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes, the 
following castes shall be considered as Scheduled Castes 
and the following tribes shall be considered as Scheduled 
Tribes. Therefore, I submit that this Bill is unnecessary. The 
provision relating to reservation of seats is already there and 
the specification of the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled 
Castes could be done by a notification by the President. I 
therefore, submit that this Bill may very well be withdrawn 
and no more time need be spent over its consideration. 

The question, however, may arise as to why the Law 
Minister, an intelligent man that he is and an eminent jurist 
as he is should have taken to this unnecessary course of coming 
forward with an absolutely unnecessary piece of legislation. 

An Hon. Member: Teek hai (It is true). 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I am obliged to my hon. Friend for 
giving me such encouragement and support. I have been 
at pains to find out what could be the reason for the Law 
Minister to come before us with such an unnecessary piece 
of legislation. I could find very easily the reason. About two 
days ago I read in the papers a speech which he delivered 
while laying the foundation stone of a building. He had the 
boldness, indeed very great boldness to... 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Deshmukh: I wonder whether this is all relevant. 

Dr. Ambedkar: This Bill was introduced long before the 
speech was made. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I would not indulge in any irrelevant 
remarks. I am trying to bring home to hon. Members of this 
House that this Bill is absolutely unnecessary. The question 
obviously would arise in the minds of hon. Members as to why 
an eminent jurist and an eminent lawyer like Dr. Ambedkar 
should ask us to enact an unnecessary piece of legislation. 
I have to prove that it is not the necessity or the propriety 
of this legislation (Interruption) that has made him to come 
before us but it is some extraneous considerations which are 
actuating him to come before us... 

Mr. Chairman : Is it the contention of the hon. Member 
that this Bill exclusively belongs to Dr. Ambedkar? it is a 
Government Bill. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Technically speaking, it belongs to 
the Government but I wonder whether Government or his 
other colleagues have really applied their minds to this Bill. 
(Several hon. Members : Oh! Oh!) I am paying a tribute to 
Dr. Ambedkar that he can easily persuade his colleagues 
to believe that something like this is necessary and he 
may persuade them to think — as he must be enjoying their 
confidence — that they need not so meticulously enter into 
every little detail of the Bill and they may well depend upon 
his ability and his prudence. 

Mr. Chairman : Is not the hon. Member one of those who 
consented to the introduction of this Bill in the Parliament? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I suppose the convention in this House 
has always been that no Member should stand to oppose the 
introduction of a Bill. I for one would be happy if hereafter 
that convention is to be broken and it will be open to hon. 
Members of this House to oppose even the introduction of 
a Bill. Anyway, I hope, Madam, it is not your intention to 
stop me from proceeding further with my speech merely on 
the ground that since at that time I had not opposed the 
introduction of the Bill I cannot speak now to oppose it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


435 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 435 

My submission is that this Bill is merely an election stunt 
of which the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar wants to take the fullest 
advantage. He would like us and the world outside to believe 
that he and he alone has the interest of the Scheduled Castes 
and Tribes at hearts, so much so that even the Constitution- 
makers were not wide awake at that time and other hon. 
Members of this House who represent the Scheduled Castes 
and Tribes had never thought of it and that he has now come 
forward before the House as the saviour of the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes with this legislation: and he would wish 
the world to believe that for the first time the interests of 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Part C States 
are going to be protected. He has in that speech to which I 
referred earlier, accused the hon. Scheduled Caste Members 
of this House of not being vigilant enough to protect the 
interests of the Scheduled Castes and he would like to arrogate 
to himself all the credit. I submit, Madam, these are the 
considerations (. Interruptions .) 

Shri Sonavane : Madam, on a point of order, I would like 
to know how the reference to the Scheduled Caste members 
of this House has any relation to the Bill that is before the 
House. Will not references made outside be out of order? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I am trying to prove what is the 
motive behind the Bill. Whether there is any propriety or 
necessity 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu (Mysore): Can an hon. Member 
attribute motive to the hon. Minister that he has been moved 
by extraneous considerations other than the subject matter of 
the Bill — that is what he said and was dilating upon — Madam 
you may consider whether personal motives can be attributed 
to any Member. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I would not dilate very much on it 
but I feel 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu: Would you give a ruling on the 
point of order raised by me? 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. The hon. Member wants 
a ruling on the subject. I would like to say that the hon. 
member’s attention has been drawn to that position. If only 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


436 


436 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

he is given a few more minutes to make his statement, then 
other hon. Members may also make their statements. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Madam, I may not have used the 
word motive. I would ask what are the reasons behind the 
Bill ? The reasons are not the necessity or the propriety of it 
but the reason is that the Hon. Law Minister wants to make 
capital out of this Bill for election purposes... 

Mr. Chairman: Without dilating upon the motives behind 
this Bill I would beg of the hon. Member to speak on the 
merits of the Bill as it is. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I have already spoken on the merits 
or the absence of merits of this Bill. I could only speak of 
the demerits of this Bill. 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab): On a point of order, Madam, 
you have ruled that motives could not be discussed. May I 
ask whether motives, intentions or merits can be divested 
from each other? 

Mr. Chairman: The ruling will be that only motives need 
not be always dilated upon. 

Sardar B. S. Man : It depends upon the emphasis that 
one wishes to make. 

Mr. Chairman: It is a matter of opinion. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: If you wish me not to rub the point 
too much I will not rub it any further. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You can do it: I have borne all this for 
25 years. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I think the Hon. Law Minister is 
bold enough, audacious enough and he can go even to the 
length of condemning his colleagues in the Government: he 
has that boldness and audacity. I would very much like to 
know whether it is in the propriety of things that one Cabinet 
Minister should outside the House condemn other Cabinet 
Ministers. {An Hon. Member: All irrelevant) I should think 
it is not irrelevant. Sitting in the Parliament we are anxious 
to see that democracy is properly worked and on every 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


437 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 437 

occasion hon. Members in this House must be on the watch 
to see that nothing which is contrary to democratic principles 
of Government is allowed to go on and I do submit, Madam, 
that at the earliest opportunity we should express ourselves 
that we are very apprehensive of this sort of thing going on 
between one Cabinet Minister and his other colleagues. 

In conclusion I would only submit that every Member of this 
House is as much interested as and perhaps more interested 
than the Hon. Law Minister in protecting and safeguarding the 
rights and privileges of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. They are absolutely equal to us and I would even say 
they are flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone. We want to 
treat them absolutely on an equal footing and I would even 
be prepared to give them more privileges that they may be 
entitled to not on the basis of their population alone and I 
would not grudge to give them any amount of representation. 
But my submission is that there was no necessity for this 
Bill to be brought before us for reasons which I have already 
submitted. I have done. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan): Why should the hon. 
Member be so upset? it is only his first election speech. 

Shri Chandrika Ram (Bihar): I was very sorry to hear 
the speech of my hon. friend Mr. Kapoor regarding the 
Scheduled Castes. The Scheduled Castes have been neglected, 
no doubt, throughout the length and breadth of the country 
for the last so many centuries, but since the Government of 
India many years back took over the responsibility for the 
Centrally Administered Areas, the conditions which were very 
bad indeed there were made deplorable. Whereas in the other 
States — Part A and Part B States as they are called in the 
Constitution — they have got legislatures and other elected 
bodies, in the Centrally Administered Areas there are local 
advisory councils presided over by the Chief Commissioner 
who never cared for anybody. In the Constituent Assembly we 
moved an amendment for the inclusion of Chief Commissioners 
also in article 341 which says : 

“The President may, after consultation with the Governor or 

Rajpramukh of a State, by public notification specify the castes, races 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


438 


438 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes 
which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to 
be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State.” 

At that time the learned Law Minister said that as these 
Part C States are governed by the President himself according 
to article 239 of the Legislative Constitution, there is no 
need for the inclusion of Chief Commissioners in article 341. 
The entire difficulty arose that way and the need for the 
introduction of this Bill today is that in that article Chief 
Commissioners are not included and the President could not 
consult anybody for purposes of issuing notifications for Part 
C States. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: What I said was that under article 
392 the President could make the necessary adaptation and 
additions in article 341, under which the Scheduled Castes 
could be specified even in respect of Part C States. 

Shri Chandrika Ram : But the difficulty is this. If you 
read clause (2) of article 341 you will find it reads : 

“(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the 
list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under 
clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of, or group within any 
caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued 
under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification.” 

Therefore, under this article the President is not in a 
position to issue another notification. Only Parliament is 
competent to do it. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The question of another notification 
does not arise because the President has not so far issued 
any notification for any Part C States. 

Shri Chandrika Ram: This matter was also raised with 
the Law Ministry, the Home Ministry and the States Ministry. 
We, who represent the Scheduled Castes in this House ran 
from one Ministry to another and consulted one Minister 
after another. Every one of them said that as there was no 
constitutional provision, notifications could not be issued 
regarding Part C States. When the original Bill was moved 
here, I moved an amendment in this House but it was not 
accepted on that very ground. The different organisations 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


439 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 439 

belonging to the Scheduled Castes, especially the Bharatiya 
Depressed Classes League, of which I am the General Secretary, 
submitted a long memorandum to the President, to the Prime 
Minister, to the Law Minister and to the hon. Shri Jagjivan 
Ram in this matter. After great consideration this proposal 
has been brought before this House. Madam, let me inform 
the House that justice has not been done to these unfortunate 
people in these centrally Administered Areas of the country. 
We speak very much against the State Governments of the 
various States but what about the Part C States? In my own 
State of Bihar there are all kinds of facilities for Harijans 
for reading, writing and in the services. But what do we see 
in the Centrally Administered Areas? Even education for the 
Harijans is not free. There are no arrangements for scholarship 
and other facilities. The Government of India have appointed 
a Board to deal with these matters. Last year they received 
about 100 applications from the students reading in colleges, 
but only five to seven could get scholarships. And in many of 
the other States, in my State of Bihar for instance, all the 
students reading in colleges get a stipend of Rs. 35 a month. 
So, the condition of these people in the Centrally Administered 
Areas is very bad indeed. As regards the representation of 
these people, there is no representative of theirs in this House. 
They have always been neglected by the Central Government. 

The responsibility for the administration of the Part C 
States is that of the Central Cabinet where the learned 
Law Minister is also a Member. May I ask what he has 
done for these people for the last three or four years he has 
been in the Cabinet ? I have seen that the Law Minister 
who calls himself the saviour of the Scheduled Castes was 
silent on this issue in the Constituent Assembly and even on 
the last occasion when a Bill was moved for Part C States 
representation. Therefore, if he comes with a Bill for the 
representation of these people now, it should not be opposed 
by any Member of the House. As we know, the number of 
Scheduled Castes in these Centrally Administered Areas 
is something like fifteen to twenty lakhs. I have moved an 
amendment that where they do not have representation, as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


440 


440 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for instance in Coorg, Ajmer, Tripura, they should be given 
representation. The Scheduled Castes in those places have not 
even been listed as Scheduled Castes. I do not know whether 
the Law Minister will be able to accept my amendment and 
list these people as Scheduled Castes. I do not say that 
wherever these people are, they must be given representation 
in the Councils, Assemblies and Parliament. That is not my 
demand. If the population of these people does not warrant 
representation, do not give it to them. If on the other hand, 
their number warrants, please give them representation and 
if you want to give them a fair deal and justice, at least 
include them in the list of Scheduled Castes so that facilities 
in education, services, representation in local bodies, and 
facilities even for drinking water can be given to these people. 
That is my only argument. I must say that in my opinion 
the Central Government has not done justice to these people 
and the larger share of the responsibility for that falls upon 
the two Harijan Ministers in our Cabinet, especially upon 
Dr. Ambedkar who has been making public speeches that people 
in Parliament belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes are doing nothing. I do not think this attitude of 
Dr. Ambedkar is fair, justified or warranted. Therefore, when 
we are working under a democracy and have laid down adult 
franchise in the Constitution for everybody, if these unfortunate 
people in the Centrally Administered Areas get adult franchise 
and get representation, there should be no grudge and nothing 
should be said against this. If any hon. Member gets up and 
opposes it, I shall say that he is acting against the principle 
laid down by the Father of the Nation — Mahatma Gandhi. 

Regarding the representation of these people in this 
House — and this is the only House in which they can be 
represented because there is no other House going to be 
established in the Centrally Administered Areas, — I should 
say that their representation is not fair. Delhi with a 
population of 15 lakhs will have three representatives in 
this House, but the number of these people in the Centrally 
Administered Areas is about 20 lakhs and yet they will have 
only three representatives, that is to say, one representative 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


441 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 441 

less calculating on the basis of one representative for every five 
lakhs. And yet people say that this Bill has been introduced 
to give representation to these people who are less in number 
in the Centrally Administered Areas. 

In the end, I shall only say that there are other castes and 
communities which are Scheduled Castes and which have been 
recognised as Scheduled Castes by the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Education. As soon as the President declared 
a Scheduled Caste list a schedule was published and this list 
was published in respect of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes for purposes of scholarships only. I would request the 
Hon. Law Minister to accept this list, so that those who are 
included in it may get the facilities that Scheduled Castes in 
other states are getting. With these words, I would request 
the Hon. Minister to accept any amendment when I move it 
at the proper time. 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): There cannot be any 
objection to the Bill under discussion. I feel that it was 
essential and has come in good time. I cannot persuade myself 
to agree with my hon. friend Mr. Kapoor when he said that 
there was no necessity for this Bill or when he questioned its 
propriety. Article 341 gives power to the President to specify 
the classes which may be included in the list of Scheduled 
Castes, but obviously if we read that article the intention 
was that it might be confined to Parts A and B States. That 
article did not concern Part C States. Therefore it was that it 
was mentioned that it would be done with the consultation of 
the Rajpramukhs or the Governors of those States. The other 
provisions in that Chapter also relate to only Parts A and B 
States. Therefore, there cannot be any doubt that Part C States 
were not provided for so far as the specification of Scheduled 
Castes was concerned. Again, it has been mentioned that 
Article 392 could be availed of for the removal of difficulties 
by the President, but that article does not apply, if we look 
at that Article closely. It reads like this : 

“The President may, for the purpose of removing any 
difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition from the 
provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the provisions 
of this Constitution, by order direct etc etc ” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


442 


442 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Therefore, these two articles could not be availed of and 
there was necessity for this Bill. Then, it has been said that 
341 (2) gives powers to the Parliament when an order by the 
President has been made. The Parliament is authorised to 
add to or subtract from or omit any caste from that schedule, 
but this is the general power, I Suppose, that is vested in 
the Parliament that is being exercised in enacting the Bill 
now before us. 

As I have said, the Bill was essential and it has been 
brought at the right moment before the elections which are 
so near at hand. There is a separate list for every State 
and I feel that some Members who spoke were right when 
they pointed out that some castes which are specified as 
Scheduled Castes in one State may not be specified as such 
in the adjoining States. There are certain entries in the lists 
before us which to my mind give rise to some doubts, and I 
want the Hon. Minister to kindly clear the position. So far 
as Delhi is concerned, there are two castes included in Nos. 
5 and 6: Banjaras and Bawarias. But these people are not 
included in the list under Himachal Pradesh. These Banjaras 
and Bawarias are to be found in Himachal Pradesh as well 
in good numbers. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If my hon. Friend will see entry No. 6 
under Himachal Pradesh, he will see Bhanjra there. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I am referring to Banjara and 
not Bhanjra. 

Dr. Ambedkar : So it is a question of pronunciation. 

Sardar Hukam Singh: No. They are different castes 
altogether. A Banjara is a different tribesman from a Bhanjra. 
Then again, Mazhabi entered as item 16 under Himachal 
Pradesh has not been entered under Delhi. These people 
are included in the list of Punjab and PEPSU and after the 
partition a good number of them have migrated to the adjoining 
States and some have come to Delhi too,, apart from a good 
number who have gone to Himachal Pradesh. When the local 
authorities in those States collected the figures, they may 
have thought that their number was very small, but then 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


443 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 443 

it would be a handicap for them if they are not included. As 
we know, these are either landless workers or labourers. The 
Banjaras move from one State to an adjoining State in search 
of employment and they eke out their livelihood. It would be a 
difficulty for them if they are deprived of their representation 
and the other concessions which they may otherwise be entitled 
to enjoy. Then there are one or two other entries. One such 
is No. 19 under Delhi — Julaha (Weaver). Then under No. 14 
under Himachal Pradesh it is given as Kabirpanthi or Julaha 
or Keer. These Kabirpanthis and the Julahas are two different 
castes. They are not one and the same. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sometimes, it is one caste with two names. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : That is not so here. These are 
two distinct and separate castes. Therefore difficulty would 
arise. Then again, there is entry No. 23 under Himachal 
Pradesh — Ramdasi or Ravidasi but under Delhi entry No. 32 
reads Ram Dasia. I would like to know from the Hon. Minister 
whether Ramdasi and Ravidasi are two different castes and 
if they are — as in my opinion they certainly are — then why 
should that be omitted from Himachal Pradesh ? In entry 
No. 33 under Delhi it is given as Ravidasi or Raidasi but 
under Himachal Pradesh against entry No. 23 it is given 
only as Ramdasi or Ravidasi. So, there is a confusion. I am 
not aware of the actual denominations by which they may be 
called, but there is certainly some confusion and those castes 
have not been included in Himachal Pradesh under those 
two separate heads. My only point is that these provinces, 
Punjab, PEPSU, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi are contiguous 
areas and people keep on moving from one State to another 
in search of livelihood. Therefore if these poor classes are not 
included in the lists of all the States, they would be deprived 
of a concession which the Constitution wanted to give them 
and the whole object of ours would be frustrated. Therefore, 
I want to draw the special attention of the Hon. Minister 
to this matter. I had sent an amendment on this point this 
morning, copy of which he would by now have received. I 
would request him to give it his earnest attention. 

With these few words, Sir, I support this motion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


444 


444 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sonavane: I rise to support this Bill and to 
congratulate the Government on bringing this measure 
before this August House. I was, therefore, surprised to see 
why the mind of Mr. Kapoor was so confused today. As is 
usual with Mr. Kapoor to speak on every Bill, he did today 
without any justification. 

A cursory reading of article 332(1) and article 341(2) 
would have made it clear to Mr. Kapoor that this measure 
was necessary. My hon. friend simply relied too much on 
article 330 (2), caught hold of words “in the State” and went 
on arguing with that, oblivious of the fact that there are 
other articles. I would draw his attention to article 332(1) 
which conditions and qualifies article 330(2). Article 332(1) 
reads thus: 

“Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas 
of Assam in the Legislative Assembly of every State specified in 
Part A or Part B of the First Schedule.” 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: We are not dealing with the State 
Assemblies; we are dealing with the House of the People. 

Shri Sonavane: I would also draw the attention of the 
hon. Member to Article 341 (2) which reads : 

“Parliament may, by law include in, or exclude from the list 
of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause 
(1) any caste, face or tribe or part of or group within any caste, 
race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the 
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.” 

In view of these provisions in Part XVI I think the 
measure that has been brought forward is absolutely 
essential and Mr. Kapoor should not have raised his voice 
against it. 

I would now come to another aspect of this question to 
which the Hon. and learned Law Minister should pay attention. 
The measure specifies certain castes in the Sixth Schedule. 
But there are other Scheduled Castes in other States. These 
Scheduled Castes when they go over to other States, are not 
recognised as such and would not enjoy the rights given to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


445 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 445 

them by the Constitution and so would not get reservations. 
He would remain an untouchable, suffering all the disabilities 
and disadvantages, with none of the rights and other benefits 
that would have accrued to him if he had remained in his 
original State. Therefore my point is this. A Scheduled Caste 
man in one State even if he migrates to another State should 
be equally entitled to all the benefits under the Constitution. I 
would request the Hon. the Law Minister to embody a provision 
to this effect. By excluding the Scheduled Castes from the 
enjoyment of such privileges, when they move from one State 
to another there has been a restriction on their movement from 
one State to another. Therefore, I would earnestly request the 
Hon. Minister to consider the insertion of a proviso to section 
3A by which all persons who are Scheduled Castes in their 
States should get automatically all the rights and benefits if 
they migrate to States other than their own. 

The third point that I would like to bring to the notice 
of the Hon. Minister is that the Scheduled Caste lists are 
defective and many castes which are untouchables in the 
different States are omitted and no efforts are being made 
to see that these castes are included in the Union List as 
also in the list of those States. The Hon. Minister said that 
this list is exhaustive and no caste has been omitted. But I 
think he has failed in his duty to see that all the Scheduled 
Castes were brought on the Provincial Scheduled Caste List 
as also on the Union Caste List. Many representations have 
been sent to the Home Minister and to the Law Minister 
about those untouchable castes. 

Mr. Chairman : Is the hon. Member likely to take a long 
time? 

Shri Sonavane : Yes, Madam. 

Mr. Chairman: Then he may continue his speech tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the 
Clock on Thursday, the 19th April, 1951. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


446 


446 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

^REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL — contd. 

Mr. Speaker: The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the following motion moved by the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar on the 18th instant: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Representation of the 

People Act, 1950, be taken into consideration.” 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay): When the House adjourned 
yesterday I was speaking on how the movement of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes from one State to 
another would be restricted by the failure of the Ministry 
of Law to safeguard the interests of these people by seeing 
that they are not omitted from the lists of the States and 
the Union. I would like to illustrate my point by giving a 
concrete instance. In Bombay, there is a caste known as 
Mahar. Persons belonging to this caste come over to Delhi, but 
this caste is not included in the Delhi Scheduled Castes list. 
Thus, these people would not get any of the benefits under 
the Constitution only because of the fact that their caste has 
not been included in the Scheduled Castes list of the Delhi 
State. In other words, had they remained in Bombay, they 
would have enjoyed all the privileges and benefits. Therefore, 
my point is that even if the Scheduled Castes migrate from 
one State to another, they should get the privileges and 
benefits under the Constitution. That is not the case today. 
This omission of the recognition of all Scheduled Castes in the 
different States has had a restrictive effect on their movement. 
Therefore, I would urge the Hon. the Law Minister to see to 
this and make an all-embracing list so that the restriction 
on their movement would be removed. 

Another instance of this omission is that certain castes 
from Bombay State have gone over to Madhya Bharat and 
they have not been included in the list there. There are three 
or four castes of that type. Though they are untouchables, the 
benefits under the Constitution are denied to them. While 
replying to a supplementary question of mine, the Hon. the 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 19th April 1951, pp. 7042-7125. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


447 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 447 

Law Minister had said that the criterion of the Scheduled 
Caste list was untouchability. Therefore, I would like to ask 
him what he has done to see that all the untouchables are 
brought on the State as well as the Union lists. He has failed 
to do his duty towards the untouchables being in authority 
here, and I would suggest that an earnest effort should be 
made by him to rectify the mistake before the coming elections. 

Now, I would go to another point. The Scheduled Castes 
in certain States like Ajmer, Bhopal, Cutch and Tripura, who 
get not more than one seat, would not get any representation 
at all. I think it would have been wise and advisable for 
the Law Ministry to have evolved a formula by which the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes could have been given 
joint representation, going in rotation. As it is, these people, 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes would have no 
representation at all even though they are in substantial 
number in those States. I would, therefore, request the Hon. 
Law Minister to evolve a system of joint representation for 
these people by rotation. 

The last point I want to make is that under the Constitution 
only such of the untouchables or Scheduled Tribes who are 
listed as such are recognised by the States and the Union 
and would get the benefits under the Constitution. Such lists 
have not been prepared by the States of Bilaspur, Coorg and 
the Andaman and Nicobar. In the absence of such lists of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, those people residing 
in those States would not get the benefits for their education 
and upliftment in the services. Therefore, I would request 
that such a list may be prepared so that these persons may 
get all the benefits under the Constitution. 

Once more I would thank the Government for bringing 
forward this measure and request the Hon. the Law Minister 
that the suggestions which I have made are embodied in the 
Bill. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay (Uttar Pradesh): 
It is needless to emphasise the fact that this House is very 
keen to safeguard the interests of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, because our Congress Government, and the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


448 


448 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


members of this House who are mostly Congressmen working 
under the guidance of Mahatma Gandhi, have all along been 
taking keen interest in the cause that was so dear to Gandhiji. 
I do not think that on that point it is at all necessary that an 
assurance need be given to this House or to the people outside 
that we are very praticular of safeguarding the interests of 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, in so far as the 
question of representation of these castes is concerned in 
the House of the People as also in State Legislatures. But it 
appears that there have been certain facts in the knowledge of 
hon. Members on account of which they had to make certain 
remarks yesterday. 


So far as the spirit of this Bill goes, it is a laudable and 
welcome measure, providing for the representation of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the 
12-00 Noon jj ouse Q f p e0 pi e as we ll as State Legislatures. 

But this provision need have been made only if there is no 
provision for it in the law as it exists at present. 


Reading the Constitution, I find that there is already 
a provision for the representation of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in this House and also in other Legislatures. 
Article 330 is very clear on this point. Clause (2) of article 
330 says : 

“The number of seats reserved in any State for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number 
of seats allotted to that State in the House of the People as 
the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State, or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case 
may be in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the 
total population of the State.” 

So, my submission is that this provision applies to all the 
States. It does not apply only to Part a States, or Part B 
States, or any particular state. Probably the confusion arises 
on account of reference to article 332, where provision is made 
for representation in the State Assemblies. I think this Bill 
is only a repetition of the provision in the Constitution. If 
it is argued that there is no provision in article 330 of the 
Constitution for the representation of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People, I do not think 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


449 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 449 

there is any other provision, and if there is no other provision, 
I do not think even this Bill could be brought before this 
House. So this Bill is either ultra vires or it is superfluous. 
In case it is accepted that a provision already exists, it is not 
necessary to bring this Bill. From that point of view this Bill is 
superfluous. In case there is no provision in the Constitution, 
this Bill is ultra vires. 

Another point for which provision has been made in this 
Bill is declaration of certain castes as Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. For that also there is provision in articles 
341 and 342. According to article 342 (2): 

“Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list 
of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under 
clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group 
within any tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a 
notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by 
any subsequent notification.” 

My submission is that if this House has any right to make 
any alteration it is under clause (2) of article 342. Under that 
provision the scope of that modification is limited. The scope 
is limited to the fact that if there be any list prepared by 
the President under clause (1) it is only to that list that any 
modification can be made by an Act of Parliament. Otherwise 
there is no independent provision for making such modification 
or change in the list or to provide for the fact that certain 
castes should or should not be included in the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes. So, as regards that provision also, I 
do not think that this Bill can take us any further, because 
there is no such list prepared by the President to which this 
modification might be directed. Therefore, my submission is 
that in all cases either this Bill is superfluous or it is ultra 
vires in respect of both the points that have been attempted 
to be covered by this Bill. The provision already being present 
in article 330 of the Constitution for the representation of the 
Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in this House, it 
is absolutely unnecessary to have this Bill or to make any 
law in this House. 

Mr. Speaker: Mr. Muldas Vaishya. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


450 


450 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I would like to 
make one request. I do not know whether the argument that 
has been advanced by Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay 
is likely to be repeated by other members, as it was done 
yesterday. If that is so, with your permission, I would like 
to explain what exactly is the constitutional position. But I 
leave it to you. Otherwise I will take up the matter in my 
own turn when it comes. 

Mr. Speaker: I think that will be better. I myself have 
not been able to catch his objection. 

Dr. Ambedkar : They have missed a particular point. 
That is why they are raising this sort of objection. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): That was also raised yesterday. 

Mr. Speaker: Then that argument should not be repeated 
and the Law Minister will reply to that point at the end. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): Let him reply now. 

Mr. Speaker: I shall not allow that argument on the 
ground of repetition . 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu (Mysore): I would request you 
not to rule out a discussion of the Constitutional position, 
because there may be other aspects of it which will have to 
be presented. 

Mr. Speaker: Anything can be argued under different 
aspects. But the words of the Constitution are there and there 
is the Bill before the House, and I think that Members would 
trust the intelligence of the Members that they can grasp all 
the aspects if they are explained once or twice. What is the 
good of repeating them? 

Shri Dwivedi (Vindhya Pradesh): Although the Bill . 
relates to Part C States, no Member from these States has 
so far been allowed to speak. I would like to know if you will 
not allow the Members from Part C States to say something. 

Mr. Speaker: I do not know why hon. Members should 
think that they have not been allowed. Every Member is 
allowed. But certainly every person cannot get an opportunity. 
And I believe the Bill is restricted in its operations only to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


451 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 451 

certain Part C States. I think I am right when I say that. 
(Hon. Members: Yes, yes). The utmost that could be claimed 
by any. Member is that Members coming from that State to 
which the Bill relates should also be given an opportunity. 

Capt. A. P. Singh (Vindhya Pradesh) : We come from 
Vindhya Pradesh. 

Mr. Speaker: It will not be a desirable practice to urge 
that because the words “Part C” are there, therefore every 
Member coming from Part C States should be entitled to speak 
on it. But I need not go into that aspect. I am just keeping 
a watch over the thing and I shall follow what I think to be 
the proper and the best method. 

Shri Dwivedi: May I request you to allow those Members 
who come from Part C States and whose case is involved here? 

Mr. Speaker: Let them plead. But at least the Hon. 
Member does not come from one such. 

Shri Dwivedi: Sir, I come from Vindhya Pradesh. 

Mr. Speaker : I am so sorry. Yes, Vindhya Pradesh is there. 
But I want to give preference first to people who themselves 
belong to the Scheduled Castes, and hon. Members who do 
not belong to the Scheduled Castes will kindly forbear for 
sometime and allow those who belong to that caste to have 
the fullest opportunity. And I am giving an opportunity to the 
hon. Member Mr. Muldas because he comes from that class. 
I have got a list and I have got in my mind as to who come 
from that community and who should be given preference. 
Let us not argue that point any further. 

Shri M. B. Vaishya (Bombay): (English translation of the 
Hindi speech ) Sir, I deem myself to be fortunate for having 
been permitted by you to speak on this bill. After listening 
to the debate on the Bill introduced by Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, 
I also wish to express my ideas. He is a great scholar of law 
and must have introduced the present Bill as a result of the 
same. It was only after the coming of Mahatma Gandhi, who 
was our saviour, we began to realize that we also are human 
beings. At many places Hon. Dr. Ambedkar has stated that 
the Scheduled Class people were happier under the British 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


452 


452 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rule, and now under the Nehru Government they are unhappy. 
I received this statement as a great shock. Our country has 
been famous for truth. Prahlad, a boy of five, had courage 
enough to utter truth and nothing but truth before his father. 
For us Harijans Mahatma Gandhi did so much and even the 
present Congress Government also are doing much but this 
is certain that our condition has been deteriorating since so 
long that a greater amount of our difficulties is a result of 
that unhappy position. Our poverty cannot be removed so 
easily. A lot will have to be done for us. But when I see our 
leaders minimizing the efforts that are being made for us, I 
feel extremely pained. Obstacles should not be placed in the 
way of a smoothly running cart. It is not proper for us to do 
so. The path of service has always been acclaimed in India to 
be a path of Yogis and we have ever been following the same 
from times immemorial and we have served the society in every 
possible way. During the days of Swaraj Movement, I can say 
of at least my own province of Gujarat, if not of others, that 
our people had worked shoulder to shoulder with our other 
friends and that is why we do not like to beg anything from 
them like beggars. Today we demand our legitimate rights 
from them on the basis of equality and brotherhood. Today we 
have our own Government, and it is the duty of the Parliament 
and the Members thereof to do justice to us. In spite of all 
these things there are still many places in India where our 
bridegrooms cannot ride a horse, where Harjians cannot sit 
in motor buses, and there are some places even where our 
women folk cannot put on costly garments and ornaments. 
There are no doubt some such places in India even today 
but it does not mean that condition is the same everywhere. 
There is no doubt that though much is being done for us, 
a lot more still remains to be done. But I do not like to be 
ungrateful as to say that, in spite of so much being done for 
our uplift, nothing is being done for us and that we were 
happier under the British rule. There is no doubt that due to 
their policy of ‘divide and rule’, the Britishers had picked out 
some educated persons among us, treated them as their equals 
and tried to benefit them in every possible manner. These 
people can thus say that they were happier under the British 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


453 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 453 

rule. But today the Harijan Community as a whole is being 
benefited and our representatives who occupy the seats on 
Treasury Benches, as Shri Sonavane has stated, by exercising 
their pressure upon the Government can get many things 
done for us. But putting the Government in disrepute and 
working against the Government would not, except bringing 
ruin to us, in any way prove beneficial to us. Dr. Ambedkar 
is a great scholar. I pray God to give him wisdom so that he 
may not utter such words as may prove our community to 
be ungrateful. He has played so many stunts in his life that 
I suppose this also to be one of them. Who knows this may 
also be an act of trickery as Bhagwan Shree Krishna used to 
show! God save us from these Mas of trickeries. We cannot 
turn ungrateful towards the country in which we have taken 
birth and whom we have served to the best of our ability. 
There was a time when we were asked to change our religion. 
But thousands and lacs of us showed to the world that even 
at the cost of our own heads we will not go against the land, 
where we have been born and give up the religion which we 
have adopted. We can sacrifice our lives but we cannot give 
up our dharma. In the end I have only to say 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. I can appreciate the hon. 
Member’s keenness to speak out his heart, but then, I am 
afraid, we are trying to introduce, on the floor of the House, 
some other subject which will be discussed better outside. At 
present, we are concerned with this Bill. A few preliminary 
remarks is something different, just to impress upon the 
House, if at all any such thing is necessary, the fact that 
the Scheduled Castes should be given special consideration. 
But beyond that, let us not enter into any political or other 
controversies which may or may not have been started outside 
the House; let them be carried on outside the House. I earnestly 
request every Member in the House not to go beyond the 
strict scope of the Bill. I did not want to interfere with the 
hon. Member’s speech, nor do I want to put his enthusiasm 
and his feelings at a lesser value. He will confine himself now 
to the merits of the case. I was just watching when he was 
really coming to the merits of the case. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


454 


454 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri. M. B. Vaishya: The ruling that you have kindly 
given in this regard is certainly valuable and we have but to 
follow it. But I have to say a few words to Hon. Dr. Ambedkar. 
The Bill that he has introduced has been moved on behalf of 
the Government and as it must have been very a necessary 
one, therefore, we, Harijans will surely lend our support to 
the same. But what I had to say I have submitted in brief. I 
hope that he will excuse me for what I have said here, and 
you Sir, will also excuse me. 

C Translation concluded) 

[Srhimati Durgabai in the Chair]. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh) : My friend the Hon. 
Minister is in a great hurry, but I have some very important 
points to urge. It is not with regard to one particular caste 
or another, but I must say, that the whole way in which this 
matter of representation of the people, election rules and 
regulations are being dealt with is extremely unsatisfactory. 
We have had one Bill in 1950, which is now Act No. XLIII 
of 1950. We know the way in which it was introduced, the 
struggle that this House had to put in for the sake of getting 
the provisions amended and the number of seats increased. 
Then very soon after we had an amending Bill which is Act 
No. XXIII of 1950 by which we provided for representation of 
Part C States in the Council of States. Then we have not had 
any Bill for some time although two are now pending before 
the House, but we had two notifications under the signature 
of the President. It is perfectly legal and constitutional to 
do so. Those are the notifications dated 10th of August 1950 
and 6th of September 1950 specifying the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes under articles 341 and 342 of the 
Constitution. My first complaint refers to action of Government 
under these two articles 341 and 342. Under the second part 
of article 341 Parliament alone has the authority to modify, 
add to or substract from the list that has been notified under 
the signature of the President. It was quite proper and 
constitutional to notify these lists but I wish the Hon. Minister 
had given this House an opportunity of looking into and 
scrutinizing the lists that have been given in these notifications. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


455 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 455 

I do not know whether the Hon. Law Minister had seen the 
representations, but I have had many letters from many 
communities, who have a grievance that they have not been 
included in these lists. It would have been quite proper 
if, instead of bringing another small Bill confined to one 
particular class of States — I do not object to the Bill on the 
other hand, I am in favour of the Bill — some sort of procedure 
was available to the Members of this House in the case of 
these two lists, so that it would have been possible for us 
to scrutinize them and the people would also know how far 
their rights have been protected. The long discussion and the 
anxiety of the Members of this House are, I believe, really 
based on this fact. If everything else was in order, if there 
was proper investigation as was absolutely necessary in this 
case, so far as the Parts A and B States are concerned — this 
is a supplementary list of Scheduled Castes with reference 
to Part C States — the debate in the House would probably 
have been much shorter. The keenness of Members would 
have been less and we would not have had much occasion 
to complain. But the way in-which the whole thing is being 
done is really strange and I hope and pray that this sort of 
thing is not done. 

We should have one consolidated enactment in which all 
these things should be provided for. There will then be no 
need to have amending Bills month after month to add or 
subtract and all the various things. My first and very earnest 
request to the Hon. Minister is that the lists given under 
these notifications are not exhaustive. The people belonging 
to many castes feel that they have been unjustly omitted and 
if we really compare these lists with the lists which formed 
the basis of the Order in Council under the 1935 Act we will 
find that many castes have certainly been omitted. If it is 
contended that these castes which have been omitted have 
really ceased to be untouchables or there has been a certain 
change in their social status, that is another matter. We do 
not know whether the House will accept it or not; whether 
the people will accept it or not. When we had these lists 
prepared as schedules to the 1935 Act, there was a great deal 
of investigation, then the people were informed and they came 
to know what their rights were and what they should fight 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


456 


456 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for. Nothing of this sort has been done on the present 
occasion. I do not know who prepared these lists which have 
been published under the signature of the President. I do not 
know what investigation has been made so far as these lists 
in the present Bill are concerned. These are matters which 
really create a lot of anxiety and feeling in the minds of the 
people and I would therefore like that the Government do 
really have some system, some method in approaching this 
question a method which will give satisfaction to the largest 
number of people. 

Then so far as this particular Bill is concerned, I think it 
is necessary so long as it is proposed to give representation 
to some of the Part C States. I think the lists have got to 
be prepared and whether they were prepared at one time as 
part of one whole or another is a different question. But I do 
not think this is absolutely superfluous. It does not appear 
to me beyond doubt that there is any definite provision in 
the Constitution according to which we are enacting this 
measure. So far as I can see the only justification or the only 
authority for bringing in this Bill appears to be that wherever 
there are Scheduled Castes people, some seats are proposed 
to be reserved for them. But this is merely because there is 
a provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes — I do not 
know if there is any specific provision in the Constitution 
according to which we can make this provision, apart from 
articles 341 and 342 which do not apply to Part C States. 
This is merely a technical objection. I really want that seats 
in Part C States should be reserved and Scheduled Castes 
should be enumerated. There cannot be any difference of 
opinion so far as the desirability of enumerating the Scheduled 
Castes or making provision for them so far as Part C States 
are concerned. But, what I wish to find out from my hon. 
friend when he replies is, where exactly is the provision in the 
Constitution according to which this representation is being 
sought to be given, according to which this Bill is perfectly 
in order? 

So far as the lists are concerned, I wish a little more time 
was available to all the people to know how far their rights 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


457 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 457 

are going to be affected. I have received representations from 
various communities which desire that their names should be 
included. It is quite likely that many backward people have 
not yet come to know that anything is being done which would 
affect their rights. It may very well be that backward as 
these people are, their rights are probably jeopardised, simply 
because we are doing this in great hurry. From that point of 
view, I would not be surprised if there are many castes which 
happen to be omitted and which have a grievance against 
what we are doing. If we compare the lists that are in vogue, 
for instance, so far as the present situation is concerned, the 
Order in Council prepared in 1930 and 1931 and which formed 
part of the Act of 1935, with the present list, we find that 
there are great many omissions. I have another notification 
by the Public Service Commission. Here in Delhi, you will be 
pleased to find that the list of Scheduled Castes contains no 
less than 64 numbers. As against that, in this schedule, you 
find only 39. What steps have been taken to find out and what 
justification there is to omit the different castes, I do not know. 
I am prepared to wait till the Hon. Minister replies. But, I 
am sure, this is a somewhat drastic reduction. I do not know 
on what basis it has been made. Even if it is slightly late, 
I would request my hon. friend not to be in a hurry, for my 
hon. friend is in a great hurry to get this Bill through. That is 
the only anxiety of the Cabinet Ministers; they are in a hurry 
and want things to be done in five minutes or ten minutes, 
as if they are the only persons who understand things, and 
the other people merely waste their breath and spend the 
time of the House and do not contribute anything specially 
or directly although they represent the people. That sort of 
attitude I do not very much like. I hope that Dr. Ambedkar 
would give us a patient hearing and I would urge on him, 
on behalf of large number of people who have no voice and 
who do not understand their rights or what is going on in 
this House, that there should be no hurry in this matter. I 
should like the consideration of this Bill to be positioned and 
the whole subject taken up and settled once for all. 

As Mr. Sonavane rightly remarked, nowadays, many 
people are leaving their homes and there is a large transfer of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


458 


458 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

population. A lot of people from Madhya Pradesh have come 
and settled more or less permanently in Delhi. If you do not 
include, for instance, the Mahars, and some other Scheduled 
Castes who have come here permanently they will lose their 
rights. All these questions will have to be investigated because 
it is not a temporary thing. This is something which is going 
to be embodied in the Constitution; this is more or less a 
permanent thing which we expect to last for a long number 
of years. In these circumstances, spending a few more days 
on consideration of this Bill is not waste of time; it would 
be time well utilised, Therefore, I submit there should be no 
hurry in passing this measure. By merely passing this Bill, 
we are not going to go ahead much. 

There are many difficulties. I am really doubtful whether 
we would be in a position to hold the elections in November 
or December next, because the delimitation work is going 
to be a great headache. There are great differences between 
what the Election Commissioner is going to do and what the 
Delimitation Committees have decided. You cannot rush such 
things in this House over the shoulders and decisions of the 
Delimitation Committees and have elections anyhow. There 
are many more difficulties which are going to take time. If 
that is going to happen, there should be no undue haste in 
passing this Bill and shutting out representation to people 
who would like to be included in the schedules to this Bill. 
I have been able to table an amendment in the case of two 
castes; but I am sure there are many more who would like to 
be heard and represented. I urge that the whole thing should 
not be done in a piecemeal fashion in which it has been done. 
It would be much better to have a consolidated measure so 
that the kinds of objections that have been raised here will 
not come forward hereafter. I shall move my amendment, and 
I hope the Hon. Minister would accept the same. 

Shri R. Velayudhan (Travancore-Cochin): It was not my 
desire to speak on this Bill because I thought there was no 
scope for any controversy over it. I am very glad that the hon. 
Speaker who presided before gave the ruling that matters that 
have happened outside this House have no proper place in the 
discussion on the Bill now before the House. I wish, however, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


459 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 459 

to confine myself to one or two points to which some hon. 
Members have already referred, because I think this is the 
only proper occasion to ventilate some feelings regarding 
Scheduled Castes as the same was done by others. 

Not only this House, but the whole country is abundantly 
interested in the problems of the Scheduled Castes. Many of 
us who represent these classes in this House would not have 
been here but for the great work done under the leadership 
of the Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi. At the same 
time, I must not omit to mention the great services that have 
been rendered by our great leader Dr. Ambedkar. I think 
Mahatma Gandhi, Mr. Jinnah and Dr. Ambedkar are the three 
personalities who have commanded the greatest admiration... 

Shri Sonavane : And have divided the country. 

Shri R. Velayudhan : ...and respect of the people and 
who have been able to shape the destinies and thoughts of 
people in this century. 

Shri Sonavane : On a point of order, is all this relevant 
to the Bill? 

Shri R. Velayudhan: Yes. 

Mr. Chairman: The hon. Member who raised the point 
was heard uninterrupted. I think he would extend the same 
privilege to other Members also. 

Shri Sonavane : My point of order has not been decided. 

Mr. Chairman: The hon. Member may go on. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: I am not going to enter into 
any controversial point. But, I must say that the Hon. Dr. 
Ambedkar who has brought this Bill as well as the greatest of 
political saints Gandhiji, who have done the greatest service 
to the down-trodden millions, the Scheduled Caste people, 
have got their respective places in the hearts of many in the 
country. Therefore, I think it was not proper on the part of 
some hon. Members to take this opportunity to fling a little 
mud on a leader who has got the greatest following among 
the Scheduled Castes even at this time. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


460 


460 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As regards the origin of this Bill I must say that the 
provision for the representation of Scheduled Castes in the Part 
C States was contemplated long, long ago. Even though the 
Constitution was framed by the greatest jurists and lawyers 
including the Hon. Law Minister, it is a matter of surprise 
that they completely forgot to include representation for the 
Scheduled Castes in the Part C States at the proper stage. 

There was a lot of heart-searching and there were lot 
of constitutional difficulties to overcome with regard to the 
formulation of this Bill which seeks to give representation 
to the Scheduled Castes of the Part C States. There was 
controversy as to whether this Bill was a proper measure or 
not and an hon. Member even spoke yesterday in this House 
sounding a discordant note to the effect that there should 
not be any reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes in 
Part C States. As for myself, I have believed and used to say 
even from my school days that the reservation of seats and 
other kinds of reservations are no panacea to the ills under 
which the Scheduled Castes are labouring. On that point I 
had my own differences with Dr. Ambedkar also. But at the 
same time, when you have given reservation in the Parts A 
and B States, it would be unjust to deny it to those in Part 
C States, — people who are not represented in Parliament or 
in the respective local bodies. 

As Dr. Deshmukh has said, there is a lot of omission and 
there are many mistakes in the formulation of these lists of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, not only in the Bill 
that is before us, but also in the order of the President for 
Parts A and B States. I looked into the proceedings of the 
Constituent Assembly touching on this point and I find that 
it was stated then that the list already fromulated in the 
1935 Act would be accepted when it comes to the question of 
elections under the new Constitution. But when the President’s 
order came out, so many castes included in that Act were 
excluded and we have now only a few of these Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes in almost all the Parts A and B States. I 
feel that this was not done without a purpose. This I think, 
was done deliberately. I mean this omission or reduction in 
the number of names in the list, because if they had included 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


461 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 461 

all those Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes that were 
in the Act of 1935, then the number of reserved seats would 
become very large. In some of the States, for instance in the 
Uttar Pradesh where there are 13 lakhs of Khatiks, they 
have been completely ignored in the President’s list. If they 
are included, I think nearly 40 per cent of the seats in U. P. 
would go to the Scheduled Castes alone. And that is not a 
small thing that they should get this much in a Part A State 
and be able to influence the destinies and the politics of the 
State. Therefore, intentionally and specially and deliberately 
they have been excluded so as to minimise the representation 
of the Scheduled Castes in the State. That is the case not 
only in the U. P. but in some other States also. But in most 
of the South Indian States they have drawn up the list 
according to the 1935 Act. Therefore, the whole list has to be 
re-formulated and the promise given by the late Sardar Patel 
in the Constituent Assembly that the list of 1935 Act would 
be accepted in Parliament for the coming election, must be 
kept, injustice to the departed leader and also to the Father 
of the Nation and also to the millions of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes who have been enjoying certain privileges 
on the basis of caste or community. 

According to the present arrangement alone can do that. 
For instance, I am from Madras, cannot go and contest a 
seat in any other State, say in Bombay. Therefore, there is 
this constitutional difficulty also which has to be removed by 
Parliament as Parliament alone can do that. For instance, I 
belong to the Travancore-Cochin State and so I cannot go to 
Bombay and contest a seat there, and that is a discrimination 
against my community, because non-Scheduled Castes can 
freely contest any seat anywhere in India according to party 
basis or on any other basis. Therefore it is my request not 
only to the Government but also to Parliament to rectify these 
constitutional anomalies as soon as possible. My submission 
is that most of the castes dropped from the former list will 
have to be included and a fair list drawn up so that the 
reservation given to the Scheduled Castes and Tribes may 
be on a just and fair basis. Otherwise let us drop the thing 
altogether and we will fight our battles on equal footing with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


462 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the rest. I have got great hope for the future and I believe 
in a bright future for my community. They are the down- 
trodden and the future is for the under- dog. Therefore, I am 
not hopeless. I am not without hope. Dr. Ambedkar might 
feel pessimistic, but as far as I am concerned, and as far as 
the youths of the Scheduled Castes are concerned, we have 
courage enough to fight on equal footing our battle of liberation. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. Is the hon. Member opposing 
the Bill or supporting it? 

Shri R. Velayudhan: I am not opposing this Bill at all, 
but only requesting that the list drawn up should be changed 
where necessary after verification with actual facts. With this 
request, I support the Bill. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi): I rise to support this 
Bill. The Bill merely seeks to ensure representation of Harijans 
in the House of the People from the Part C States and there 
can be no objection to this from any part of the House. But I 
would like to point out that the reason given by Dr. Ambedkar 
the Mover of this Bill that this was not defined when the 
Representation of the People Bill was before this House does 
not seem to be quite correct. This reservation is after all a 
temporary reservation for a period of ten years and perhaps 
it was thought desirable to leave out some areas without this 
reservation so as to see whether Harijans could be returned 
to the House of the People without reservation. (An Hon. 
member: Very doubtful.) My friend says very doubtful. I am 
not prepared to have a bet with him on that. But I can say 
that so far as Delhi is concerned I would like the Mover of 
the Bill and other friends to realise that Delhi and Ajmer 
were the only two places, even under the old regime, which 
enjoyed joint electorates, whereas throughout the country 
there were separate electorates and reservations of seats on 
that basis. I need hardly remind the hon. Mover and other 
friends who feel like him that Delhi had returned to the 
Central Assembly through joint electorate, the candidate 
belonging to the minority community and that too in the teeth 
of opposition from reactionary elements. Although opposition 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


463 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 463 

forces from all parts of India were concentrated in Delhi to 
oppose the Muslim candidate put up by the Congress, Delhi 
was able to uphold the principle of joint electorates and had 
returned the minority community candidate. I would have 
considered it a privilege if Delhi and other Part C states were 
allowed the opportunity to return Harijan candidates without 
reserving seats for them. That would have given us also an 
idea as to what will happen after ten years when all such 
reservations will go. But my friend the Mover of the Bill, who 
unfortunately has always held a different view, has thought 
it fit to bring this Bill. Now that the Bill has been brought 
forward I support the Bill, for there can be no opposition either 
in principle or in substance so far as this Bill is concerned. 

I would however like to make one or two observations. 
Reference has already been made by more than one Member 
to the speech which was delivered by the Hon. Minister the 
other day. I do not wish to make any comments on that but 
for his information I would like to point out that delhi was 
the headquarters of the All-India Dalitodhar Sabha, even 
before the congress had included the removal of disabilities of 
the depressed classes in its programme in 1921. This Sabha 
was founded by the late Revered Swami Shraddhanand. It 
was he who had moved the resolution in 1920 in Calcutta 
Session of the Congress to include the removal of disabilities 
of Harijans in the Congress programme. Even earlier in 
his address as Chairman of the reception committee of the 
Indian National Congress session held at Amritsar after the 
Jallianwala Bagh tragedy, he had raised the question of the 
disabilities of the Harijans and had persuaded the Congress 
to recognise its importance. It would have been in the fitness 
of things if the Hon. Minister who undoubtedly has worked 
for the uplift of Harijans and holds a very high place as a 
Harijan leader, had recognised this fact. But unfortunately 
his policy and his angle of vision have been quite different. 
If I were to refer to the history of the struggle for the uplift 
of the Harijans in Delhi 

Mr. Chairman : I would invite the attention of the hon. 
Member to the fact that, when the hon. Speaker was in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


464 


464 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Chair, he gave us a ruling that references regarding the speech 
of Dr. Ambedker need not be made here in extenso except by 
way of a few preliminary remarks. Therefore, I would request 
the hon. Member to speak on the merits of the Bill. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: I have practically made no 
reference to that. I was only trying to make out that even 
without the proposed reservation of a seat Delhi would have 
returned a Harijan candidate. My hon. friend has made an 
unfortunate speech at a time when this Bill was coming before 
Parliament but I have purposely avoided making reference to 
it. I only wish to tell him that coming as he does from Bombay 
very probably he does not know the conditions prevailing in 
Delhi. All that he has done is that he has tried to treat the 
entire population of Delhi as Harijans. That is the contribution 
that he has made to the Constitutional advancement of Delhi. 
On that my friend can certainly congratulate himself, as 
that is one way of equalising. Instead of raising the status 
of Harijans he has tried to lower the status of non-Harijans 
and brought them both on the same political level. I want him 
to realise that in 1921 and even earlier in Delhi, the foreign 
Government, of which he is so much enamoured today, was 
using and exploiting the Harijans against the best interests 
of the country. A big all-India depressed classes conference 
was held in September 1921 in the People’s Park to mobilise 
support to welcome the Prince of Wales in those days, when 
the whole country was against it. In spite of this attitude of 
the depressed classes leaders the movement for the uplift of 
Harijans which was started by the late Swami Shraddhanand 
continued as they felt that the removal of disabilities of the 
Harijans was a matter of duty with them and not a question 
of doing any favour to the Harijans. Swami Shraddhanand 
in Delhi was attacked by the supporters of the old British 
Government — in which camp most of the people who were 
following the lead of my hon. friend were then — while he 
was leading a procession to have temples and use of wells 
thrown opened to Harijans. All that is part of history and 
should not be forgotten. Therefore, I would have thought a 
privilege, if at least Delhi had been left out of this Bill and 
given an opportunity to return Harijan without there being any 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


465 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 465 

reservation. That would have also proved that after ten years 
there would be no difficulty in returning Harijan Candidates 
when there will be no reservations. With these words I support 
the Bill. I assure my hon. friend, whether this Bill is there 
or not, that Harijans in Delhi enjoy an equal status. Most of 
the disabilities about which he has been complaining may be 
in existence in his part of the country. So far as these areas 
are concerned there is no political motive behind the social 
work done by social reformers like Swami Shradhanand, and 
late Lala Lajpat Rai and other Aryasamaj leaders. They had 
dedicated their lives to it and this fact should be recognised 
while passing this Bill. 

Shri Dwivedi: ( English translation of the Hindi speech ). 
So far as the principles of this Bill are concerned. I support it 
because for more than once I have made suggestions in this 
House to provide for the representation in Part C States of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. What I wish 
to say is that so far as the administration and development 
of Part C states are concerned, that issue should have been 
brought in this House even before this Bill was moved. But 
not realising the significance of that Bill, the Government 
hurriedly brought forth the present Bill. That goes to show 
that the Government are not so much keen about the 
representation of the people and the introduction of necessary 
reforms for establishing a democratic type of Government, as 
about this Bill. Anyway, I would support the present measure; 
but, all the same. I would like to explain a couple of things 
to the House. In the first place, I would like to say, as the 
previous speaker Shri Deshbandhu Gupta said in regard to 
Delhi, that we would have elected Harijan representatives 
even without this Bill. Then alone could it have been said 
how generously we treated the Harijans. In Vindhya Pradesh 
the Congress and the public workers have been treating the 
Harijans and the caste Hindus alike, and, as Shri Deshbandhu 
Gupta said, in Delhi they had already got opportunities of 
representation. In view of the fact that in Vindhya Pradesh 
untouchability has long been removed from the schools as 
also in the day-to-day intercourse and that Harijans there 
are loved by all alike and get due representation, there is no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


466 


466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

reason why a separate legislation should now be enacted for 
them. Now that such a Bill has come before us, I welcome 
it, but, all the same, I wish to mention a couple of things 
in this connection. Firstly, out of the six seats in the House 
of the People allotted to Vindhya Pradesh, one third have 
been reserved for the untouchables — Scheduled Tribes and 
Scheduled Castes. But unfortunately the people of Vindhya 
Pradesh are so illiterate and backward that only a limited 
number of such persons will be available as may be able to 
discharge their duties and represent their people properly in 
Parliament. Such is not the case with the Harijans alone; 
even Caste Hindus suffer from illiteracy. Shri Thakkar Bapa 
had once remarked that mass literacy should have preceded 
adult franchise. We did never raise any question in regard 
to education. While in Delhi new schools have been opened 
and arrangements made for their education and educational 
facilities extended to rural areas too, but no steps have been 
taken in this regard in Vindhya Pradesh. One of the speakers 
who spoke before me, Shri Sonavane, strongly supported this 
Bill. I also agree with him. May I ask whether in his speech 
he at all referred to the absence of any arrangements for the 
education of the people of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes? Today they are devoid of even the prime necessities 
and comforts of the modern life. In places like Kherua, a poor 
labourer is paid at the rate of only four annas per day, while 
contractors get contracts at nearly double the rate. The better 
course, therefore would have been that the hon. Members, who 
are supporters of the cause of Harijans should have personally 
visited those places, taken some positive steps to improve their 
conditions and approached the Education Department of the 
Government for providing them with educational facilities. As 
a matter of fact they are only keen about their own interests — 
that they should be elected here as their representatives — and 
do not care for the interest of the Harijans. Unless they do 
some material work for the uplift of the Harijans, I would not 
approve of mere idle talk as it can do no good to the country. 
We should promote education among our brethren — the 
people of the Scheduled Castes — whom we consider to be our 
own, so that after being elected to Parliament they may be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


467 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 467 

able to discharge their duties properly; otherwise, there is no 
use in electing them. 

Mr. Chairman: Does the hon. Member propose to take 
a long time? 

Shri Dwivedi : Yes Sir. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two 
of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of 

the Clock. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair ] 

Shri Dwivedi: Sir, you might have heard whatever few 
observations I made before the House. What I particularly 
mean to say is that the Government have classified the States 
into various Parts in the manner in which the entire society 
has been broken up into many categories, viz., Savarna, 
Avarna, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and so on. 

Shri Amolakh Chand (Uttar Pradesh): The Hon. Minister 
is not here. 

Mr. Chairman: He will come soon. 

An Hon. Member: Let somebody deputise for him. 

Mr. Chairman: He will be coming in a minute or so. Let 
the hon. member proceed. 

Shri Dwivedi : What I was going to say is that States 
too have been classified into various parts in the manner 
in which people have been divided into Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes etc. I want to ask the Hon. Minister why 
does he not contemplate to bring a legislation in respect of the 
various Parts referred to in the present Bill in the manner 
in which he has presented the Bill regarding the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 

Shri Sivan Pillay (Travancore-Cochin): On a point of 
order, Sir. The treasury Benches are vacant. 

Mr. Chairman. . . The Hon. Minister is likely to come very soon. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


468 


468 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Dwivedi: I think I can continue. 

Mr. Chairman: Yes. 

Shri Goenka (Madras): Who will listen? 

Shri Dwivedi: I suppose what I say will be noted in 
the proceedings. As for example cerain portions of Vindhya 
Pradesh have been merged into other States as enclaves. 
Rampur, Tehri Garhwal and certain other States have been 
given due protection in the Legislative Assemblies of the 
States concerned as also in Parliament, but no attention has 
so far been paid to those enclaves of Vindhya Pradesh which 
have been referred to in this Bill. 

Shri Goenka: They have been complaining that there is 
no one on the Treasury Benches. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The Treasury Bench is quite unnecessary 
for the House. 

Shri Dwivedi: Since a legislation has already been brought 
forth for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., it 
should have been our first concern not to treat those merged 
enclaves like some packages that can be placed according to 
ones wishes. These enclaves should also get due representation 
in the States Legislative Assemblies. 

Now, Sir, I wish to divert your attention to a very important 
legal issue. In clause 2 of Article 330 of the Constitution, it 
is stated: 

“(2) The number of seats reserved in any State for the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall 
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total 
number of seats allotted to that State in the House of the People 
as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State or Part of the State, as the Case 
may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the 
total population of the State.” 

What I want to say in this connection is that since there 
has been a clear mention regarding the allotment of seats, 
including those of Part C States, in the Act XLIII of 1950 and 
since clause 2 of article 330 of the Constitution clearly states 
that the seats will be allotted in proportion to the population, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


469 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 469 

there seems to be little reason why this legislation should 
be brought forth. Article 341 of the Constitution specifically 
mentions that: 

“(1) The President may, after consultation with the Governor 
or Rajpramukh of a State, by public notification, specify the 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races 
or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State.” 

Similarly a provision has been made in article 342 with 
regard to the Scheduled Caste. I want to know what is the 
necessity of introducing such a measure when the President 
is empowered, vide article 341 and 342, to do so by a public 
Notification. If article 330 provides for any such legislation 
for the Scheduled Castes then that legislation has already 
been enacted and in case it does not provide for one, the 
Constitution does not indicate any necessity of enacting such 
a legislation. Therefore as the hon. Member speaking before 
me said, this Bill is superfluous. That is why I would like 
the Hon. Minister to pay his attention to this legal intricacy 
so that it may not give rise to any legal clash later on in the 
Supreme Court. The Hon. Minister is an eminent legal expert 
and as such is in a better position to study the situation, that 
this legislation does involve legal complexities. I hope he will 
throw light upon the subject and, if necessary, either amend the 
Bill accordingly or withdraw it after its consideration because, 
as Shri Deshbandhu Gupta said and the representative of 
Vindhya Pradesh also supported him there seems to be no such 
condition that the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
will get representation only by enacting such a legislation. 
Representation will be provided to them even in the absence 
of any such measure. It is my duty to draw the attention of 
the House to the legal intricacies involved in the present Bill. 

The second thing is that the Hon. Minister may take 
recourse to article 82 of the Constitution. It states : 

“Notwithstanding anything in clause (1) of article 81, 
Parliament may by law provide for the representation in the 
House of the People of any State specified in Part C of the First 
Scheduled or of any territories comprised within the territory 
of India but not included within any State on a basis or in a 
manner other than that provided in that clause.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


470 


470 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Parliament have the power to enact such legislation under 
the above article and they have already enacted one Clause 2 
of article 330 clearly states that the number of seats allotted 
by the President to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes will be in proportion to the population, Under such 
circumstances, I think there was no necessity of any Bill like 
this one. What is needed now is that this intricacy should 
be removed. As far as I could understand, the Hon. Minister 
has not stated anything to that effect and, therefore, I have 
drawn the attention of the House to this issue. 

Besides this, I would also invite the attention of the Hon. 
Minister to the fact that when the Peoples Representation. 
Bill was moved here, the population of Vindhya Pradesh was 
nearly 33 lacs. Then a population of about two and a half lacs 
to three lacs was included within the bordering territories in 
accordance with the Enclaves Merger Act. At that time six 
seats were agreed upon to be allotted to Vindhya Pradesh. 
Now that the census has taken place. I am told the population 
of Vindhya Pradesh has increased by five lacs. Under these 
circumstances, I believe Vindhya Pradesh has every right 
to claim for more seats to be allotted to it. I will therefore, 
make a couple of important suggestions. Firstly, it should 
be considered, if possible, as to how these two seats should 
be allotted. It would be better that decision in this respect 
may be taken after having consultation with the Delimitation 
Committee for Vindhya Pradesh. In view of the fact that the 
population of Vindhya Pradesh has increased by five lacs, the 
number of seats allotted to it should also be increased by one 
by bringing an amendment to the Peoples Representation Bill. 

With these words I support this Bill. 

{Translation concluded) 

Dr. Parmar (Himachal Pradesh): I rise not only to support 
this Bill but also to congratulate the Government for giving 
representation to the scheduled castes and tribes in Part C 
States. It has been said in this House that this Bill has been 
brought by the Law Minister unnecessarily and for certain 
other extraneous reasons. I must, however, contradict this and 
say that what the Law Minister and the Government of India 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


471 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 471 

have done in bringing forward this Bill is only an 
implementation of the policy which has been laid down in 
the Constitution. 

Whatever my friends from Delhi and Vindhya Pradesh 
feel about this matter — and their feeling is that even without 
this legislation the representation of the scheduled castes and 
tribes would have been assured in the House of the People — I 
welcome this measure for certain definite reasons. I can speak 
with some amount of knowledge as far as Himachal Pradesh 
is concerned and my feeling is that in spite of all that the 
Central Government and the other State Governments have 
done, our machinery is moving so slowly that the schedule 
castes do not feel that enthusiasm that should have come with 
the Constitution. And that is all the more reason why we on 
our part should give a feeling, should give ample proof of our 
idea, of our determination to see that the scheduled castes do 
receive a fair deal in the next elections. What is happening 
in Himachal Pradesh makes it all the more necessary. 

I do not want to take very much time of the House, but 
I will just refer to an incident or two to show how very 
necessary it is to make this provision. It was about four 
months back — on the 4th January 1951 — that the Himachal 
Pradesh Advisory Council recommended to the Government 
to introduce, at least extend, the Untoucability Removal Act 
as it is in force in Uttar Pradesh, to Himachal Pradesh for 
there are a number of disabilities which the scheduled castes 
suffer from in those areas. I was surprised to learn from 
certain quarters in the States Ministry that some of them 
at least consider that there is hardly any necessity for this 
measure, for there is no such problem there as in Madras, 
nor is there such a serious demand from the people that it 
should be extended. If that is the view which is prevailing 
in the Central Government too, I am afraid that much that 
has to be done will remain undone. 

When I had been to my constituency recently, a section 
of the scheduled castes, known as kolis, met me there in the 
interior of Himachal Pradesh in district Sirmur. They narrated 
to me a recent incident in which some members of that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


472 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

scheduled caste of kolis who tried to assemble to consider 
some problems relating to their betterment were pounced 
upon by the landlords, fled hand and foot and locked up for 
about three days. If that is what the scheduled castes are 
to expect under the new Constitution, I am afraid we have 
to give the matter a very serious consideration. We have 
to admit the fact that our machinery has not yet geared 
itself to this new idea : they are still going along the same 
old rut and since not one scheduled caste is represented in 
the whole of the services, this sort of thing is allowed to 
happen. I was told of this incident not only by those people 
but also by people who contacted the police and the local 
congress committee which has taken the matter in hand 
with a view to doing justice to these people. But the Police 
feel that they will not be able to prosecute the offenders 
as no evidence will be forthcoming because those scheduled 
caste people, who are tenants, have been told that if they 
give evidence against the landlords, they will be howhere 
and that their lands will be taken away from them. That 
is why I feel that they should have representation, so that 
one of them at least will have a chance of coming here 
and expressing what they feel about the state of affairs. 
That will have a reaction on people who have not changed 
and who do not see the writing on the wall. I personally 
feel that unless we solve this problem, solve it of course 
in a spirit of friendship, unless this discrimination is done 
away with, the social order will go to pieces. I personally 
feel very strongly on this measure has been brought none 
too early. 

Shri P. Y. Deshpande: (Madhya Pradesh): I wish to 
draw the attention of the Hon. the Law Minister and of this 
House to certain legal aspects which have so far escaped 
notice. This Bill proposes to amend the Representation of the 
People Act of 1950 and it is brought forward with the object of 
providing representation to scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes. My submission is that this has already been provided 
for in the Representation of the People Act, 1950. Section 3 
of the Act, which is sought to be amended, provides for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


473 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 473 

allocation of seats in the House of the People, and states 
in sub-section (2) that “to each State specified in the first 
column of the First Schedule, there shall be allotted the 
number of seats specified in the second column thereof 
opposite to that State”. In the First Schedule the seats 
have been allotted to Part C States also. The question 
arises, what about the scheduled tribes and the scheduled 
castes ? Now, that too has been provided for. In section 
6 of the Act, in sub-section (2), it is stated, “As soon as 
may be after the commencement of this Act, the President 

shall, by order, determine — (a) (b) (c) and (d) the 

number of seats, if any, reserved for the scheduled castes or 
for the scheduled tribes in each constituency.” This section 
authorises the President to determine reservation even for 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. Therefore, it seems 
to me that this Bill is altogether unnecessary. There is 
the Constitutional mandatory provision in article 330. The 
Representation of the People Act, 1930 goes further — in fact 
it implements that Constitutional mandate and provides 
seats for Part C States and also provides for representation 
to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. Therefore, it seems 
to me there is only one matter which is left rather in doubt. 
And that is the specification of the particular castes and the 
particular tribes which would be entitled to be recorded as 
such. That could be done, as it has been done in the case 
of Part A and B States, by order of the President, not only 
under articles 330 and 392 of the Constitution but also 
under section 6 of the Act which is sought to be amended 
by this Bill. Although, I wholeheartedly agree with the 
purpose of this Bill — I do want that the scheduled castes 
and tribes should be represented and all doubts about their 
representation should be removed. There is no question 
about that — it seems to me that when a mere order of the 
President specifying these tribes and castes will do. when 
such an order could have been placed before Parliament 
and as in the case of the Part A and B States, it could 
have been revised, altered or modified by Parliament later 
on, giving enough time to the people of these States to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


474 


474 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

suggest amendments, to omit or add to the castes and tribes 
enumerated in the President’s order — that being so. I do not 
see any propriety for this Bill at all. All that it seeks to do 
could be done by an order of the President specifying the 
castes and tribes and by placing the order of the President 
before the House and then following the same procedure as 
in the case of the Part A and B States. I hope the hon. the 
Law Minister will look into this matter and convince us that 
the Bill is really necessary. 

Capt. A. P. Singh: ( English translation of the Hindi 
speech) Sir, I am not opposed to the object of the Bill, namely, 
making a provision for representation of the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. As for the many points that have 
been raised here, I will only say that I agree with the views 
of hon. Dr. Ambedkar. He himself says that Articles 341 
and 342 apply in relation to Part A and Part B States only 
and that Articles 330 and 332 are also for Part A and Part 
B States. Then again, he has said that there is no specific 
provision of affording representation to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes of Part C States. He admits this thing 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons. Now, he finds that 
because it is necessary to reserve seats for these people, they 
must therefore be given representation by enacting legislation 
in the Parliament, that is to say he wants special powers for 
the Parliament to do it. That is the object for which he has 
brought this Bill before the House. 

In this connection, my submission is that he himself was 
a Member of the Constituent Assembly when the Constitution 
was being framed. If we wish to find out the reasons why no 
provision was made for the Part C States, we must examine 
the spirit of the Constitution as to why the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes of Part C States were not given any 
representation. There must be some definite reasons for that. 
As far as I could make out, the entire population of Part C 
States were treated as Harijans for the reason that they have 
all been regarded as backward people. This right or reservation 
of seats is given to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


475 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 475 

only because they are a backward class and since the people of 
those States have been treated as backward class, no provision 
has therefore been made to give separate representation to 
them. So, when there is no such provision, should we agree 
that they should not be given any rights and that there should 
be no separate representation for the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes? My submission is that there is another 
section in the Constitution which makes such a provision and 
they should be given these rights under that article which, 
I believe, is meant for Part ‘C’ States. They are Articles 239 
and 240. Sir, I would like to draw your attention to Article 
240, according to which these people can be given this right. 
Article 239 deals with special powers and Article 240 says : 

“(1) Parliament may by law create or continue for any State specified 
in Part C of the First Schedule and administered through a Chief 
Commissioner or Lieutenant-Governor — 

(a) a body, whether nominated, elected or partly nominated and 
partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the State; 
or 

(b) a Council of Advisers or Ministers, or both with such 
constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may 
be specified in the law. 

(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed 
to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of 
article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which 
amends or has the effect of amending the Constitution.” 

That is to say, according to the Constitution, we can make 
change, if necessary, under this article. But in that case one 
thing is certain and it is that we will have to give more rights 
to the people in Part C States. It would have been better had 
hon. Dr. Ambedkar brought forward a clear measure, just as 
he has declared in the case of Part B States that Part VI with 
the undermentioned amendment will apply to them, to the 
effect that the Part VI with the following modifications will 
apply in relation to Part C States as well. I wish to draw the 
attention of the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar to that. It is as follows : 

“The provisions of Part VI shall apply in relation to the 
States specified in Part B of the First Schedule as they apply 
in relation to the States specified in Part A of that Schedule 
subject to the following modifications and omissions, namely:” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


476 


476 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Similarly he could have provided the following: 

“The provisions of Part VI shall apply in relation to the 
States specified in Part C of the First Schedule as they apply 
in relation to the States specified in Part A of that Scheduled 
subject to the following modifications and omissions, namely:” 

If a Bill having this object and purport and which could also 
provide that all provisions of Part VI would be applicable, had 
been brought, it could automatically have solved this problem 
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. But he has chosen 
a different path and wants to enter through the backdoor. He 
does not take the simpler and a more direct course, which every 
hon. Minister has the option to adopt and which he must do. 
Dr. Ambedkar might probably say that it is the concern of the 
Ministry of States and not his. The Hon. Minister on several 
occasions, during my talks with him, expressed this view. But 
I take the Government as a whole, may he be Dr. Ambedkar 
or Shri Ayyangar or the Minister of Home Affairs. All that 
I want to submit is that such a Bill would have been much 
better. But in failing to do so he has put the cart before the 
horse with the result that people are complaining all round. 
He should now postpone this Bill and bring forward a Bill 
which would give all powers enjoyed by Part A States to Part 
C States. Then this object would automatically be fulfilled. 
At present he is not working according to the Constitution 
because, by this Bill, he is giving rights only to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. But we all are Harijans and so 
before taking this step, all other people must be made distinct 
from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, that is to say 
they should first be given more rights as is the case of Part 
A and Part B States. He should first do this and then only 
bring such a measure, otherwise, in my opinion, it is of no use. 

It would take a long time to deal with its details and to 
describe its reasons. Shri Ayyangar has also stated in his 
speech that so far as Himachal Pradesh and Vindhya Pradesh 
are concerned, a Bill will be soon coming for them. It is being 
framed and we are on the Standing Committee. The Committee 
has considered it and although it is very unsatisfactory at this 
time but we hope it will be improved upon to the satisfaction 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


477 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 477 

of the people. Now, it is said that Delhi should also be allotted 
one seat. As for Delhi, I submit that there should be no hitch 
to give this right to it. It is said that since it is the capital 
of the country, it cannot be given this right. Sir, I would 
submit that Calcutta too had a Lieutenant-Governor when it 
was the capital of India but the people of Calcutta enjoyed 
full rights. Then again, taking the case of Simla, it used to 
be the capital of India for some period of the year and being 
situated in Punjab, the Lieutenant-Governor also used to live 
there, but there had never been any difficulties about the two 
Governments functioning from the same place. Therefore, I 
am at a loss to comprehend the argument put forward that 
the people of Delhi should not be given this right on account 
of its being the capital of the country. I for one, feel that the 
people of Delhi should be given more rights because they are 
living in the capital itself. Shri Ramchandra had said : Sab 
te priya mohi yahan ke basi, mum dhamda puri Sukhrasi. 
(I love most the people of my own place which is the land 
of wealth and prosperity). He had said it for the people of 
Ayodhya. So when there is so much of hesitation in giving 
rights to the people of Delhi, I am afraid, other people will 
have to face even more difficulties. Therefore, in my opinion, 
it is most desirable to keep the people of Delhi contented 
as it is the capital of the country and it will not be wise to 
dissatisfy them in any way. It would have been more proper 
had we arranged to hold a plebiscite of the people of the area 
which we are administering. 

Mr. Chairman: May I draw the attention of the hon. 
Member to the fact that we are not discussing the problem of 
Delhi but we are discussing the Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Bill ? 

Capt. A. P. Singh : Since it is being enforced in Delhi also, 
I thought I might refer that Delhi should also be given these 
rights which we are going to have. I meant only that. Anyway, 
if it is so, I will not discuss that. My submission is only as 
to why smaller States like Manipur and Tripura should be 
refused these reforms of introducing responsible Governments. 
Aundh is one of the smallest states but it was the first state 
to have a responsible Government. Therefore I see no reason 
why other small States like Manipur and Tripura be deprived 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


478 


478 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of a responsible Government and why a responsible type of 
administration be not established there. There are so many 
other States where a responsible administration does not exist 
but I have no time to speak about them. 

The next point which I would like to submit is with regard 
to the population of Harijans in Vindhya Pradesh. How 
much is that? No figures have been given about Scheduled 
Tribes. But it seems that the population of both comes to 
about, nine lakhs, that is, a little less than one-fourth of 
the total population. But they are being given one-third of 
the total seats allotted, that is to say, two out of six seats 
are being given to them while their population is less than 
even one-forth. If Hon. Dr. Ambedkar deems it proper, and 
it is my personal request to him, he should allot one more 
seat to Vindhya Pradesh so that the population ratio may be 
adjusted to a greater extent. Although I have not submitted 
any amendment to that effect, but it is my request to him 
and it would be better if he agrees to do it. I submit to hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar that if he thinks it proper he should withhold 
the present Bill and bring another Bill to that effect. If he is 
agreeable to do it, I can submit my own Bill to him which I 
have already drafted in a comprehensive manner. It will be a 
small Bill saying that more rights should be given to Part ‘C’ 
states and that responsible Government should be set up 
there. If it is done, I believe the problem will automatically 
be solved. That is all I have to say. 

C Translation concluded) 

Mr. Chairman : I think this has been sufficiently discussed. 
I therefore, propose to call hon. Dr. Ambedkar to speak. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yesterday when Mr. Kapoor raised a 
constitutional question that in view of certain articles in the 
Constitution, this Bill was unnecessary and that I had brought 
this Bill for some other motive, I myself did not believe that 
Mr. Kapoor believed in his argument. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): You never believe 
in a fact. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It seems to me that his argument has 
caught on and it has been repeated by several Members today 
on the floor of this House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


479 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 479 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair \ 

It is therefore incumbent on me to repel the suggestion 
which has been made in the course of this debate that this 
Bill is uncalled for. hon. Members have referred to article 
330 on which they have built their main argument. It is 
quite true that article 330 refers to the reservation for the 
scheduled castes in the House of the People. What we are 
considering in this Bill is the reservation of seats in the 
House of the People for the scheduled castes in certain Part 
C States. As I said, it is therefore relevant that this article 
should be referred to. It seems to me that hon. Members who 
have relied upon article 330 seem to have altogether forgotten 
that the basis of representation of the scheduled castes must 
be the enumeration or the definition of the scheduled castes. 
Unless and until we knew what the scheduled castes are and 
what their total population is, it is absolutely impossible for 
anybody to make any provisions for the practical and factual 
representation of the Scheduled Castes. The question, therefore, 
is this : Is there any provision whereby it is possible for any 
authority except Parliament to make a list of the scheduled 
castes so that we might know what they are, and also their 
population? For that purpose, it is necessary to refer to article 
341. This is what article 341 says : 

“(1) The President may, after consultation with the Governor 
or Rajpramukh of a state, by public notification, specify the castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes 
which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to 
be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State.” 

A similar provision is contained in article 342 which relates 
to scheduled tribes. There is a proviso contained in sub-clause 
(2) of article 341 and sub-clause (2) of article 342 which 
prevents the President, after having once made the order, 
from modifying it. The power to modify the order has been 
expressly reserved to Parliament. It is necessary to read very 
carefully the words of article 341 and article 342. No doubt, 
the President is empowered to issue a notification; but, there 
is a very important condition attached to his power to issue a 
notification. That condition is that he can issue it only after 
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State. Any 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>27-11-2013 


480 


480 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

one who reads the Constitution will know that by making 
reference to a Governor or Rajpramukh, it is quite clear 
that what is meant is states in Part A or States in Part B. 
Because, it is only in States in Part A or Part B that you find 
the institution of a Governor or Rajpramukh. If article 341 
also stated in specific terms that the President can issue such 
a notification in consultation with the Chief Commissioner, 
undoubtedly, the President could have been presumed to have 
been empowered by the Constitution under articles 341 and 
342 to issue a notification with regard to States in Part C 
also. Unfortunately, or fortunately, such a clause was not put 
in article 341. 

My. hon. Friend who spoke last asked that I must explain 
as to why the Constitution did not make any provision giving 
the President the power to issue a notification with regard to 
the scheduled castes in Part C States. I think those Members, 
who took part in the discussion of the various articles when 
the matter was before the Constitutent Assembly, will 
recall that this question was a matter of great controversy. 
Everybody felt that politics might enter into this field, that 
the President might be advised for political reasons to omit 
a certain community, that the President might be advised to 
add a certain community because of its political affiliation. 
Consequently, we had to draft this article with the greatest 
care and attention. It was also insisted that once the President 
had made the order, he should not have the power to alter it, 
because, there again, politics might enter. This is evident from 
the fact that in both the articles clause (2) was introduced, 
because it was felt that once the order was made, if any change 
was demanded, that change ought to be made in the open 
House, by the House, with the knowledge of the scheduled 
caste Members of Parliament. That was the reason why these 
articles were drafted with such meticulous care. 

My point, however, was this. The argument of my hon. 
friends who said that this Bill was unnecessary is based upon 
a complete misunderstanding and misreading of article 341. 
As I stated in my opening remarks, it is absolutely impossible 
to devise any kind of scheme of reservation for the scheduled 
castes unless two things are known : who the scheduled castes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


481 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 481 

are and what their population is. As I said, if this matter 
was covered by article 341, then it would have been quite 
unnecessary to come to this House for making provision for 
representation of scheduled castes in Part C States. Because, 
then the President would have the same power as he has with 
regard to the scheduled castes in Part A and Part B states to 
determine the Scheduled Castes in Part C States and their 
population so that the Election Commissioner could easily 
proceed to delimit the constituencies. Therefore, my submission 
is that there is no substance in this argument that this Bill 
from a constitutional point of view is unnecessary. 

My hon. Friend Mr. Deshpande has challenged me on 
another ground that this matter is already covered in the 
former Act called the Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
He has referred to section 6 of that Act where it is stated that 
the President may determine among other things, “the number 
of seats, if any reserved for the scheduled castes or for the 
scheduled tribes in each constituency ”. Here again, he seems 
to be suffering from one fallacy. This Act has reference to the 
order issued by the President with regard to the scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes in Part A and Part B States. This 
section 6 could have no reference to or relevance to a case 
where the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes have not 
been notified by the President. It is only when the President 
can notify that this section can be attracted. What we are 
doing now is to enact a list of the scheduled castes and the 
scheduled tribes in the various Part C States where we propose 
to reserve seats for them. Therefore, my submission is that 
his argument too is based on a complete misunderstanding 
of the provisions of that particular Act. 

There is, I find, no disagreement on the question that 
provision should be made for representation of the scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes in Part C States. So far, so 
good. Two Members from Vindhya Pradesh have said that 
by taking two seats, one for the scheduled castes and one 
for the scheduled tribes, the general representation has been 
cut into too much. Prima facie, I am not prepared to accept 
that argument. That argument seems to be founded on the 
supposition that all the six seats were to ensure to the benefit 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


482 


482 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the caste Hindus. I am not prepared to accept that 
argument. Those seats have been given to Vindhya Pradesh 
not only for the caste Hindus but for all other people who 
are resident in those States. They have appealed to me to 
see if the quota of seats allotted to Vindhya Pradesh in the 
House of the People may not be increased by one. You know 
that in the Constitution a definite maximum limit has been 
placed for the House of the People and I believe it is about 
500. It is quite obvious that I could not increase the quota 
of representation of Vindhya Pradesh if the thing is going to 
offend against that maximum which would be quite impossible 
and unconstitutional. It is quite possible that other Part C 
States may also claim an enlargement of their quota because 
they may also claim the same sort of treatment. It is therefore 
difficult for me to commit to any such proposal as has been 
put before me. All that I can say is that I will look into the 
matter and see if something can be done. Beyond that I do 
not propose to say anything. 

Then, my friend from Vindhya Pradesh drew my attention 
to article 240. His argument was that instead of taking action 
under article 240 I was proceeding under some other articles 
of the Constitution. Well, I know he will agree that the articles 
under which I am proceeding are perfectly legitimate. The 
reason why he wants me to act under article 240 he knows 
very well and I do not wish to expose the thing more than is 
necessary. All that I need tell him is this, that it is unnecessary 
for me to refer to article 240 because my problem is very 
different. My problem is to provide for the representation of 
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in Part C States in 
the House of the People. My present problem is not to find 
representation for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes 
in any local assembly or a Parliament that may be devised 
hereafter. When the Government of India will take action to 
satisfy my friend for the purpose of establishing some local 
legislature, then undoubtedly article 240 will be resorted 
to and provision will be made for the representation of the 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes therein also. But for 
the moment, it is not necessary for me to resort to article 240. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


483 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 483 

Then, much criticism has been levelled against the list 
of the scheduled castes. Well, I do not know how one can 
satisfactorily deal with a matter of that sort, because anybody 
in the Government of India dealing with a matter of this sort 
as to what community is a scheduled caste community and 
what community is not a scheduled caste community, must 
necessarily depend upon the local information furnished to 
the Government of India by their officers and other agencies 
who are conversant with the matter. It is quite possible that 
the information supplied to the Government of India by their 
agency differs from the information which hon. Members have. 
Government, therefore, has to come to its choice necessarily 
relying on the information of its own officers. If any hon. 
Member can prove to my satisfaction that in the list that we 
have prepared, there has been any grave error or omission. I 
shall certainly consider the question. My friend Dr. Deshmukh 
of course, is very discontented, I think with the Government 
and thinks that the Government is always rushing through 
matters. I do not know how long he would like each Bill to 
take — probably a fortnight — and I do not know whether he 
would be satisfied even with that time. He expatiated a great 
deal upon the inadequacy and the errors of the list. My friend 
Dr. Deshmukh will permit me to say that as a member of the 
Round Table Conference, I had a great deal to do with the 
preparation of these tables. I had a great deal to do with it. 
We had before us a very grave problem. That problem was 
that in the census reports, right from 1910, if he will refer to 
them he will see, that certain classes were shown separately 
and they were called “depressed classes”. When the question 
came at the Round Table Conference for giving representation 
to these classes, the question arose what was meant by the 
“depressed classes”. There were a large number of people who 
were economically and educationally backward but who in 
the technical sense of the word were not untouchables. There 
were certain communities like the mangarudis for instance, 
who were criminal tribes put were not untouchables in the 
technical sense of the word; they were practically outside the 
pale of society and yet were not untouchables. The question 
was then considered at great length — Are we going to give 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


484 


484 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

representation to the whole body of people who were in the 
census designated as “depressed classes”, which would have 
meant a very large division in the share of representation 
of the general Hindu population, or whether we were going 
to cut that class into something more precise, more definite, 
something which represented what were known as classes 
with disabilities imposed upon them and not those which 
were merely backward? Therefore, a decision was taken 
that the representation should be given only to what, were 
really untouchables and to no others. Now, some people did 
not like the word “untouchables”. They said, “We do not 
want that word ‘untouchables’.” So we had a term known as 
the “excluded classes”. That the Hindus did not like. They 
said: “These are our blood brothers and you must not have 
a terminology which would indicate that they are outside 
us.” And so we devised this phrase — scheduled castes — and 
I might say that to some extent I was responsible for it. I 
said, if you do not want the word untouchables, and if you 
do not want the term excluded classes, then have this term 
of scheduled castes. After all, they will have to be scheduled. 
Consequently the enumeration which is contained in the 1935 
Act Order in Council for scheduled castes has been drafted 
with the greatest care and attention and I have no doubt in 
my mind that there is no community which is omitted from 
it which as a matter of fact ought to have been included, 
nor added any which ought not to have been added. It is as 
exact a classification as one could make. I may tell my friend 
Dr. Deshmukh that while sitting here I was myself making 
some mathematical calculations in order to find out what 
variations there were from the list contained in the Order in 
Council following the Government of India Act, 1935 and the 
list produced or rather notified by the President. Now I find 
that so far as these lists are concerned, this is the position. 
Unfortunately here it is done in the alphabetical order while 
there it was shown presidency-wise. Well, in Assam there are 
15 communities listed in the order issued by the President. I 
do not find that any single community which was included in 
the Order in Council has been omitted. All of them are there. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


485 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 485 

You take Bihar. There again there are really 14 communities 
listed in the Order in Council under the Government of India 
Act, 1935 and here the number of communities that have 
been listed as scheduled is 21. What they have done is this. 
In Bihar certain communities were untouchables throughout 
the province but certain other communities were untouchables 
in parts of districts and not in others. Consequently they 
were listed separately. Probably the Home Department in 
making the notification thought that it was much better not 
to make this territorial distinction but to treat all of them as 
untouchables irrespective of the territorial distinction. 

Take Bombay. There is no change at all. The old Order 
in Council mentions 34 communities. In this notification the 
communities listed are 36, which is two more. 

I do not think it is necessary for me to go over the whole 
list. So far as Part A States are concerned I do not think 
there is any ground for complaint. With regard to Part B 
States it is not possible for me to give any such assurance, 
for the simple reason that no such lists were prepared under 
the Act of 1935 for Part B States. Consequently the lists are 
very new and it is possible that some errors might have crept 
in. I quite see that an important community like the Ballia 
whom I know, is not to be found in the list. So with regard 
to Part B States I have no basis for comparison. So far as 
Part A States are concerned the list is a fair list. 

My friend referred to Delhi and produced some paper 
issued by the Union Public Service Commission. It is quite 
true that a larger number is mentioned in the list but I have 
checked it up, and I am prepared to say that compared to the 
list we have included in this Bill, I think you might as well 
say that, about 90 per cent, are included in our list. Some of 
them seem to me to be duplicate names, the same community 
called by two different names. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Only 39 out of 64. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Some people are called Ramdasias as 
also Ravidasias. Some others are called Dhanuk and Dhanu. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


486 


486 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is very difficult to know whether they are two communities 
or one community with two different names. I am prepared 
to rectify this by omitting the word “or” and numbering them 
as though they were separate communities. 

Then an hon. Member wanted figures. But I may tell 
him that we have been very meticulous in seeing that the 
proportion is very accurate. 

I do not think there is any point made in the course of 
the debate which I have not dealt with. With these words I 
commend the motion. 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu : I would like to have a clarification 
from the Hon. Minister. Scheduled castes and tribes are in 
a way defined by articles 341 and 342, but only in respect 
to Part A and Part B States and there is no corresponding 
provision in the Constitution of scheduled castes and tribes in 
Part C States. It is a matter of doubt whether Parliament can 
by law define a term used in the Constitution. (Dr. Ambedkar: 
of course.) Is it not necessary that action should be taken by 
the President under article 392? 

Mr. Speaker: The hon. Member is agitating the same 
point. If he coolly considers the reply of the Hon. Law Minister 
I think he will find the answer. 

The question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 — (Insertion of new section 3A etc.) 

Shri J, R. Kapoor: I beg to move : 

In clause 2, for the proposed section 3A of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950, substitute: 

“ 3A. for the purposes of reserving seats in the House of the 
People under the Constitution of India, the castes specified in the 
Sixth Schedule shall be the scheduled castes in relation to the 
Part C State under which they are so specified, and the tribes 
specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be the scheduled tribes in 
relation to the Part C State under which they are so specified.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


487 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 487 

The implication of my amendment is that sub-clause 
(1) of the proposed new section 3A goes off. So far as sub- 
clause (2) of the new section is concerned for the words “for 
the purposes of this Act” we shall have the words “for the 
purposes of reserving seats in the House of the People under 
the Constitution of India” 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I say that this amendment is entirely 
outside the scope of the Bill? What we are doing is we are 
reserving seats in some of the Part C States. Only so far as 
those States are concerned we are preparing the list. The 
amendment is that there shall be a list of scheduled castes 
for all Part C States. That is a separate question. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I do not know how my hon. friend could 
put this interpretation on my amendment. I have nowhere 
stated in the amendment that there must necessarily be a 
schedule in relation to all Part C States. I am referring only 
to the Sixth and Seventh Schedules which are already given in 
the Bill itself. I nowhere seek to add a new Schedule or even 
to amend the two Schedules. They shall remain intact unless 
of course they are amended by any other amendment which 
may be moved and accepted by the House. All that I suggest 
in my amendment is that sub-clause (1) of the proposed section 
3A shall be omitted and so far as sub-clause (2) is concerned 
for the words “for the purposes of this Act” we shall have 
the words “for the purposes of reserving seats in the House 
of the People under the Constitution of India.” Why I am 
moving the amendment is that I am definitely of the view as 
I submitted yesterday and reaffirm today, that article 330 of 
the Constitution specifically provides that in the House of the 
People seats shall be reserved for every State. And the word 
“state” as defined in article 1 of the Constitution includes all 
States whether they are in Part A or Part B or Part C. The 
Hon. Law Minister in his reply to the debate on the Bill a 
few minutes ago said that while he did admit that article 330 
specifically provided for reservation of seats his only difficulty 
was that article 330 could not be complied with until there 
was a specific list of scheduled castes for Part C States and 
since there was no such list and since none could be made 
according to the provisions of article 341, it was necessary to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


488 


488 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have a separate list of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. 
To that I would repeat my submission made yesterday that 
article 341 should have been so amended and adapted by 
the President as to remove this difficulty. This he could have 
done under article 392. But that argument did not appeal 
to my Hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar. I am not reiterating that 
argument today, but even assuming that it is necessary for 
Parliament to pass a list specifying the scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes, my original contention does remain, that it 
is not necessary to provide again in this legislation for the 
reservation of seats in the House of the People for scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes residing in Part C States. This 
provision is already specifically included in article 330 of the 
Constitution. Therefore, sub-clause (1) of the proposed section 
3A is absolutely redundant. 

There is another reason why we should not have this 
sub-clause (1) of section 3A. It not only specifically provides — 
unnecessarily — for the reservation of seats but it goes beyond 
that and fixes the number of scheduled castes representatives 
in the House of the People on behalf of the scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes of Part C States. This, I submit, is against 
the Constitution itself because under clause (2) of article 330 
a definite formula has been given as to in what proportion 
there shall be reserved seats in the House of the People in 
relation to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in Part C 
States — they shall be in proportion to their numbers. Here 
the number is absolutely ignored and theoretically speaking 
an arbitrary number of seats is fixed, one here and one 
there. May be today we know definitely the specific number 
of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes living in a particular 
Part C State of Vindhya Pradesh, Delhi and so on, but we 
do not know what the situation may be five years hence. 
Only this morning my hon. friend, Shri Deshbandhu Gupta 
brought to our notice that quite a large number of persons 
from different parts of the country, belonging to scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes, have come over to Delhi and, 
for aught we know, during the next five years there might 
be material change in the figures of scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes in the various Part C States mentioned in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


489 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 489 

the Bill. The difficulty then will be that we shall have to 
amend this legislation. Therefore, since a specific formula is 
already provided in the Constitution itself, it is not open to 
this Parliament to change that formula. It is for the Election 
Commissioner to find out at any particular time as to how 
many reserved seats there shall be in the House of the People 
in relation to any particular State in Part A, B or C. Therefore, 
I submit that sub-clause (1) of the proposed section 3A is 
against the Constitution and is also unnecessary. 

Mr. Speaker: Amendment moved : 

In clause 2, for the proposed section 3A of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950, substitute: 

“ 3A. For the purposes of reserving seats in the House of 
the People under the Constitution of India, the castes specified 
in the Sixth schedule shall be the scheduled castes in relation 
to the Part C State under which they are so specified, and the 
tribes specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be the scheduled 
tribes in relation to the Part C State under which they are so 
specified. ” 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): Does my hon. Friend suggest that without 
a Parliamentary enactment the Election Commissioner can 
give a specific number of seats to any specific State? It will 
have to be done by Parliament. 

Mr. Speaker: The point, as I have been able to understand, 
is that the necessary directive having already been given by 
article 330 that representation shall be in proportion to the 
population, the Election Commissioner has already got the 
direction and it is for him to work it out, not for this House 
to lay down exactly what number of seats they will give to 
each State 

Shri Santhanam: Sir, if I understand, it correctly, 
the directive is to Parliament and not to the Election 
Commissioner. Because the actual number of seats have to be 
laid down by Parliament — the Election Commissioner cannot 
fix the numbers. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The specific article is 82 which deals 
with the representation in the House of the People. It says : 

“Notwithstanding anything in clause (1) of article 31, Parliament may 
by law provide for the representation in the House of the People of any 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


490 


490 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

State specified in Part C of the First schedule or of any territories 
comprised within the territory of India but not included within 
any State on a basis or in a manner other than that provided 
in that clause.” 

We knew that the same principle could not be applied to 
Part C States and therefore a special article had been made. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : May I submit that article 82 has no 
relation to article 341? Article 82 says that so far as Part C 
States are concerned, the basis of representation in the 
House of the People, as specifically mentioned in article 81 in 
relation to Part A and Part B states, may be varied. Under 
article 81 the basis of representation is one representative for 
every five to 7 1/2 lakh persons. Article 81 does not refer to 
reservation of seats at all. Under the cover of article 82 this 
Parliament cannot take to itself the right of overriding the 
specific provision of article 330. As you rightly pointed out, Sir, 
under article 330 the direction has already been specifically 
given obviously to the Election Commissioner to do a little 
arithmetical calculation. It is merely a little arithmetical 
calculation and for that the Constitution-makers did not think 
that Parliament should be troubled. It is a little arithmetical 
calculation which can be done by the Election Commissioner 
and it is not open to the Parliament to make even a slight 
variation this way or that way. 

Shri Santhanam : If you will kindly refer to article 81 
(2) and (3) you will find, Sir, that all adjustments have to 
be made by Parliament by law. Upon the completion of each 
census, the representation of the several constituencies shall 
be decided by Parliament by law. The Election Commissioner 
cannot by notification allocate seats in Parliament. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I readily agree with the proposition 
just now enunciated by my hon. friend Mr. Santhanam and 
even this time we have already passed one Representation 
of the People Bill. But the point we are now considering is 
not as to how many persons from a particular State shall be 
elected to the House of the People. We have already done that 
and we are not going to amend it, and even if we want to, 
we have to have a separate amending Bill for that. But all 
that we are considering now is this: Out of the total number 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


491 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 491 

of seats which we have already fixed for representatives from 
Part C States, how many shall be reserved for the scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes ? That is the proposition that 
we are considering at present and not the bigger and the 
general proposition of the number of seats to be given to a 
particular State. The limited question is how many seats are 
to be reserved for the scheduled tribes and scheduled castes, 
and for that my submission is that we have not got to pass 
any legislation. The directive is given under article 330 (2) 
and it is only the Election Commissioner’s business to make 
a little mathematical calculation from time to time (a) to 
find out how many scheduled castes and tribes there are and 
(b) on the basis of their number, to determine how many out 
of the total seats shall be reserved for them. For this, it is not 
only unnecessary but it is against the specific provisions of the 
Constitution to have the proposed section 3A. Therefore, it must 
be deleted. Since this is obviously against the Constitution, I 
have raised this question. I request that the House may not 
be pleased to accept sub-clause (1) of the proposed Section 3A 
but it may be pleased to accept only sub-clause (2) and that 
too in the form in which my amendment stands. 

One word more and I have done. If it be the contention of 
the Hon. Minister that it is not provided in the Constitution 
that seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for 
Part C states, then I am afraid we cannot make any such 
provision here, because the House of the People must be 
constituted strictly in accordance with the specific provisions 
of the Constitution. I take my stand on the plea that it is 
already provided for in the Constitution, but if the contention 
of the Hon. Minister is otherwise, then it is a very risky 
one and in that event we must hold that it is not open to 
Parliament to say anything with regard to the composition or 
constitution of the House of the People. It may be a lacuna in 
the Constitution, or it may have been left over by oversight 
or deliberately. But if the contention of the Hon. Minister be 
that there is no provision in the Constitution itself providing 
for the reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes, then we cannot help it. My own view is that provision 
already exists. Therefore, in order that he may not run such 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


492 


492 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a risk and in order that this question may not crop up before 
the Supreme Court and be contested there, I would submit 
that the House should accept my contention and be content 
with accepting my amendment. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: While making 
my submission in the morning, I had not gone into minute 
details, but after hearing so many speeches on the same point, 
I hope you might have seen that the position taken by the 
hon. Minister is not a sound one as far as the specification 
of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes list is concerned, 
because this list could be prepared only by the President. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No. I definitely deny that. He has no 
power to do that. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : Under article 341 
it is the President who is authorised to prepare a list of these 
scheduled tribes and castes in consultation with the Governor 
or Rajpramukh concerned and that list has been prepared by 
the President and been published in the Gazette in respect 
of Part A and Part B States. But there is no list for Part C 
States. If there is no provision under which the President 
could prepare a list for Part C states, then I do not think 
that there is any other provision under which that list could 
be prepared by this House. 

Mr. Speaker: Is the hon. Member prepared to go to the 
logical length that because no powers are specifically provided 
for Parliament preparing a list of scheduled castes, therefore 
in States other than Part A and part B there can be no 
recognition of scheduled castes? Is that his position? 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: Yes. In article 330 
general direction has been given and it is that according to 
the population of the scheduled castes and tribes the seats 
shall be allotted and after the allotment of seats and the 
delimitation of constituencies by the Election Commissioner... 

Mr. Speaker: Let us leave aside the delimitation at this 
stage. Let us try to determine what the scheduled castes are. 
The other point will be the one raised by Mr. Kapoor. So, let 
us be clear on that point first. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


493 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 493 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: My submission is 
that there is no such provision except the one contained in 
article 341 where the specification of scheduled tribes and 
castes are mentioned in the Constitution. In the list prepared 
by the President in consultation with the Rajpramukh or the 
Governor concerned had been brought before Parliament for 
amendment saying that such and such castes should be added in 
the list for Part C States that would have been understandable ; 
otherwise, there is no authority vested in Parliament to have 
an independent Bill for providing lists of these castes for 
Part C States. This is my contention, unless of course my 
hon. friend can point out any provision in the Constitution 
under which he thinks that this House is authorised to have 
an independent list of castes and tribes on the basis of which 
these seats could be allotted to Part C States. 

4-00 p .m. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will deal first with Mr. Kapoor’s point — 
his amendment. He has all the time been relying on article 
330 where provision for scheduled caste representation is 
made. His contention — if I have understood him correctly — is 
that that provision is sufficient not only for Part A and Part 
B, but also for Part C States. That is the only difference 
between us. My point is that a separate provision such as 
the one contained in the Bill is necessary : his contention is 
that it is unnecessary, because it is covered by article 330. 
I believe I have represented him correctly. That is the point . 

The submission that I propose to make in favour of the 
course that I am following by bringing forth this Bill is just 
this. There is a definition of scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes in article 366 of the Constitution. Clause (24) of article 
366 reads thus: 

“ ‘Scheduled Castes’ means such castes, races or tribes or parts 
of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed 
under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this 
constitution.” 

Now. it may be open to contention that the “Scheduled 
Castes” referred to in article 330 are “Scheduled Castes” as 
defined in clause (24) of article 366. Scheduled Castes in Part 
C States cannot be said to be Scheduled Castes within the 
meaning of that clause. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


494 


494 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : That is what my amendment seeks 
to provide for. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am coming to that. Therefore, it may 
be open to contention that article 330, which directs that 
representation shall be on the basis of population may not apply 
to Scheduled Castes which do not fall within the definition 
in clause (24) of article 366. That being so, it is necessary 
to make a separate provision for that. That is my reply to 
Mr. Kapoor’s point. 

With regard to the point raised by Pandit Munishwar Datt 
Upadhyay, article 82 is worded in the widest sense. It says: 

“Notwithstanding anything in clause (1) of article 81, 

Parliament may by law provide for the representation in the 

House of the People of any State specified in Part C of the First 

Schedule ”. 

My submission is this: That this power is so wide that in 
making provision for the representation in the House of the 
People of Part C States it is certainly open to Parliament 
to say that so many seats shall be allotted to the scheduled 
castes and so many seats shall be general seats. I cannot 
understand what more he wants by way of specific provision. 
If in making provision for the representation in the House of 
the People of any Part C State Parliament decides that there 
shall be a certain reservation for scheduled castes, then my 
submission is that it carries with it an implied power also to 
set out who are the scheduled castes. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: May I say one word? 

Mr. Speaker : By way of reply? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I do not know whether I have a right 
to reply. 

Mr. Speaker: If the hon. Member thinks over the reply 
given by the Hon. the Law Minister just now, he will perhaps 
agree not to press his amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I will make one small submission 
and then seek your guidance on the subject. 

Mr. Speaker : Let me repeat what I have understood, so 
that he may point out in the submission he makes whether 
I have committed any mistake in understanding the position. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


495 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 495 

The Hon. the Law Minister — he will correct me if I am 
wrong — has pointed out the difficulty, in the interpretation o 
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, which is possible 
and then it may land us into a very inconvenient, position The 
terms “Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes” an defined 
in article 366 (24) and (25). Now, that definition specifically 
mentions the castes and tribes that are to be deemed as 
scheduled castes or tribes under specific articles 341 and 
342 with the result that possibly, so far as Part C states are 
concerned, it may be contended that what you cal scheduled 
castes as defined by Parliament cannot be recognised as 
scheduled castes under the Constitution. In as much as article 
330 gives a general direction so far as the scheduled castes 
under the Constitution are concerned, the cases of Part C 
States scheduled caste representation are not covered by 
article 330. Is that the intention? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes; that is so. 

Mr. Speaker: If that is so, then his further argument is 
that “let there be a superfluity, if you so call it, but why not 
make the position sure? ” Therefore, even if it is assumed that 
the legislation is a superfluity, let us have it, so that no legal 
technicality might come in the way of the representation o 
the scheduled castes. He wants to make that position quite 
clear and leave nothing to the ingenuity of the lawyers or 
technicalities of law. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Sir, the argument of the Hon 
Dr. Ambedkar is plausible enough indeed. 

Mr. Speaker : If that is so, let there be no reply. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The definition of scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes in article 366 is not an absolute definition 
This definition has to be read along with the preamble or 
the introductory words of article 366 which run thus : “In 
this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
following expressions have the meaning hereby respectively 
assigned to them...” Obviously, therefore, the context of article 
330 does not fit in with this definition of scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


496 


496 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The context of article 330 obviously means that there shall 
be reservation of seats for the scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes in the House of the People. Therefore, these definitions 
should not be taken at their face value. 

Mr. Speaker : I may point out to the hon. Member that 
the position may be said to be left in doubt and uncertain in 
the Constitution. That is why we are going to have special 
legislation. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: What about the second point? Can 
we fix a number, and not go by the formula of clause (2) of 
article 330? 

Mr. Speaker: If the argument is conceded that it is 
desirable, as a matter of safety, to have a special definition of 
scheduled castes for the purpose of representation in Part C 
States, the other thing follows automatically. The two go 
together. You cannot rely upon that definition for one purpose 
and still reject it for another. 

Shri. J. R. Kapoor: Is it your ruling or your view that 
it is open to Parliament to reserve seats for any particular 
section of the community unless it is specifically provided for 
in the Constitution? If it is not so provided, can we do it? 

Mr. Speaker: In the first place that question does not 
arise. It is a problematical one and the Chair should not be 
called upon to go on interpreting it. The matter is very clear. 
We are not going into the wider question of interpretation of 
the Constitution. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Have you considered the objection 
raised by Mr. Deshpande which relates to section 6 of the 
representation of the People Act by which the number is to 
be determined by the President and not by Parliament? 

Mr. Speaker: We are again in the same vicious circle. The 
interpretation of that is practically based on the same view of 
the article. I think we need not go into that. The discussions 
are no doubt very interesting and involve very interesting and 
very good points of legislation. But let us legislate as common 
people, going by common sense. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


497 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 497 

About the hon. Member’s amendment, I shall put it to 
the House. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : If that be your view, it need not be 
put. 

Mr. Speaker : He need not depend on my view, it may 
be a mistaken one. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : No. Sir, I go by your superior wisdom, 
particularly in the matter of law. I beg leave of the House to 
withdraw the amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

“ That clause 2 stand part of the Bill. ” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 . — ( Addition of Sixth and Seventh Schedules etc.) 

Mr. Speaker: I find a number of amendments here 
making small corrections, perhaps of spelling or putting the 
names in proper order. For instance there is one substituting 
“Adi-Dharmi”. It is a pure mistake of spelling. That will be 
corrected. Is it necessary to have it as an amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I am pressed to say that in clause 3, 
in the proposed Sixth schedule, under the heading ‘Delhi’ in 
entry No. 14, after the word “Dhanak” the words “or Dhanuk” 
be inserted — If that satisfies some Members. 

Mr. Speaker: That is amendment No. 4 in the list, by 
Mr. Chandrika Ram. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mine is No. 5 in the list. Anybody’s may 
be taken. 

Mr. Speaker: I would take the amendment about “Adi 
Dharmi” also. Mr. Chandrika Ram’s amendment No. 2 is what 
the Hon, the Law Minister is accepting as his No. 3. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: In a different form that is “Ad Dharmi”. 
The correct expression is “Adi-Dharmi”. 

Shri Chandrika Ram (Bihar): It should be “Adi-Dharmi”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


498 


498 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am prepared to accept his amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: Does the hon. Member Mr. Chandrika Ram 
accept the Law Minister’s version in regard to his amendment 
No. 4? 

Some Hon. Members: Both are the same. 

Mr. Speaker: I think the hon. Minister’s amendment (No. 5) 
is better than Mr. Chandrika Ram’s amendment (No. 4). And I 
think amendment No. 7 by the Law Minister is also better in 
form than No. 6 of Mr. Chandrika Ram. 

Dr. Deshmukh: I want amendment No. 8 of mine. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have examined the list and I have also 
consulted authority. Those contained in No. 8 have never been 
part of the Schedule. I do not accept amendment No. 8. 

Amendments made : 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’, in entry No. 1, for “ Adharmi ” substitute “Adi-Dharmi”. 

— [ Shri Chandrika Ram\ 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’ in entry No. 14, after “Dhanak” insert “or Dhanuk”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’ in entry No. 34. after “Rehgarh” insert “or Raighar”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Dr. Deshmukh: I beg to move: 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’, at the end, add new entries: 

“40. Nai (Barber). 

41. Dhiwar (fisherman)”. 

While replying to my speech the hon. the Law Minister 
referred to my being discontented with Government. From the 
recent speech that he made it appears that he is also not too 
pleased with the Government of which he himself is a part. 

Shri Sidhva: Are barbers untouchables? 

Dr. Deshmukh: I am bringing this amendment on the 
strength of a representation that has been made to me. Secondly, 
in the list which was referred to by the Hon. the Law Minister — 
which is a notification by the Federal Public Service Commiossion, 
India, dated the 12th March 1949 — these two castes are included. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


499 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 499 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the chair.] 

As I had pointed out in my speech the number of these 
castes in Delhi according to this list is sixtyfour. I have not 
suggested the inclusion of all that have been omitted. I have 
only suggested two, which are also present in the list here. I 
think it is very unfair that the Hon. the Law Minister should 
not accept it. But even if he is not prepared to accept it I 
want to press it and I hope all hon. members of this House 
will be pleased to vote with me, because this is discrimination 
pure and simple. For one purpose you have a notification in 
which certain castes are included. This notification holds good 
and neither the Law Minister nor the Government have taken 
any steps to disallow this list. Any boy who is born of any 
of these castes is entitled to apply, under this notification, 
styling himself as a scheduled caste. But here I do not know 
for what reasons the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar does not wish to 
include them. These two castes are here in this list — in this 
Gazette copy which any hon. Member may come and see. These 
petty fishermen who are called Dhinwars or Jhinwars — that 
name also is here — are here in this list, which is item 22 in 
this list. I hope therefore that irrespective of what the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar decides, the House will vote with me and see 
that these two castes who feel it keenly are not deprived of 
their privileges merely by a stroke of the pen. I hope therefore 
that the House will support me in this amendment of mine. 

Shri Sidhva : May I know whether it is a Government 
of India publication? 

Dr. Deshmukh: Yes. Dr. Ambedkar has got a copy of it. 

Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved: 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’, at the end, add new entries: 

“40. Nai (Barber). 

41. Dhiwar (fisherman)”. 

Shri Sonavane : With reference to the amendment moved 
by my hon. Friend Dr. Deshmukh I think only such of the 
castes who are untouchables in the society 

An hon. Member: We have no untouchables now. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


500 


500 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sonavane: That is the basis for the scheduled castes 
lists and therefore these two communities are mentioned in 
the amendment and if they are really untouchables then there 
should be no objection to their inclusion. But as far as my 
knowledge goes, in Bombay, barbers and fishermen are not 
untouchables and if they are not treated as untouchables here 
in Delhi, I do not see any point in their inclusion. Therefore, 
I would oppose this amendment. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): It is really very 
strange to see that Nais are being put in the scheduled caste 
list. In our province, U.P., formerly they used to write Nai 
Thakur and afterwards as Nai Brahmin. If you call them 
scheduled castes, I am sure they would never like it. The 
same is the case with Dhiwars. You cannot include these two 
castes in the scheduled castes in any way. As for any other 
list that might be prepared for the purpose of giving service 
or any other thing, they might be termed as ‘backward’. That 
is a different thing, but they cannot be put in the scheduled 
castes’ list in any case. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: I also agree with my hon. 
friend who has preceded me that Nais and Dhiwars should 
not be considered to be members of scheduled castes in Delhi. 
I do not know on what basis their names have been included 
in the list which Dr. Deshmukh has read out. The fact is 
that some time ago some representatives of Nais came to me 
and said that they had a grievance that they were termed 
as members of depressed classes. Therefore, I am sure that 
Dr. Deshmukh will not be obliging the Nais and the Dhiwars 
by their inclusion in this list. 

Mr. Chairman: Has not the hon. Member heard : Ghar 
se aaya hai motbir nai? 

The question is: 

In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the heading 

‘Delhi’ at the end, add new entries : 

“40. Nai (Barber). 

41. dhiwar (fisherman)”. 

The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


501 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 501 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): I beg go move: 

In cluase 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule 

Dr. Ambedkar: If my hon. Friend moves both his 
amendments together, I am prepared to accept them, subject 
to one reservation that these will be numbered alphabetically. 
Under the heading “Delhi”, he has given the No. 40 and so 
on and under the heading “ Himachal Pradesh ” he has given 
the No. 28 and so on. These will have to be renumbered. 

Sardar Hukam Singh: I beg to move: 

(i) In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the 
heading ‘Delhi’ at the end, add new entries: 

“40. Kabirpanthi. 

41. Mazhabi”. 

(ii) In cluase 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule under the 
heading ‘Himachal Pradesh’, at the end, add new entries: 

“28. Banjara. 

29. Bawaria. 

30. Ramdasia.” 

Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved: 

(i) in clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the 
heading ‘Delhi’ at the end, add new entries: 

“ 40. Kabirpanthi. 

41. Mazhabi”. 

(ii) In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth schedule, under the 
heading “Himachal Pradesh’, at the end, add new entries: 

“ 28. Banjara. 

29. Bawaria. 

30. Ramdasia.” 

Shri Sonavane : With reference to the amendments moved 
by Sardar Hukam Singh, I would like to say that I am very 
much surprised that Sardar Hukam Singh, who is a Sikh 
to the core, has come forward to take out some of the Sikhs 
from the Sikhs proper and put them as scheduled castes. I 
was very much surprised in the beginning when I learnt that 
there were some scheduled castes among the Sikhs and then 
it became clear to me that Dr. Ambedkar was right when he 
did not embrace Sikhism. Besides that, when we hear a lot of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


502 


502 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

atrocities committed in P.E.P.S.U. and Punjab by Sikhs on the 
scheduled castes. I am afraid my hon. Friend Sardar Hukam 
Singh wants some communities to remain as scheduled castes in 
order that persecutions may continue to be committed on them. 
Therefore, I would request him to withdraw his amendments 
and get all these people into his fold and bring them up to his 
level and in that way end the scheduled castes among the Sikhs. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Before you put the amendments 
to vote, I would like to know whether Dr. Ambedkar has satisfied 
himself that the Kabirpanthis in Delhi are members of the 
scheduled castes ? To my knowledge, there are no Mazhabis 
in Delhi and I do not object to their being included in the 
list as some Mazhabis might have migrated here. But about 
Kabirpathis, so far as I know, they are not termed as members 
of the scheduled castes. If Dr. Ambedkar has satisfied himself 
about this I have no objection, but if he has not satisfied 
himself, merely for the reason that they are so in the Punjab 
and P.E.P.S.U., they should not be treated as such in Delhi. 

Sardar Hukam Singh: I have not put down anywhere 
whether these would be Sikhs or Hindus. I do not see why 
such an obsession should be there and certain hon. Members 
should bring up such an objection. I deliberately refrained from 
saying anything on the order that had already been passed and 
when I learned that the Hon. Minister was accepting I did not 
make a speech. But now a discussion is being initiated, may I 
be allowed to say certain things? I never said it has to be done 
here. It is also in the order of the President that these castes 
shall be included in the Scheduled castes so far as the Punjab 
and P.E.P.S.U. are concerned. I have stuck to that whether they 
are Hindus or Sikhs, they shall be scheduled castes. Whether 
they are Hindus or Sikhs, it has been admitted that they are 
backward classes. Now, to bring 

Mr. Chairman: The Hon. Minister is accepting the 
amendment. 

The question is : 

(i) In clause 3 in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the 

heading ‘Delhi’, at the end add new entries: 

“ 40. Kabirpanthi. 

41. Mazhabi”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


503 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 503 

(ii) In clause 3, in the proposed Sixth Schedule, under the 

heading ‘Himachal Pradesh’, at the end, add new entries : 

“28. Banjara. 

29. Bawaria. 

30. Ramdesia.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Chandrika Ram: I beg to move : 

In clause 3, in the Sixth Schedule, at the end, add: 

“ Ajmer-Merwara. 

1. Aheri 

2. Begri 

3. Balai 

Dr. Ambedkar: These amendments are quite outside the 
scope of the Bill. The Bill reserves seats in certain Part C 
States. It is only in those States that we are trying to define 
what the scheduled castes are. In Ajmer-Merwara we have 
not reserved any seat. In Bhopal, we have not reserved any 
seat. In Tripura and Coorg we have not reserved any seat. 
Therefore, these amendments are quite outside the scope of 
the Bill. 

Shri Chandrika Ram: You are going to make a 
representation for Part C States. All these people belong to 
Part C States. Even yesterday when I spoke I did not demand 
that these people must have representation. But, this matter 
has got a long history. When these people 

Dr. Ambedkar: I might mention to cut short the discussion 
that Government has in contemplation the issue of a list of 
scheduled castes in Part A states, Part B States and also 
Part C States where there is no representation because it 
is felt that besides the privilege of representation in the 
legislature, there are also other privileges such as educational 
concessions, fees and services and so on. In order that there 
may be no misunderstanding on the part of anybody that 
those scheduled castes who are not included in the list 
are not entitled to those privileges. Government propose 
to do that. This is hardly the moment to deal with that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


504 


504 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Chandrika Ram : It is not a new thing that I 
have brought forward here. In the Ministry of Education, the 
Government of india have already accepted this list and on the 
ground of this list, all these people are getting scholarships. 
What is the harm if the Government accepts 

Dr. Ambedkar: It cannot be done in this Bill. 

Mr. Chairman: We have already adopted clause 2; Clause 
2 gives representation only to certain States. Those States 
are not included in this amendment. I do not see how this 
amendment could be moved. Therefore, I rule it out of order. 

The question is: 

“That clause 3, as amended stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 3, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1, was added to the Bill. 

The title and the Enacting Formula were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

“That the Bill, as amended, he passed. ” 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Ch. Ranbir Singh (Punjab): ( English translation of the 
Hindi Speech) Sir, I must thank Hon. Dr. Ambedkar for 
providing representation for the backward classes of Delhi and 
other areas. But I wish to submit all the same that the problem 
presented by Delhi is a peculiar one. Delhi has four seats out 
of which hardly one falls to the lot of the rural areas. If the 
rural seat is also joined on to an urban seat and bracketed 
with it, the other seat being a reserved one, this would mean 
giving away the seat of one backward class to another. I think 
that as against the clever people of Delhi and the officers and 
big people living in New Delhi the rural people of Delhi should 
be included either among the scheduled castes or if the Hon. 
Minister would not have them as such on the ground that they 
are not Harijans, they might be included among the scheduled 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


505 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 505 

tribes. The Hon. Minister should thus have tried to get them 
a seat. Since I know that this is extremely difficult I would 
make another suggestion. There is a general principle that as 
far as possible the seats for those areas which have a larger 
percentage of the scheduled castes, should be doubled. There 
are also some other considerations attached. I know that in 
the case of not one but several states, occasions have arisen 
when the Committees have not followed these rules. I do not 
mean to say that they have not followed them at all. Exceptions 
are always there and it would be right to a great extent, to 
treat this as an exceptional case. The reason for this is that 
there is a considerable difference between the people living 
in the rural and the urban areas of Delhi. Besides if people 
belonging to the scheduled castes are given representation from 
the rural areas they will have to experience a lot of difficulty. 
If any two seats out of the seats for Delhi city are doubled 
this would help those poor folks in whom we all are interested 
to secure true and proper representation. If, however, their 
seat is joined on to the rural seat this would not serve as a 
reward to them but rather as a punishment. Hence, I would 
appeal to the Hon. Minister to give a direction to the Election 
Commission that in the matter of the doubling of seats they 
might combine any two out of the three seats for Delhi city 
and turn them into double seats but that the seat for the 
rural areas should be left single so that it could be possible 
to do justice to a backward class of people who are as much 
entitled to sympathy as the scheduled castes. 

C Translation concluded) 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Sir,.... 

Mr. Chairman : The Bill has been so much discussed and 
at such great length that I do not think any long speeches 
are necessary now. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I do not want to enter into any detailed 
discussion. If you will permit me, Sir, I only want to utter a 
note of warning. I will not take more than two minutes. That 
note of warning is that by not accepting my contention the Hon. 
Law Minister has rendered the greatest possible disservice to 
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes of Part C States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


506 


506 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sonavane : No, no. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I am sure he will regret sooner 
rather than later having adopted this attitude and this 
contention that the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes 
should be considered as defined in article 366 for the purposes 
of the Constitution. If I only draw his attention to article 
335 and some other cognate articles which also use the 
words ‘scheduled castes’ then, I am sure he will change his 
opinion because if he would still stick to that view, then the 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes will be deprived of 
all the various privileges that are contemplated to be given 
under article 335 and other articles to the scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes residing in Part C States. Article 335 
runs thus : 

“ The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently 
with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the 
making of appointments to services and posts in connection 
with the affaris of the Union or of a State. ” 

If scheduled castes and scheduled tribes as mentioned 
in article 335 are to refer only to those scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes as are defined in article 366, meaning 
thereby the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes belonging 
to Part A and Part B States, then, the scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes residing in Part C States do not get 
the advantage of article 335 of the Constitution. By this 
one error — I do not know whether it is error of judgment 
or what it is — by this one error to day-he has deprived the 
scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes of Part C States 
of all the benefits they were having or could have under 
article 335. And... 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. May I ask the hon. Member 
whether all the members of the scheduled castes and the 
scheduled tribes are bound by the interpretation given by 
the Law Minister ? there is no such thing as an estoppel on 
interpretation. We have only just enacted this Bill without 
coming to any legal conclusions whether this interpretation 
or that interpretation is the correct one. That is for the 
courts to decide. The courts have to interpret the meaning. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


507 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 507 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: With due respect to you, Sir, I 
would submit that it is for the Government and for the 
Cabinet to advise the President in this matter and as such 
these scheduled castes and tribes will be losing what they 
were entitled to get with reference to article 335. So far 
as the Government is concerned, they are bound by the 
interpretation of the Law Minister. 

Mr. Chairman: And can he not change his opinion? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I do not know whether he will 
change his opinion or not. But so far I have found that... 

Mr. Chairman: Let me point out that at this stage this 
discussion is quite academical. After all we have accepted a 
particular provision in the Bill and we are not concerned any 
further with the definition of a scheduled tribe or scheduled 
class or other articles so far as this Bill is concerned. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Therefore, it is that I say I am only 
sounding a note of warning here. 

Shri Jnani Ram (Bihar) : The time for filing objections 
to the electoral rolls has expired on the 31st of March last. 
But in view of the amendments now made will the scheduled 
castes people be entitled to file objections even after this 
date? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That question does not arise because 
a person is registered as a voter irrespective of the fact 
whether he is a member of the scheduled castes or not. 

Shri Jnani Ram: Does it not arise when a candidate 
happens to be a member of a scheduled caste or scheduled 
tribe ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That question will arise on the date 
of nomination. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is: 

“That the Bill, as amended be passed. 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


508 


508 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (No. 2) BILL 

Presentation of Report of Select Committee 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, on behalf 
of the Chairman of the Select Committee I present the Report 
of the Select Committee on the Bill to provide for the conduct 
of elections to the Houses of Parliament and to the House or 
Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications and 
disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt 
and illegal practices and other offences at or in connection 
with such elections and the decision of doubts and disputes 
arising out of or in connection with such elections. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): In regard to this matter 
may I know whether Government have taken any decision 
as to how many days will be allotted for the discussion of 
this very important Bill and when. That will be helpful to 
members in more ways than one. 

The Prime Minister and the Leader of the House 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): Government considers that this 
measure should have top priority, so that as soon as the 
Finance Bill is discussed this Bill should be taken up. 

Shri Kamath: How many days will be allotted for its 
discussion? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I cannot say. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member very often gets 
into the noose. It is no good saying that it is open to any 
Member or even the Government to restrict the time allotted 
for the discussion of a Bill. Let not the House give away its 
rights and privileges. 


*P.D., Vol. 10, Part II, 31st March 1951, p. 5566. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


509 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 509 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(NO. 2) BILL 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move: 

“ That the Bill to provide for the conduct of elections to 
the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications 
for membership of those Houses, the corrupt and illegal practices 
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with such elections, as reported by the Select Committee, be 
taken into consideration.” 

In the few observations that I propose to make in 
support of the motion, I wish to draw the attention of 
the House to the changes made by the Select Committee 
in the Bill and also to the changes proposed by some of 
the Members of the Select Committee in their minutes of 
dissent. The House will agree that the Bill is a very big 
one, extending to about 169 clauses. The Select Committee 
has made changes in various clauses of the original Bill 
and it is hardly possible for me to deal with every single 
change proposed by the Committee. I think it would be 
enough if I were to draw the attention of the House to 
the most important changes which have been made by the 
Select Committee. 

So far as I see, I find that the Select Committee has 
made four important changes in the original Bill. The first 
clause in which important changes have been introduced is 
clause 7, which deals with the disqualifications for being 
chosen and for being a Member of Parliament or of a State 
Legislature. The House will recall that the clause as it 
stood originally had only three cases of disqualification in 
it. The first disqualification in the original Bill was founded 
on a conviction for an electoral offence, either connected 
with corrupt practice or an illegal practice. The second 
disqualification in the Bill was founded on a conviction for 


*P. D., Vol. 2, Part II, 9th May 1951, pp. 8348-70. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


510 


510 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

an offence enacted by the penal law of the country as 
distinguished from an electoral offence, for instance, an 
offence under the Penal Code or some other local criminal 
law. The third one was the disqualification which was founded 
on what might be called the actual serving of a sentence 
during the course of the election. That will be found in the 
original clause 7, sub-clause (2). And the fourth was failure 
to lodge election expenses in accordance with the law and 
within the time. 

So far as these original proposals are concerned, the only 
change to which the Select Committee has made is with 
regard to the disqualification contained in sub-clause (2) of 
clause 7. 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair ] 

That provision the Select Committee has dropped. And 
the reason is this that the clause is unnecessary so far as 
a sentence is for two years or more. If the sentence is for 
less than two years the Committee felt that there was no 
necessity to enact a disqualification on that ground because, 
assuming that a man was elected to the House, it would 
still be necessary for him to obtain the permission of the 
House to absent himself beyond sixty days, which is the rule 
now, and if the House did not grant him the permission his 
seat might thereby be rendered vacant. On that ground the 
Committee felt that it was unnecessary to retain it. 

To this clause 7 the Committee has added four new 
disqualifications which are very important. The first is that 
the holding of a contract with Government would, under 
the provisions now made by the Select Committee, be a 
disqualification. Secondly, the holding of a licence or permit 
from Government for dealing in commodities which are subject 
to control so far as their price or movement is concerned 
would also be a disqualification. Thirdly, the holding of a 
Directorship in a company in which the Government has a 
share or interest would be a disqualification ; and fourthly, 
dismissal of a Government servant for corruption. These are 
the four new disqualifications which the Select Committee 
has added to the original clause. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


511 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 511 

Now I come to the second change which the Select Committee 
has made. The House will remember that there was in the 
original Bill a clause which was numbered 35. The object of that 
clause was this. The clause intended to seperate proceedings 
with regard to nomination from proceedings with regard to 
actual election. As hon. Members will remember, an election 
proceeding falls into two divisions. The first is the stage of 
nomination and the second is the stage of election. Under the 
law as it existed the provision was this that there was no 
finality to the proceedings with regard to nomination. There 
may be objections to nominations and yet the election could 
continue to its final course and it is only when an election 
petition was filed for challenging the result of the election 
that it was open to any party who was a party to the election 
to raise the question before the Election Tribuanal that the 
nomination paper of a particular candidate was wrongly 
admitted or that the nomination paper of a particular candidate 
was wrongly rejected. Then if the Election Tribunal came to the 
conclusion that either of the two grounds was well-founded it 
was open to the Election Tribunal to set aside the whole of the 
election. It has been felt by many persons who are interested 
in politics that, that was not a very fair thing, to have the 
whole of the election gone through with the enormous amount 
of expenditure which various candidates would incur and then 
to be ultimately faced with this solitary single issue whether 
the nomination paper was properly admitted or rejected and 
then the whole election to be set aside. It has been felt that it 
was a very wrong thing and that it was desirable to sever the 
nomination proceedings from the election proceedings and that 
the election should proceed after the nomination proceedings 
have been finalised and made conclusive so that no such issue 
could be raised before the Election Tribunal when the election 
was challenged. I personally felt that that point of view was 
a very good and a very sound one and that if it was possible 
we should treat the nomination issue as a preliminary issue, 
as civil lawyers call it and have it disposed of completely and 
finally, so that we could then proceed to real election and the 
challenge to the real election could be limited only either to 
corrupt practice or to illegal practice or to intimidation and 
cases of that sort in which the election was neither fair nor free. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


512 


512 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Unfortunately the Committee did not agree with that view, 
although, as Members will see from the Report of the Select 
Committee, they expressed a great deal of sympathy with the 
provisions contained in the original clause 35. The Committee 
was greatly influenced by the fact that before the nomination 
proceedings could be deemed to have been concluded and 
finally settled it would be necessary for somebody to investigate 
whether the questions as to qualifications and disqualifications 
of a candidate were properly decided. The Committee felt that 
if the issue of qualifications and disqualifications of candidates 
were to be decided before the actual election starts the interval 
between nomination and election might be very long and the 
election might not take place as expeditiously as we would 
all wish it to take place. That was the governing factor which 
led the Committee to reject the provisions contained in the 
original clause 35. Notwithstanding that, as hon. Members who 
have read the Report of the Select Committee would notice, 
the Committee has said that they like the provision, and, if 
during the passage of the Bill in the House it was possible 
to evolve some formula which would avoid that delay that 
Members feared would take place between the conclusion of 
the nomination proceedings and the start of the election, they 
would welcome such a provision. I myself have not been able 
to think of anything which I could at this stage put before 
the House. I am told that such a provision does exist in the 
Madras law which deals with the election of the District 
Local Boards. It was after a long time that I was able to get 
a copy of that and I have not had time to apply my mind to 
it. I therefore — speaking from my point of view — propose to 
keep this question rather open. 

Then I come to the third change which the Select Committee 
has made and that relates to the Election Tribunal. First of 
all I may refer to the changes made in the personnel of the 
Tribunal. As the House will remember, the original provisions 
in the Bill said that District Judges, advocates of ten years’ 
standing and subordinate judges might be regarded as 
eligible to act as Members of an Election Tribunal. The Select 
Committee has cut out subordinate judges. They think they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


513 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 513 

ought not be regarded as eligible for sitting on an Election 
Tribunal and they have added retired District Judges and 
retired and sitting High Court Judges as persons eligible for 
being appointed to an Election Tribunal. With regard to the 
two other matters relating to the Election Tribunal namely, 
the constitution of the Tribunal and the question of appeal, the 
Select Committee has made no change, so that the Tribunal 
as originally provided would continue to be a Tribunal of 
two members, one Chairman and one Member. Similarly the 
provisions with regard to appeal will also continue. As the 
House knows, we provide no regular appeal at all. What is 
proposed is that if the two members differ, there will be an 
automatic reference to the High Court. 

Then I refer to the fourth change which the Select 
Committee has made and which from what has happened 
recently, I think, is a very salutary and a very important 
change. The House will remember, that in the original draft 
Bill the power to fill casual vacancies was left to the State 
Governments to decide. It was a matter left entirely within 
their power and within their discretion. The Select Committee 
felt that the State Governments might not be very diligent in 
the matter of exercising these powers and casual vacancies 
might remain unfilled for a long time, depriving constituencies 
of their opportunity to have their representatives sitting in 
Parliament or in the State Legislature. The Committee has 
therefore decided that this power, instead of being left with 
the State Governments, should be vested in the Election 
Commission which has nothing to do with Parliament or with 
the State Legislature. It is he now who will fix the date of 
election ; it is he now who will issue writs to the constituencies 
for holding the election and for sending their representatives. 
This I think is a very salutary change. These are the four 
important changes which the Select Committee has made in 
the Bill. 

I will now proceed to deal with the changes proposed in 
the Minutes of Dissent. Analysing the Minutes of Dissent, I 
find that the Members who have subscribed to their Minutes 
of Dissent propose 10 different changes to be made in the Bill, 
as reported by the Select Committee. The first change is an 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


514 


514 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

alteration in the disqualification clause introduced by the Select 
Committee in sub-clause ( d) of clause 7. This change is proposed 
by two members of the Select Committee, Mr. Gokulbhai 
Bhatt and my friend, Mr. Goenka. Among themselves they 
do not seem to be ad idem. Mr. Bhatt has no objection to the 
disqualification relating to holding of a contract to continue 
as it is. His only objection is to the holding of licences or 
permits, but my hon. friend, Mr. Goenka objects to both. As 
I said, these provisions did not exist in the original Bill; they 
were introduced by the Select Committee. I do not mind giving 
to the House my own personal reactions to these additional 
provisions. The first thing I feel is that there is no doubt that 
the clauses, as worded in the Select Committee draft of the 
Bill, appear to be somewhat severe. I personally feel that we 
could make a distinction between disqualification for being 
chosen and disqualification for continuing to be Members of 
Parliament. We ourselves have been making that distinction. 
I do not quite understand what difficulty or political injustice 
can arise if we said that while persons holding a contract 
from Government or having a licence from Government are 
free to stand as candidates for election they would become 
disqualified for continuing to be Members of Parliament. I 
cannot see any difficulty in making a provision of this sort. 
In other words, we may permit a holder of a contract or a 
holder of a licence to stand as a candidate. After he has been 
elected, he may be presented with this alternative, either 
he gives up his contract and continues to be a Member of 
Parliament or he decides not to be a member of Parliament 
and continues his contract 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): Whichever is more 
profitable ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Whatever it is, my point is this. I think 
it would be too much to say that none of these people shall 
be entitled to stand as a candidate. There may be something 
in the argument that they should not continue to be Members 
of Parliament. I think we could make that change. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): Has Government any 
view on this ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


515 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 515 

Dr. Ambedkar : In course of time Government’s view 
will be known. With regard to the other question of licences 
10 am anc ^ S ° ° n ’ n ° a great agitation is going on in 

the country by the business community that if this 
clause stood as it now stands in the draft Bill of the Select 
Committee, the whole of the business community would be 
disfranchised from playing its part in Parliament, I mean 
in the political affairs of the country. I am sure that we do 
not want to bring about such a result. Every section of the 
community should have an opportunity of taking part in the 
politics of the country, of coming into Parliament, placing 
its points of view, modifying legislation in any way it thinks 
it ought to be. Parliament ought not to be a sectional body, 
representing any particular class or any particular group or 
any particular community so that the point of view of all 
others goes un-represented. I think that would be very unfair 
thing; it would be a disservice to Parliament in my judgment 
if such a thing happens. At the same time, I am quite clear 
in my mind that while the business community should have 
a fair opportunity to influence politics and to come into 
Parliament, we do not want Parliament to be converted into 
a Stock Exchange. 

Pandit Maitra: They are already dominating. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Another thing that we must bear in mind, 
and which I think goes to the root of the matter is that our 
Parliament and our Electoral law should be so constituted that 
the independence of the Members of Parliament as against the 
Government must be scrupulously observed, There can be no 
use in a Parliament if we adopt a system which permits the 
Government to corrupt the whole of the Parliament either by 
offering political offices or by offering some other advantages. 
If a Parliament cannot act independently without fear or 
without favour from the Government, in my judgment such a 
Parliament is of no use at all. Therefore, while it is necessary 
to permit every class of people to come into Parliament and 
to play their part, you must at the same time place some 
safeguards whereby Parliament will not be converted into a 
sort of what I might call chorus girls who would be saying 
always ditto to what the Government say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


516 


516 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): Why girls ? 

Dr. C. D. Pande rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What is it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: My point is as I said, we have to sail 
within two limits. One limit is this: that our electoral 
law should not be such as to deliberately shut out any 
particular section or any particular community. The 
second limit is this: the Electoral law must be such that 
it would maintain an amount of freedom in Parliament. 
Within these two limits, anybody who has any suggestion 
to make with regard to the improvement of the provision 
relating to this particular disqualification will have my 
sympathetic hearing. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is there any provision regarding 
political jobs ? The Hon. Minister was saying that political 
jobs or contract ought not to be allowed to corrupt Members 
of Parliament. 

Dr. Ambedkar: To that point, my reply is this. I wish 
very much that we adopted the principle of the British 
law where there has been a definite limit laid down to the 
number of Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries, Ministers 
of State, and so on. I hope some day we shall be able 
to pass legislation of that kind so that Government will 
not be in a position to increase its supporters by offering 
political jobs such as Ministers and Deputy Ministers and 
Parliamentary Secretaries to anybody in the House. This 
matter 

Seth Govind Das (Madhya Pradesh): Why not have 
those provisions now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That cannot be done; that is a matter 
dealing with Ministerial affairs. I do not know ; perhaps, 
you may remember that this question was considered at 
the time when the Government of India Act, 1935, was 
made. One proposal was 

The Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture (Shri 
Thirumala Rao): That was by a foreign Government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


517 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 517 

Dr. Ambedkar : Wisdom is wisdom whether it comes from 
inside or outside the country. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay (Uttar Pradesh): 
Are you in agreement with this ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes ; I said so. I remember when the 
Government of India Act, 1935 was framed, this very question 
was raised whether we should allow the Prime Minister 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): Article 102 
is already there; everybody holding an office of profit is 
disqualified. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We have limited that. If anybody becomes 
a Minister, he ceases to come under that disqualification. I 
do not want to go into that now. This question apart. I shall 
answer the query that you put. 

Shri Sidhva : Why not incorporate all those things here ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot do all sorts of things in this Bill. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): You were referring to 
the Government of India Act, 1935. What was it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I said about the Government of India 
Act, 1935, because I had been at the Round Table Conference 
where this very question was raised namely, whether it was 
necessary to put a limit on the number of Ministers that 
could be apppointed. The point there was that it might be 
possible for the Ministry to so expand as to have a large 
number of people in the Ministry so that the House may be 
disabled. There were two proposals made. One proposal was 
that a maximum number should be fixed in the Act, that not 
more than a certain number of persons could be appointed as 
Ministers. The second proposal was — I do not know whether 
the Members would like it or not — to fix a maximum salary 
for the Ministry as a whole, so that, if they wanted to expand, 
they could do so by dividing the spoils and lowering the share 
of each one. Neither suggestion was adopted and it was left 
to the good sense 

Seth Govind Das: We can have both. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


518 


518 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : Could you limit 
the number of Ministers under the Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The House can. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): If cannot; please read the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am very sorry; I should think that we 
can. There is nothing in the Constitution to prevent that. All 
that the Constitution says is that there shall be a Council of 
Ministers to advise the President. It does not say how many 
Ministers there will be. 

Shrimati Durgabai: On a point of order, Sir 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member is on a point of 
order. Will the Hon. Minister give way? 

Shrimati Durgabai : On a point of order, Sir, may I 
know whether the Hon. Minister is making any insinuation 
against the Government that whenever they appoint more 
Ministers or Deputy Ministers they are appointing them only 
to disable the House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am replying to the Chair. I wanted to 
drop the thing; it was Mr. Kamath who wanted me to say 
something. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not think there is any 
insinuation. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I hope my hon. lady friend is not intending 
to create bad blood between myself and the Ministry. 

I come to the next question. The second proposal is that 
the Princes should be declared to be disqualified for being 
chosen as Members. The point is made by my hon. friend 
Mr. Raj Bahadur — I hope he is here — and his friends. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan): I am here. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mr. Rama Rao has appended a separate 
minute of his own. The ground which has been urged by 
Mr. Raj Bahadur and his friends is that the Princes are holders 
of Office of profit. It seems to me that if that contention 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


519 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 519 

is correct, it is not necessary for us to introduce any kind 
of clause in this Bill at all, because the Constitution itself 
lays down in article 102 that holders of offices of profit 
shall not be eligible for being Members of Parliament. If his 
contention is that they are holders of office of profit, they 
automatically come under article 102 of the Constitution. It 
has laid down this disqualification which this Parliament can 
neither amend nor enlarge. The only thing he can do is to 
act under article 103 which says that if any person who is a 
holder of an office of profit is a Member of Parliament, the 
matter may be referred to the President and the President 
shall after obtaining the opinion of the Election Commission, 
give his decision according to such opinion. To take a concrete 
case, suppose any particular prince — I think they call them 
princes — is elected to this House or to any Chamber of the 
State Legislature, all that is necessary to do, if my friend 
is correct, is to apply to the President saying that he is a 
disqualified person and so cannot take a seat in Parliament. 
Therefore, on his own argument it is unnecessary to introduce 
any clause for the purpose in this Bill. It is for him to say 
whether his contention that they are holders of offices of profit 
is correct or incorrect. On that subject I do not propose to 
express any opinion now. 

Shri Sidhva: They get a sort of pension. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is vast difference between pension- 
holders and these cases. 

Shri Hussain Imam (Bihar): What about Government 
pensioners? Are they holding offices of profit ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not wish to be dragged into this 
aspect of the matter. The point is very simple. The question 
is whether if they are holders of offices of profit, they are 
disqualified. If that be so, the disqualification is there under 
article 102. You have only to refer to the provisions of article 
102 and get the person removed from Parliament. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: It is a case for the lawyers again. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why not? The hon. Member is himself a 
lawyer. Why should he shut himself out? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


520 


520 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Shyamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Cannot the matter 
be raised before the Election Commission ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is unnecessary to go to that length; 
The remedy is very simple, as I have already explained. 

Well, then. If my friend’s contention is that the holding 
of an office of profit is not a good ground for disqualifying 
them, then the House in enacting a provision for disqualifying 
them, must, of course, have some justification. Referring, for 
instance, to the composition of the House of Commons it may 
be pointed out that the clergy of England are disqualified for 
being members of the House of Commons. Similarly a person 
holding a peerage which entitles him to sit in the House of 
Lords is a disqualification for being a Member of the House of 
Commons. Now, in both these cases there is ample justification 
why they are disqualified. If my friend were to study the history 
of the case, he will know that the clergy were disqualified by 
the Act of 1801 because it was felt that under the Protestant 
Revolution when the State became the head of the Church or 
when the Church and the State became one — what are called 
allow-sons — that is to say, churches where service is offered 
and payments made, these became a sort of gift in the hands 
of the State and consequently it was felt that churchmen and 
priests were holders of offices of profit and therefore they 
must be disqualified. With regard to members of the House 
of Lords being disqualified from being members of the House 
of Commons, there again the justification is quite obvious, 
namely that a person cannot be a member of two Houses. 
This is the principle which we have also embodied. Therefore 
the disqualification of these two classes of people, although it 
exists in England is founded on the two justifications which 
I have given. If my friend could suggest some justification 
other than the ground of office of profit, it would be open to 
consider whether such a justification is valid here, 

Dr. Parmar (Himachal Pardesh): Can the Princes not be 
excluded on the ground that they are political pensioners ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know why political pensions 
should be regarded a disqualification. Of course, as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


521 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 521 

hon. Members know, Dr. Johnson, the author of the first 
English Dictionary, defined a political pensioner as a slave 
of the Government. But he himself subsequently accepted a 
pension from Government. It is no use being too logical. 

Dr. Parmar: Are political pensioners debarred from the 
House of Commons ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No, only Peers and lunatics, as they used 
to say in the days of the Reforms. 

The third point raised in the Minutes of Dissent relates 
to the reservation of seats to the Scheduled Castes in double- 
member constituencies. This point is dealt with at considerable 
length by Mr. Sarangdhar Das and Mr. Rama Rao. It seems 
to me that this matter has already been concluded by the 
Representation of the People Act of 1950 which this House 
passed last year. A reference to section 6, sub-section (2), 
clause ( d ) of that Act would show that the House left this 
matter for the President to decide in an appropriate case. I 
therefore, do not think that we can do anything now, unless 
we go back and amend that Act. 

Apart from that, I should like to draw the attention of the 
House to certain considerations which have prevailed upon 
the Government in making the sort of reservations which 
have been made. I think it necessary to draw a distinction 
between what may be called a reserved constituency and a 
constituency in which a seat is reserved. I think these are two 
very different things and the question that has to be considered 
is what was the intention, whether it was to adopt the system 
of a reserved constituency or a system of a constituency in 
which a seat is reserved. There again, it seems to me, if 
you refer to the intentions of the Constituent Assembly, the 
matter is more or less concluded. The first point is this. Our 
friends will remember — I shah refer to it presently that the 
Constituent Assembly passed a Resolution in favour of what 
is called distributive voting. Now, my submission is this. 
Would there have been any necessity to pass a Resolution 
regarding distributive voting unless it was the intention of the 
Constituent Assembly that the constituency should be one in 
which a seat is reserved ? If the intention was that it should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


522 


522 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be a reserved constituency, no such question would have arisen, 
because the system of one man one vote would have applied. 
Secondly, although the Constitution does not expressly make 
any reference to this matter, the intention of the makers of 
the Constitution and of the Constituent Assembly appears to 
be clear by a reference to article 332, clause (5). My friend 
Mr. Chaliha must be very familiar with that article. The House 
will recall that a contention was raised whether a constituency 
should be reserved for the tribal area so that in that area 
only a tribal candidate would stand. On the other side the 
question was raised that if a constituency was so framed that 
only a tribal candidate could stand, the rest of the non-tribal 
people would be completely disfranchised. And that was not 
a desirable thing, the Assembly decided. Consequently in 
passing article 332(5) they made the special provision that 
if such a thing was to be done, then certain areas in which 
the non-tribal people were concentrated should be separated 
and given separate representation. I therefore concludes, from 
the fact that the Constituent Assembly supported distributive 
voting and from the fact that there is a provision in article 
332, clause (5), that the intention of the Constituent Assembly 
was that the system to be ordinarily adopted is the system 
of a seat being reserved in a constituency. It was on this 
construction of these provisions that the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950, contained the provision which is embodied 
in section 6, sub-section (2), clause ( d ). 

With regard to the question of distributive voting, there 
again both my friends Pandit Kunzru and Mr. Das have 
expatiated at considerable length in the vicious character 
of this system. As I said, it is quite open to argue that the 
cumulative system is better in that it enables minorities, 
social or political, to muster their strength and have their 
representative elected to the House. As I said just now, we 
have not got a clean slate to act upon. As my friend will 
remember this matter was discussed in the Constituent 
Assembly and a motion was moved by no less a person than 
the late Sardar Patel, in which he proposed that all special 
representation for all minorities, such as the Muslims, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


523 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 523 

Christians and so on, shall be abolished and that they shall 
be retained only for the scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes, and wherever a seat is reserved in a constituency for 
these two classes the system of voting shall be distributive 
voting. That resolution was accepted by the Constituent 
Assembly. No doubt there was a certain amount of debate 
on that question but ultimately the decision of the Assembly 
was in favour of distributive voting. It seems to me that our 
Parliament must pay some special regard to the decisions of 
the Constituent Assembly, because, after all, it is from the 
Constituent Assembly that we have derived our power and 
authority. Certain decisions taken by the Constituent Assembly 
we have got in our Constitution, certain others which we could 
not embody in our Constitution remain outstanding. It does 
not mean that because we have not embodied those decisions 
in the Constitution we are not to pay any regard to them. 
Therefore it seems to me that whatever may be the view-point 
on the subject — I do not deny that there is some validity in 
the contention of the other side — I think personally that the 
matter must be regarded as concluded. It would of course be 
open to the House to take any step they like, if as a result 
of experience in the next or subsequent elections they find 
that the system is not a good one and ought to be substituted. 
But for the moment the decision of the Constituent Assembly 
must stand. 

The fifth point raised is the declaration of the results. 
That is also raised by my Friend Mr. Sarangdhar Das. If I 
understand him correctly — he will correct me if I am wrong, for 
it is not quite clear to me — what he wants is that the results 
of the election should not be announced piecemeal, constituency 
by constituency, or province by province, but that all results 
should be announced on the same day. I take it that he has 
no objection to counting the votes piecemeal, constituency by 
constituency, and making the record of it complete. There is 
a d iff erence between counting and announcing 

Shri Gautam (Uttar Pradesh): Counting is done in the 
presence of the candidate. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, of course. Those provisions are 
there. The only question is as you finish your counting for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


524 


524 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

constituency, will you publish the results in the Gazette or 
will you wait until all the counting has been done in all the 
constituencies and the result is announced in a consolidated 
form in one issue of the Gazette. 

Seth Govind Das: What would be the use ? will it not be 
published in the various newspapers ? (. Interruption ) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I want to understand his minute of dessent. 
His argument seems to me, and it is not unsound, is that 
people after all are carried away by what is called the herd 
instinct. If people had voted in one way in one constituency 
other people like to do so in their own constituency. It is a 
psychological point. He felt that if the result of the election in 
one constituency was announced, which was unfavourable to 
any particular party, then the other constituency also might 
say “Our neighbours have voted in one particular way and 
why make an experiment of voting in some other way. Let 
us vote in the same way.” 

Seth Govind Das: When the counting will take place 
in the presence of the candidate it would be known to all 
newspapers and how will you be able to withhold the result ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : You cannot. As I said no electoral law 
can be either foolproof or knave-proof. A11 sorts of loopholes 
will remain. 

Shri Sarangdhar Das (Orissa): I had put in the minute 
of dissent and I have also given an amendment, because there 
is a possibility of having the general election in some of the 
States, whereas other States are not ready with their electoral 
rolls and would like to have the elections sometime later. 
That is why I want that the results of the earlier elections 
should be held over until the later elections are over and all 
the results are announced simultaneously. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I was only trying to understand him, 
because his minute deals with that in a few sentences. No 
doubt the matter will be considered, because there is something 
to be said for the point of view he has urged. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It does not affect any individual 
election. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


525 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 525 

Dr. Ambedkar : It does not. I am only making a distinction 
between counting and announcing which is really the important 
thing. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): The counting 
will be public and the result will be known and published in 
the papers. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As regards counting it is there in the rules. 
Then there is this ticklish question of the use of conveyances. 
The Bill does not permit the candidate to employ cars or 
other means of transport for conveying his voters but it does 
permit the voter himself, if he has got a car, to use it for the 
purpose of going to the polling booth and registering his vote. 

Seth Govind Das: Can a voter hire a cart ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : He may if he wants to pay, but our 
friends are rather worried over this. They say that it is 
perfectly possible for a candidate to circumvent this provision 
by putting a few pieces of money into the hands of the voter 
and say “You hire the car and I pay for your conveyance. Come 
and vote for me.” Therefore they say this provision would be 
nugatory. I do not deny the possibility of such circumvention 
but the question we have to consider is whether this provision 
will be circumvented on such a large scale as altogether to 
nullify the provisions of this particular section. My reply is 
that it would not be so possible. That is my view. On the other 
hand, we have to take into consideration two other factors — I 
shall be very frank about it. We are making provision for our 
polling booths to be within two or three miles of each village. 
In that event perhaps it is not necessary to use a car at all. 
On the other hand, there is also the fact that there are many 
people who have got a right to vote, who are willing to vote, 
but who on account of their old age are not able to walk to 
the polling stations. There are many people who are lame or 
who have some kind of a physical disability which prevents 
them from going to the polling booths on their feet. 

An hon. Member: Such as ladies. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well. I do not know. If you say ladies, 
yes, — women in India walk and therefore I am not concerned 
with them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


526 


526 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): What are our sisters 
in this House, ladies or women ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall leave it to them to answer. 

Therefore, as I said, in determining this question we have to 
take into consideration these various factors. One is this that 
our polling booths will be much nearer than they used to be. 
Secondly, there may be a good many people who on account 
of their physical disability will not be able to go to the polls. 
Are you going to deny altogether any kind of physical aid by 
way of transport to such people to go and register their votes ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): Make an exception 
in their case. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As I said, I am not concluding the matter 
by expressing any dogmatic opinion. I am putting both sides of 
the question before the House. It is for the House to determine. 
Personally, I do not mind if transport is completely stopped; 
anybody who wants to vote may go on foot and vote. But 
we have got to consider this question that there are a large 
number of people who may not be in a position to go and we 
must make some kind of a provision for them. 

Then I come to another point which is very important: 
obtaining of assistance from Government servants in the 
elections. That point is raised by Mr. Gokulbhai Bhatt and 
also, I believe by my friend Mr. Khandubhai Desai. I cannot 
help saying that this is a very important provision and in 
considering this the following points, I think, require attention. 
We must make a distinction between the right to vote and the 
right to take active part either in forming a political party 
or in helping an existing political party. So far as the right 
to vote is concerned, nobody in this country is denied that 
right; neither the government officers employed in the civil 
services nor the military personnel have any impediments 
placed in their way in the matter of exercising their right to 
vote. The only question that arises for consideration is this, 
whether they should be permitted to form an association of 
themselves for the purpose of starting a political party or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


527 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 527 

helping any particular political party. It seems to me that 
to allow the civil or military servants of the Government 
to take past in party politics is nothing short of sowing the 
seeds of subverting the Government. That point can never 
be forgotten, it seems to me. If our Secretariat servants 
were allowed to form a political organisation as against 
the existing Government that they wish to bring about, 
what would happen to the administration ? Could they be 
expected to be loyal to a government which they intended to 
overthrow by their political activities ? It seems to me the 
whole administration will come down to pieces. Secondly, 
it must be remembered — and I emphasise it because I find 
that it is not generally remembered as it ought to be — that 
whether the political party of the government, the Ministers 
and so on, is partial or impartial or whether they side on 
one side or the other is a matter of small moment. What is 
of importance is the impartiality of the administration. The 
administration, in my judgment, is far more important than 
government as such. And supposing the administration was 
permitted to associate itself with political parties, would the 
administration be impartial ? Would they not favour those who 
work with them and disfavour those who do not work with 
them ? What would happen to the administration ? Therefore, 
I am very strongly opposed to the suggestion made by my 
friend. Mr. Khandubhai Desai or by Mr. Gokulbhai Bhatt 
that the administrtation should be permitted to take part in 
politics or to help any particular candidate by holding meetings 
for him, for canvassing, for collecting funds, and this, that 
or the other. I think it is absolutely subversive of civil and 
military government 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay): That is not the idea behind my 
suggestion. 

Shri Khandubhai Desai (Bombay): You were not replying 
to my minute regarding the activities of ordinary employees 
of Government in support of any candidate. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I thought you were dealing with it 
generally, but if you were to move an amendment then the 
matter will be debated at a later date. I have plenty of material 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


528 


528 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

on this subject and I think I shall be able to satisfy the House 
on this point. 

Shri Bhatt: What I have suggested does not concern the 
officers and persons holding administrative posts but only the 
ordinary run of employees known as the officials. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is very difficult to make a distinction 
between and 

There is one other question and that is with regard to 
the use of symbols. The Select Committee has decided that 
religious and national symbols shall not be used. Our friend, 
Mr. Das, and then Mr. Man and Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee 
differ. Mr. Das is in favour of the provision but he wants to 
extend it. He said that there might be colourable imitations 
of the prohibited symbol and since they were only colourable 
and not actual it might be possible for members of the 
political party to get round this particular provision. Well, as 
I said. I do not know whether I can find any suitable words 
to prohibit colourable imitation. I have not as yet found any 
suitable expression to overcome that difficulty. Our friend, 
Mr. Man and Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee object to it. They 
say symbols should be permitted. — the Hindu Mahasabha 
should have its own flag to carry on the election compaign. I 
think that the provision in the Bill as reported by the Select 
Committee is a very sound one, because I think that elections 
ought to be conducted on issues which have nothing to do with, 
for instance, religion or culture. A political party should not 
be permitted to appeal to any emotion which is aroused by 
reason of something which has nothing to do with the daily 
affairs of the people. 

Shri Kamath: What about political emotion ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Political emotion — enthusiasm — is all 
right, but I think that any emotion other than political emotion 
should not be permitted. Therefore, this is a good provision 
and the suggestions made are unacceptable to me, 

Then I come to the last point in the Select Committee’s 
Report which I know has caused a great deal of heart burning 
i.e. with regard to the return of election expenses — what 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


529 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 529 

expenditure must be included in the return ? Mr. Goenka who 
has raised this matter in the course of his minute of dissent 
says that if the clause stands as at present, a political party 
will not be free or entitled to spend money on elections and he 
thinks that is a situation which ought not to be allowed. The 
political party should be permitted to spend money on elections, 
which a candidate — and this is the most important part — need 
not show in his return of election expenses. The last point 
that the candidate need not show is most important. It seems 
to me that his contention is founded on a misunderstanding 
of what is meant by election expenses. Since the Select 
Committee reported, I have myself gone a great deal into the 
cases which have been decided by the Election Tribunals in 
England over a long course of years and I would like to give 
to the House some of the results arrived at by the Election 
Tribunals in England. In considering this question, the first 
point that has to be borne in mind is that we are dealing with 
‘election expenses’ and we have to understand very clearly 
what is meant by ‘election expenses’ of a candidate. Election 
expense means ‘expense incurred during a period beginning 
from the commencement of the election and ending with the 
conclusion of the election.’ 

Shri Kamath: Does commencement mean nomination or 
polling ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am coming to that. It may be before that. 

Therefore, we must bear this in mind — that the phrase 
‘election expense’ has reference to a definite period, namely, 
the period commencing from the beginning of the election 
and the period ending with the conclusion of the election. 
Any expense incurred by anybody before the commencement 
of the election is not election expense. 

Shri Kamath: What is the commencement — nomination 
or polling? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. If you will let me 
proceed, I shall explain. I have spent some considerable time 
and taken considerable trouble over this, because I myself 
wanted to understand it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


530 


530 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is there any such restriction in 
the body of the Bill ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No such thing, but I am talking about 
the judicial interpretation of the phrase ‘election expense’ 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Does that mean ‘all expenses in 
anticipation of the election ?’ 

Dr. Ambedkar: The emphasis is on the word ‘election’ 
Election means an event which has a beginning and an end. 
Therefore, what I am saying is that we are only concerned 
with expenses incurred on an election which has a beginning 
and an end. 

Shri Kamath: Everything has 

Dr. Ambedkar: Some things probably have not. Some 
things are sanatan — they have no beginning and no end. 
But election is not sanatan. Having regard to this fact, 
any expenditure incurred before the commencement of the 
election, whether it is incurred by the candidate or whether 
it is incurred by the political party, does not come within the 
meaning of election expenses. A political party may be free to 
spend any amount of money before the election commences, 
because that would not be part of the election expenses. After 
the conclusion of the election, a political party or a candidate 
may do anything. A candidate, after he is elected, might invite 
people, subject of course to the food regulations, to a dinner in 
the Imperial Hotel. That is not part of the election expense. 
Therefore, barring these two things, a political party is free 
to incur any expenses. That is not barred by this clause. 

Shri Sidhva: What about ‘during elections ?’ 

Seth Govind Das : rose — 

Dr. Ambedkar: Do not cross-examine me. Let me go on. 
If you have a complete idea of what I have to say, you will 
probably have no questions to ask at the end. 

Now, I come to the point raised by my hon. friend 
Mr. Sidhva about the expenses during the event of elections. 
Let us examine the situation in a very concrete way, not 
theoretically. What happens when an election is on ? Two 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


531 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 531 

things may happen. One is that there may be political meetings 
or political lectures. 

Shri Sidhva: Also political pamphlets. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that separately. I am 
taking each case by itself. First let us consider political 
meetings and political lectures. I think everybody will agree 
that these political meetings and political lectures could 
be divided into two classes. Political meetings and political 
lectures may be intended for the advancement of the political 
principles of a particular party without reference to any 
particular candidate. The Conservative Party may come and 
say, “Well, we believe in property. We believe in freedom of 
industry and things of that sort,” without any reference to 
any particular candidate. On the other hand, there may be 
political meetings and political lectures for the specific purpose 
of advancing the candidature of a particular individual. So far 
as judicial decisions are concerned, expenditure incurred on 
political meetings and political lectures which are not centred 
round the idea of promoting the candidature of any particular 
individual is not part of the election expenses. Therefore, 
a political party would be free to go to any constituency ; 
organise meetings or a series of lectures ; send lectures for 
the purpose of propagating its principles and faith, without 
mentioning names. On the other hand, as I said a meeting 
may be organised in which the intention is to win over the 
voters to the side of a particular candidate. Then obviously, 
it is part of the election expenses. I have now given you the 
line which should be drawn between expenses which are part 
of the election expenses and expenses which are not part of 
the election expenses. 

Seth Govind Das: Very confusing. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, it is very confusing. You want a 
straight line, but you cannot have it. 

Now take the other case — for instance the issue of books, 
pamphlets, posters and things of that sort. There again, you 
have got to make some sort of a distinction. Books, pamphlets, 
posters, etc. which are for the purpose of propagating the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


532 


532 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

principles of a party are not part of election expenses and 
need not be shown in the return by the candidate. On the 
other hand, if there is a book saying “20 points in favour of 
Mr. so and so — why he should be elected” or if a poster is 
put out giving the photograph of the candidate, giving below 
something in praise of him and recommending him to the 
electorate, obviously that is in furtherance and advancement 
of his election. Therefore, expenditure on that would be 
expenditure chargeable to the election and should be mentioned 
in the return of election expenses. 

I am giving the results of the election petitions tried by the 
various tribunals in Great Britain. This is the distinction that 
they have drawn. Anything which does not promote or advance 
the election prospects of any particular candidate is not part 
of the election expenses and therefore free to be incurred by 
anybody, whether a political party, a philanthropist, friend 
or anyone who wishes to take interest in this matter. These 
are, as I said, the guiding principles which the various 
election tribunals in England have laid down for the purpose 
of determining what expenditure is chargeable as election 
returns and if our election tribunals follow the same rules, 
there is more than enough room for political parties to spend 
their money in furtherance of their political faith. If they do 
something for the special benefit of any particular candidate, 
then, of course, that becomes part of his election expenditure 
and must be shown in his return of election expenses. Sir, I 
think I have exhausted all the points which arise from the 
report of the Select Committee and the Minutes of Dissent 
that have been recorded by hon. Members. 

Shri Satish Chandra (Uttar Pradesh): What about the 
duration of election ? What will determine the commencement 
and the conclusion of the election ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The courts have held that no doubt polling 
is one fact which is the other end of the election — the election 
has concluded. 

With regard to the commencement of the election, courts 
have said that it is a question to be determined by fact. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


533 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 533 

Ordinarily, if there is nothing to the contrary, then the date 
of nomination would be the date of the commencement of the 
election. But they say it is perfectly possible for a candidate 
long before the election takes place to publicly announce that 
he is going to be a candidate. He may not only announce, but 
may incur some expenditure in order to steal a march over 
some other candidate. If that is so, then the date on which 
he has announced himself publicly as a candidate shall be 
the date of commencement of election in his case. 

Dr. C. D. Pande (Uttar Pradesh): Then everybody will 
have his own date. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose so. Sir, that is all that I have 
to say. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: After the Minister’s statement 
today nobody will announce his candidature openly. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab): There are some people who have 
already announced it in Delhi — what about them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have nothing to add to what I have 
said and I commend the motion to the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to provide for the conduct of elections to 
the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications 
for membership of those Houses, the corrupt and legal practices 
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts arid disputes arising out of or in connection 
with such elections, as reported by the Select Committee, be 
taken into consideration.” 

I was the Chairman of the Select Committee on the Bill, 
and as such may I make a suggestion for the consideration of 
the House. There is no one single principle running through 
the whole Bill. There are various points dealt with in different 
clauses to which the Hon. Minister for Law referred. Therefore, 
to cut short the discussion on this Bill — if the House is 
agreeable — I will put the consideration motion to the House 
and then the real discussion will begin on the clauses. 

Some hon. Members: No, no. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


534 


534 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sidhva: I think it is a healthy suggestion that you 
have made. 

Shri Gautam: It will be very difficult for the House to 
decide whether there is some connection between one clause 
and the other. If you introduce this, then the tyranny of the 
majority will start not today, but tomorrow. Therefore, as 
protector of the privileges of this House, and especially of the 
minorities, I would request you not to introduce this novel 
procedure. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me not be misunderstood. I 
have nothing to say against the majority or the minority. I 
have only made an appeal to the House irrespective of the 
question of majority or minority. 

Shri Kamath: It is very gratifying to hear Mr. Mohanlal 
Gautam talk of the interests of the minority. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: At any rate, I hope Members will 
bear my observation in mind and try to conclude before the 
end of the day. 

Shri Gautam: I congratulate the Government for 
introducing the Bill, although after a long time. There is a 
general impression in the country and also outside created by 
the opponents of the Congress and other interested parties 
that the Congress does not want to hold the elections. I 
think the Government has got its difficulties; the Provincial 
Governments have got their problems. But I can assure you 
of one thing and that is that the Congress as a political party 
has never been in favour of delaying the elections. 

We do not want to delay the elections because we are 
afraid of them. We want them to be completed as soon as 
possible. There are certain difficulties which have prevented 
Government from holding the elections earlier. There is 
in some quarters a lurking suspicion that the elections might 
be delayed a little further. I, Sir, would request Government 
that the elections must be held according to the schedule in 
November-December as announced by the President in his 
address to this House and no further delay should be brooked. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


535 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 535 

*Shri Gautam: Then I come to the last point 

that I want to raise and that is about illegal practices. 
Dr. Ambedkar has laboured very much to explain one point to 
us which as the interruptions of the House showed was not 
clear to many of us and that was with regard to the return 
of election expenses 

Dr. Ambedkar: Not clear. 

Shri Gautam: The clause reads as follows: 

“The following shall be deemed to be illegal practices for 
the purposes of this Act: — 

(1) The incurring or authorisation by any person other than 
a candidate or his agent of expenses on account of holding 
any public meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or 
publication.” 

Mark the words, it is not publication only. If a man 
distributes the handbills of a candidate, it is circulation “or 
in any other way whatsoever” and this opens the door. I 
do not know to what extent and to what limit. The clause 
further reads: 

“or in any other way whatsoever, for the purpose of promoting 
or procuring the election of the candidate, unless he is authorised 
in writing so to do by the candidate.” 

If I were a candidate, I think it will be impossible for 
me 

An hon. Member: You are making an announcement. 


** Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar) (. English translation 
of the Hindi speech ) : I thank you, Sir 

Dr. Ambedkar: Speak in English. 

Babu Ramnarayan: No. Sir, we are now a free nation. 
Why should we remind ourselves of our slavery by speaking 
in English ? I will therefore express myself in Hindi. 

I very much appreciated one of the observations made by 
Hon. Dr. Ambedkar. It was that the object of the laws that 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 9th May 1951, p. 8375. 
**Ibid., p. 8413. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


536 


536 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are being made would be such as may ensure that no 
Government in the country may be able to corrupt the 
Members of Parliament. This is a welcome thing but 
some provision should also be there, and I think it is 
very essential to see that the Government should not 
be corrupt because if the Government are itself corrupt, 
they would corrupt the Members also. It will certainly 
happen. Therefore the aim should be that no opportunity 
be made available to corrupt them which, in other words, 
means that there should be no corrupt Government in the 
country at all. 


* Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma : These 
allegations are irrelevant in view of the fact that the other 
party is not here to explain the matter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It relates to Congress elections. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The matter is now placed in the hands 
of the Election Commissioner under the Constitution. It 
is not in the hands of Government. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Election Commission has 
been made supreme and the Select Committee proceedings 
show that they have given further powers in respect of 
the notification of the dates and other things both for the 
general elections as well as the bye-elections. The Election 
Commission has been made more and more important. 

Shri Kamath: He wants to support this salutary 
change. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But we are not enquiring into 
the past. Let him come to this Bill. 


** Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma : Then I come 

to the question of election expenses. As Prof. Shah said, most 
of the expenses will be incurred either in propaganda and 


*P.D. Vol. 11, Part II, 9th May 1951, p. 8415. 
**Ibid., pp. 8460-61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


537 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 537 

publicity or in carrying the voters to the booths. So far as 
propaganda and publicity are concerned they would be done by 
the party to which the candidate belongs. Situated as we are it 
is very difficult for an individual to stand on his own account: 
a candidate, I suppose must belong to one party or another 
and that party will in course of time evolve its own method 
of working. We might make mistakes in the beginning but 
just as other people have evolved precise methods of working 
we too are not likely to fall in devising proper methods of 
propaganda and publicity. But I do not agree with the Hon. 
Law Minister that expenses incurred on propaganda on a 
party basis would be a part of the election expenses incurred 
by the candidate... 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I did not say 

that — I said just the opposite. 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma: Then it is all right. 
The election expenses of a candidate must be confined to 
expenses incurred with regard to that candidate, which would 
be incurred mostly by himself, his agent or on his behalf by 
his friends. So, the question of the expenses coming to large 
sums, as Prof. Shah fears, will not arise because among other 
things, the polling booths will be easy of access to all the 
voters which will eliminate heavy expenses 


*Dr. C. D. Pande (Uttar Pradesh): Before I take up the 
provisions of this Bill. I should like to make a reference to 
the compliment that has been paid by Dr. Ambedkar to the 
Members of this House. He referred to them as chorus girls. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sorry. I think it is quite wrong to 
say that I referred to the House. My observations were of a 
general character; they had nothing to do with the House at all. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: It was not about the House. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: If he did not mean that 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He did not want Members of the 
House to be mere chorus girls when they are elected. 


*P.D., Vol. 11, Part II, 10th May 1951, pp. 8464-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


538 


538 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. C. D. Pande : It comes nearly to the same thing. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Not at all. It refers to future Members. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : Anyhow, when I heard that remark 

Dr. Deshmukh: He has not discovered any of such 
characters here so far. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: I felt with some Members of the House 
at least that that remark was not a happy one, and the remark 
if it was appropriate, let me extend the simile further. What 
he said was that the Members were chorus girls. If we are 
all chorus girls, then he is the matron of that establishment. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): You may be one ; 
we are not. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : He is the matron of that establishment. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: Is it not an insinuation Sir? 

Shri Rajagopalachari: If we talk again and again about 
chorus girls perhaps they may object too! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: As a matter of fact, some of the 
lady Members of this House expressed to me that I ought 
to have intervened and said that a reference ought not to 
be made to chorus girls. They are very touchy about these 
matters now-a-days. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I apologise if they have taken it in offence. 
This is what I said : if we did not do certain things, then what 
might follow will be like that. I had not the sightest idea to 
refer to the Members of this House. I was referring to the 
result that will follow if certain precautions are not taken. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar): You were right. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: If he did not mean it, I leave it at that. 

The main provisions of this Bill have been throughly 
discussed by previous speakers and I would touch only a few 
main points. To me, the most vital point is the use of the 
national flag in the election campaign in this country in which 
the Congress takes part wherein the use of the national flag 
could be avoided or should be avoided. The distinction between 
the national flag as accepted by Government and as used by 
the organisation is very slight and people are really confused. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


539 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 539 

It will be very difficult for the officers concerned to make a 
distinction whether a particular flag has got the Asoka Chakra 
or the Charkha on it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think the two are perfectly distinguishable. 


* Dr. C. D. Pande : Dr. Ambedkar said that he found 

no difficulty in filling the election expense returns because 
election expenses means expenses incurred for the election, 
that is, after the nomination. The question was put whether 
pre-nomination expenses were included there or not. He said 
it depends, because if you have announced your candidature 
from that date it will be incumbent upon you to fill it in the 
returns. I think it will be very very difficult and dangerous 
to give such wide ranges and to give new definitions for the 
election expenses and for the nomination expenses — to make 
that distinction between the two stages, that is, nomination 
expenses and election expenses. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I did not make any such distinction. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: You said that election expenses do not 
mean the expenses incurred before the nomination is valid, 
that is to say, the expenses up to the date of validation of 
the nomination should not be included. But so far as the 
terminology goes it includes all the expenses incurred on the 
election, whether before or after nomination. 

Dr. Ram Subhag Singh (Bihar): Not before nomination. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: Why not ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is the judicial interpretation 
according to the Hon. Minister. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : I myself have experience of filing election 
returns. There are expenses for instance of getting the voters 
list has to be included. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is right. But you do not want all 
the registers. All that is necessary is a certified entry. It will 
not cost you more than two pence. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 10th May 1951, pp. 8469-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


540 


540 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. C. D. Pande: What I want to make out is that 
the demarcation between nomination expenses and election 
expenses has not been observed so far, but it may be done 
in the future. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Evidently the hon. Member is 
suggesting that there should be an explanation. 

Dr. Ambedkar: All that he is suggesting is that there 
ought to be no such rule as presenting the election expense 
return and that a candidate should be able to spend any 
amount according to his capacity. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: I do not wish to restrict the amount, 
it is a matter of practical difficulty when election returns 
are filed — whether pre-nomination expenses will be included 
or not, whether election expenses will be included or not, 
whether election expenses mean only the expenses incurred 
after nomination and up to the end of polling. If that is so 
this is a new meaning given to election expenses. That is 
what I want to say.... 

Then I want to suggest one thing and that is about 
withdrawal. You have said therein that nobody should be 
asked lawfully to withdraw from standing. So many dummy 
candidates are set up by parties and they are asked to 
withdraw. Either you say that this jargon has not got any 
meaning, or if it has a meaning it must be made clear and 
there should be no loopholes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The language seems to be quite 
clear. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The Select Committee certainly did not 
find any difficulty in understanding it. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : Clause 122 (l)(a) says “a person to stand 
or not to stand as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate 
at an election.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The earlier portion ought to be read 
along with that, namely, “Bribery that is to say, any gift, offer 
or promise by a candidate with the object of inducing” etc. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


541 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 541 

Dr. C. D. Pande: Suppose I suggest to a candidate that 
he should not stand for the Assembly because he has a better 
chance to be taken up in the Upper House. Does it amount 
to corrupt practice ? It does as far as I read the provision. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It does not come under sub-clause (1). 
You are offering him better and surer prospects. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: Does it not come within this provision ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : You can go on doing your manipulations. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : They are necessary and we should not 
be ashamed of them because a party cannot be run without 
them. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): I think it would 
come within the mischief of the clause. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: I would very respectfully submit to 
Dr. Ambedkar that there are situations that have to be met 
in practical life and you cannot do away with the difficulties 
you find. We would have left this language as it is had we 
not the apprehension that in future all the elections will be 
questioned and in all the elections the basest material of 
human nature will come out to upset things and the courts 
and lawyers will conspire to do their best to undo what has 
been done by the franchise. To my mind, if a man secures 
the majority votes that is the highest tribunal for the final 
decision for his being elected. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Lawyers will be available to conspire 
against that also. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: On the other hand, is there no 
danger of a proper candidate who is liked by the constituency 
being forced, by illegal gratifications offered, to withdraw his 
candidature after the nomination is filed ? 

Dr. C. D. Pande: But it remains to be decided whether a 
promise to set up that person for the Upper. Chamber instead 
of the Assembly amounts to corrupt practice or not. 

Hon. Members: No. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: These words do not indicate that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


542 


542 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think these doubts may better 
be cleared when the clauses are discussed. 


*Shri Raj Bahadur: This brings me to my point and 

my minute of dissent that I have appended to the Report of 
the Select Committee. Yesterday, Dr. Ambedkar pointed out 
that a clause disqualifying the Rulers or all those persons 
who get some fixed allowances, salaries and pensions from 
the Consolidated Fund of India is not necessary at all. He 
invited our attention to the provisions of articles 102 and 103 
and said that in case there is any Member against whom an 
objection is taken on this score, the remedy lies in appealing 
to the President. I would request the Hon. Minister to listen 
to me because he wanted me to give him the justification for 
asking him to include a clause to that effect. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member invites the 
attention of the Hon. Minister, particularly about the Princes, 
how far they hold offices of profit etc. The hon. Member wants 
to impress his arguments on the Hon. Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sorry, another hon. Member was 
asking some questions about this. 

Shri J. R, Kapoor: Are all pensioners in India disqualified ? 

Shri Raj Bahadur: There are amendments to that effect 
also. 

Therefore, to sum up my objection is that these are a 
privileged class and they should be ineligible to contest the 
elections. My objection does not proceed on mere legal or 
constitutional grounds. It is much more fundamental. I am 
not at all for a moment afraid of their entering the election 
contest with any of us in Part B States. So far as we are 
concerned we should like the common man to rub shoulders 
with the highest. But the position is that when they come 
into the election contest we will have to say things 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If he holds an office of profit under 
article 102 he is disqualified for being chosen. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 10th May 1951, p. 8477. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


543 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 543 

Dr. Ambedkar: So the remedy is there. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : But Dr. Ambedkar is not at all clear. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That has to be decided only by the 
President. That point may be disputed also in a court of law. 
If the Prince is not disqualified under the Constitution how 
can he be disqualified by this law ? Is it not a Fundamental 
Right, even if he does not come under article 102 ? 


*Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member evidently means 
that under clause (e), “if he is so disqualified by or under 
any law made by Parliament”. It is open to Parliament to 
make a law. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He must show some justification. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: The justification is that he would 
overpower the common man. The justification is that in the 
U.K. the Lords were not allowed to contest seats in the House 
of Commons, because they would try to perpetuate vested 
interests and interfere with the rights of the common man. 
Similarly if you allow these people whose position is analogus 
to that of the Lords in U.K. they will interfere with the affairs 
of the common man and will side with reaction and prove 
impediments to the progress of the country. 


** Shri Alagesan : But I should like to utter a warning 

here about the conception of independence by the Election 
Commission. This independence is meant to hold the scales 
even between various political parties that compete for power. 
The Commission has to see that one political party does not 
get any undue advantage over another. The independence 
of the Election Commission does not mean that it should 
cause inconvenience to all parties impartially. Here I should 
like to refer to the work of delimitation of constituencies for 
Parliament as well as the State Legislatures. 


*P.D. Vol. 11, Part II, 10th May 1951, p. 8482. 
**Ibid„ p. 8485. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


544 


544 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : I should have thought that that was quite 
outside the scope of this Bill. That matter will be debated 
when the President’s Order will be placed before the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not think it is the hon. 
Member’s desire to go into the details of the delimitation 
question. The President’s Order is yet to issue and will be 
placed before the House, when it can be discussed. But if 
in a general manner the hon. Member wants to show that 
because large powers are given to the Election Commission 
greater care must be taken by that Commission, then he 
would be quite in order. 

Shri Alagesan: I think I can make a reference as to how 
the Election Commission has proceeded with its work so far. 

Dr. Deshmukh : The hon. Member wants to show how 
the Election Commission has worked so far. He is quite in 
order. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That may be debated when we take up 
the actual Order of the President delimiting constituencies. 


*Shri P. Y. Deshpande : .... .. The fact is that everybody 
has the right to vote and stand as a candidate. What power 
is left in us now, without changing the Constitution, to limit 
that right of any person to offer himself as a candidate for 
election ? He may be a Raja or an ex-Raja. If the people 
want him, let them elect him. Having given this right to 
every one, why should we now fight shy of that ? The Rajas 
of even black-marketeers, whatever men there are in society, 
if the people choose them, that would be their verdict; right 
or wrong, evil or good. If you want to limit that verdict, then 
change the Constitution first and then you can limit it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The Constitution 
empowers this House to prescribe qualifications. 

Shri P. Y. Deshpande: You have not done that, so far. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We are now doing that. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 10th May 1951, p. 8491. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


545 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 545 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Why should persons who have 
undergone imprisonment for more than two years be 
disqualified ? 

Shri P. Y. Deshpande: That is true. I would even allow 
a criminal to stand as a candidate. I appreciate the case 
of the criminal. But, if you take a fundamental stand that 
every adult has the right to vote and stand as a candidate 
for the elections, if that is your concept of democracy, then, 
if the criminal has the courage to stand, the people will 
defeat him if they do not want a criminal. If a Raja wants 
to stand and if the people do not want him, the people will 
defeat him. The right to defeat these persons is vested in 
the people. 


* Shri Ghule: I think, elections, big and small have 

been held in this country but it is difficult to make any 
distinction between the meetings held for the propagation 
of political doctrines and those for the personal canvassing 
of the candidate. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I might inform the hon. Member that 
there is absolutely nothing new in clause 124, which has 
been bodily copied from the existing rules, which he will 
find in the Corrupt Practices and Election Practices Order, 
First Schedule, Part III. It has been there since 1919. 

Shri Ghule : Quite right, I was just thinking that as 
this clause connotes a wide conception, it should have been 
included in the previous Act, and as you say, it was included. 
In spite of this law, Congressmen and other Members fought 
the previous elections while propagating the political doctrines 
to which they subscribed and at the same time canvassed 
votes in the constituencies from which they stood, but I have 
not come across any such instance in which the tribunals 
in India have declared any of the elections invalid on this 
ground. Therefore, as I was saying that I was not disturbed in 
the least to read the note of dissent of Shri Goenka but after 
having listened to the speech of Hon. Dr. Ambedkar I feel 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 11th May 1951, p. 8534. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


546 


546 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

perturbed. As Hon. Dr. Ambedkar has said that this law was 
in force previously as well and in spite of it Congressmen, 
Socialists and Communists etc. in our country propagated their 
political doctrines and at the same time canvassed votes for 
their respective candidates as well, then what emergency has 
arisen today ? It will be better if Hon. Dr. Ambedkar clarifies 
the position during his reply to the Debate. 


* Shri Venkataraman : There is another thing which 

I do not understand. In clause 3 of the Bill it is laid down that 
a candidate to the Council of States should be a resident of the 
State concerned, but a candidate to the House of the People 
need be resident only in any Parliamentary Constituency 
in the country. I fail to see any reason for this distinction 
between the two. If there is any I hope the Hon. Minister of 
Law will clarify the position and tell us the reason why this 
distinction has been laid down, Clause 3 says: 

“A person shall not be qualified to be chosen as a 

representative in the council of States unless he is an elector 

for a Parliamentary Constituency in that State...” 

Shri Syamanandan Sahaya (Bihar): Because it is the 
Council of the States. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, that is the reason. And the other is 
the House of the People. 

Shri Venkataraman: But a person belonging to a 
particular State may be resident in another place and he should 
not be disqualified from standing as a candidate because he 
is not resident in that State. Take, Sir, your own case. You 
have become a resident in Delhi and so you will not be able 
to stand for election in your own State, since you are not 
enrolled in that constituency. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If I am not in touch with my 
constituency, why should I stand as their candidate ? 

Shri Venkataraman: Sir, as I said, this point has to be 
considered. 


*P.D., Vol. 11, Part II, 11th May 1951, pp. 8574-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


547 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 547 

*Shri Venkataraman: A party cannot go and do 

propaganda saying, “Vote for Congress, vote for Liberal 
Party or vote for Labour Party”, without stating who is 
standing as a candidate of the party concerned. But the 
moment that information is given it becomes an illegal 
practice. Even if there is a precedent the time has come 
when it should be changed. 

Prof. Ranga (Madras): What is the position in 
England ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is the same as in the Bill — there 
is no departure. 

Shri Venkataraman: Again in sub-clause (5) of clause 
124 you have said that the issuing of any circular, placard 
or poster having a reference to the election which does 
not bear on its face the name and address of the printer 
and publisher thereof, will become an illegal practice. 
The easiest thing for an opponent to do is to issue a 
circular on behalf of his opponent, without the name of 
the printing press and this man would be disqualified. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Unless the candidate is a party 
to it he will not be disqualified. 


*Prof. Ranga: So far as the Chairmanship of 

the Tribunal is concerned I would like to suggest that to 
think of making a district judge the Chairman is really 
not reasonable. No one enjoying a lower status than that 
of a High Court Judge should ever be appointed as the 
Chairman of the Tribunal. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You cannot get so many High Court 
Judges. 

Prof. Ranga: You do not have so many Tribunals 
either. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You do not know how many petitions 
there will be. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 11th May 1951, p. 8578. 
**Ibid., p. 8611. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


548 


548 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. Ranga: Then, there should be a maximum limit 
for election expenses. I do not think it is advisable to leave 
it to be prescribed later on by rules. And in making these 
rules I hope that it is only the Union Government which 
will be entrusted with this responsibility and not the State 
Governments. Even in this connection I do suggest for the 
consideration of the Law Minister that this power might be 
left with the President to be exercised on the advice of his 
Election Commissioner. 


*R. K. Chaudhari : Take for instance, the provision 

regarding conveyance. If this rule had been applied severely 
before all the elections that had taken place hitherto in India 
would have been nullified. But today we turn our back and 
strive our utmost to fill gaps and impose severe penalties on 
wrong-dores at election time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhari. 

An hon. Member: This is zabardasti. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You want women to be disqualified ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: The first point that I wish to 
speak about is about disqualifications as laid down in clause 7. 
More than one speaker before me have spoken on it and I 
would only add a few arguments for the complete deletion of 
sub-clause ( d) of clause 7. 


**Mr. Deputy Speaker: I wish to give hon. Members ten 
minutes only, and I intend to call upon the Hon. Minister at 
five minutes to one. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The arrangement as I understood in the 
morning was that I should reply on Monday morning. 

Dr. Deshmukh : These are points which are accepted 

by most of the Members of this House and I hope on account 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 12th May 1951, p. 8632. 
**Ibid., pp. 8639-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


549 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 549 

of the substantial degree of unanimity they will all be accepted 
by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, as you were pleased to remark when 
the discussion of my motion started, that as there was hardly 
any principle running throughout this Bill and that each clause 
stood on its own merits, the proper thing would be to devote 
more attention to each clause as and when it comes before 
the House, and I do not think that I need take much time in 
discussing the points which have been raised in the course 
of this debate. I know that many Members, if they at all feel 
very serious about the comments that they have made, will 
undoubtedly take care either to express their point of view 
when the clause is put before the House and if they have any 
difficulty I certainly would deal with that matter in order to 
remove the difficulty, or they will take the course of moving 
proper amendments to get their point of view discussed in 
the House and by carrying conviction to the House. 

That being so, it is not necessary for me to deal at great 
length with the various points that have arisen. I therefore, 
propose to be somewhat brief and to touch upon only those 
points which may not arise again in the course of the debate. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is the Hon. Minister likely to take 
some time ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Then the House stands adjourned 
till 8-30 a.m. on Monday. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the clock 
on Monday, the 14th May 1951. 


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(No. 2) BILL — contd. 

* Mr. Speaker: The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the motion moved by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar on the 
9th May regarding the Representation of the People (No. 2) Bill. 


* P. D. Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8650-57. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


550 


550 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): On Saturday 
last when I entered upon the reply to the general debate on 
my motion, I said that although a great many points were 
raised by those who spoke on my motion there were some 
which were actually covered by amendments and that it was, 
therefore, unnecessary in the course of the reply to deal with 
those points because I felt that a better reply could be given 
when the motions are moved, and I said that I would therefore, 
confine myself to such points as were made in the course of 
the debate which were not covered by any amendment. On 
going over the amendments I found that there are only three 
points which are of some substance which were made at which 
I do not find having been made the subject of any specific 
amendment. It is therefore to these points that I propose to 
confine myself. 

The first such point was made by Babu Ramnarayan Singh 
and also by my friend, Prof. Ranga. Both of them complained 
that according to their experience and information the 
Ministers of the Governments in various Provinces and States 
were taking very active part in the election campaign and 
that they were exercising their authority and their influence 
in order to serve their own political interests or the interests 
of the party to which they belonged, and that this kind of 
a misuse of authority and influence was calculated to result 
in unfair practice against those who did not belong to their 
persuasion. The suggestion that they made was that there 
ought to be a provision in this law calling upon Ministers 
to resign their offices some time before the actual election 
commenced. It seems to me that this suggestion has not been 
examined properly either by my friend Babu Ramnarayan 
Singh, or by Prof. Ranga, because I have no doubt about 
it that if they do examine the feasibility of giving effect to 
such a proposal they will find that it would be more or less 
imposible to give effect to it. In this connection I would like 
to point out the provision contained in our Constitution. The 
Constitution makes the President the head of the State. At 
the same time the Constitution lays down that the President 
shall not act except on the advice of what is termed the 
council of Ministers. Therefore, if the President is to act, it is 
absolutely essential, according to the Constitution, that there 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


551 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 551 

must be in existence at all times a council of Ministers to 
advise him. We have not got any such provision as contained 
in section 93 of the Government of India Act, 1935 where 
under certain circumstances and in certain contingencies the 
head of the province, namely the Governor, was permitted to 
act on his own authority without the advice of the Council of 
Ministers. We have not got any such provision at all. In fact, 
the whole of the Government will have to be suspended for 
the period of three months if this suggestion is to be given 
effect to. Therefore, from the point of view of the Constitution 
itself the suggestion made is quite impracticable. 

Both the Members, Babu Ramnarayan Singh as well as 
Prof. Ranga, also referred to the conduct of the civil servants 
who, they thought, either under the positive directions of 
the Ministers under whom they are serving or because of 
their desire to flatter and help and to win the goodwill of 
the Ministers under whom they are serving, were engaged 
in political activities in which they ought not to engage. 
I am very sorry to hear of that. If the fact as alleged by 
either one of them is true, it undoubtedly indicates a great 
deal of demoralization in the civil servants. It is all the 
more regrettable because we have taken ample pains in the 
Constitution and the rules that have been framed thereunder, 
to give the civil servants the utmost security in the matter of 
the tenure of their posts in the promotion to which they are 
entitled to and all the other privileges as to salaries etc. All 
that was done with the definite intention of giving the civil 
servants the security which it is necessary for them to have 
in order to be independent in the matter of administration, 
if, notwithstanding the security that has been given to them, 
the civil servants are not standing up to the best of their 
traditions, all that I can say is this that there has been a 
great demoralization. But I do not know what remedy one 
could adopt. As the Bible says. “If the Salt has lost its Savour 
wherewithal shall it be salted ?” If the civil servants have lost 
their salt. I do not know how they could be salted. I think we 
must depend upon the general improvement in the mind of 
our people as a whole that there are certain moral principles 
to which we must adhere in the course of our public life. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


552 


552 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I hope such an elevation of the moral sentiments will some 
day come. But if my friend insists that rather than wait for 
the improvement in the morals of the people we should apply 
some legal remedy, there again I find that it is not quite so 
easy. The only remedy that one can think of is to make a law 
whereby we could make the conduct of a civil servant which 
is partial to any particular party or which is not strictly in 
conformity with the rules of administration, penal and subject 
it to some kind of rigorous sentence. It seems to me that one 
point in this connection has to be borne in mind and that 
is a civil servant could not be made liable to prosecution at 
the will and whim of anybody who feels himselfs wronged 
by the conduct of such a civil servant. It would be necessary 
to provide some kind of a previous sanction in order that a 
prosecution may be lodged against the civil servant. Whose 
previous sanction shall be required ? Obviously the previous 
sanction must be the sanction of the Government or of the 
President. 

Prof. Ranga (Madrass): Why not of the Election 
Commissioner ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Of the Election Commissioner ? Well, I 
have no idea and I do not want to say anything about the 
Election Commissioner because the officer, technically is 
supposed to be under me and I do not wish to say anything 
which would in any way derogate or depreciate from the 
authority of that particular officer. But let us admit that 
some kind of a sanction will be required before a prosecution 
is launched. Now I wonder whether the Government of the 
day, whom a particular administrator has helped, would be 
ready and willing to give its sanction. Therefore, if any such 
law was made, it would only be a paper law and would not 
have any effect in practice. It seems to me, therefore, that 
this is a matter which must be left to public morality and 
the sanctions of public morality. 

The second point to which I wish to refer is a point raised 
by Mr. Venkataraman. He suggested that in this Bill voting 
is regarded as a right. His contention was that it should be 
regarded as a duty, that a citizen of this country should not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


553 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 553 

merely have the right to vote, but he must have the duty 
to vote and that he ought to be visited with some kind of a 
publishment. The sentiment of course is very laudable and 
no doubt the principle has been accepted in some of the 
countries such as Australia, Belgium etc. But let us examine 
the position a little more carefully. If this obligation is to be 
a real obligation, where in a country like India, according to 
Mr. Venkataraman himself and according to many others 
who have experience of elections, there is a general apathy 
regarding voting, the punishment must be somewhat serious. 
It could not be five rupees ; it could not be ten rupees. It 
shall have to be something like one hundred rupees. Now, I 
wonder whether anybody in this House, however enthusiastic 
he may be with regard to the point that every citizen ought to 
exercise his duty, would be prepared to support a punishment 
so condign, as the one represented by a fine of rupees one 
hundred. I doubt very much if many Members will come 
forward to support it. If the punishment is not rigorous enough, 
then again the law will be of no value at all. 

Secondly, in a matter of this sort we will have to grant 
many exemptions. A voter may be on that day ill. If he is 
not ill, but finds subsequently that it is brought up before 
the court, it would not be very difficult to go to a medical 
man and obtain a certificate by paying eight annas, as most 
of us in criminal courts do in obtaining postponement of 
the cases. If he is not his wife may be ill, or she may have 
been delivered on the same day. All these things would arise 
and we may have to give a lot of exemption so that the law 
ultimately may remain to be a bare skeleton. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): What about the Australian 
Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: In Australia almost everybody votes. I 
think the people who bring themselves within the ambit of 
this law are very few. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): What is the panalty there ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Five pounds. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


554 


554 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

My own view is this. I cannot say that I have much of 
experience of voting. But such experience as I have has given 
me this idea that the lowest class of people in this country and 
the highest are politically most conscious. In my experience 
in my province, the Scheduled Castes, who stand last in the 
scale of social order, vote to the extent of 80 per cent. I have 
never found any election in which they have voted less than 
that. I also feel — and I think I am sure in my statement — 
that the Brahmins in my province vote about 80 per cent. 
The reason is obvious. 

One community is a depressed community. It is conscious 
of the fact that its moral and material elevation depends 
upon the place it occupies in the legislatures of this country. 
Consequently they never waste their time, their energy in 
anything else, however profitable they may be except to go 
to the poll and vote on the day when the poll is called. My 
experience with regard to the Brahmins is also the same and 
my analysis is also the same. They today stand almost on 
the precipice. Everybody wants to push them out from all the 
places that they have occupied. Consequently they also know 
that unless they have a certain amount of solidarity among 
themselves, that unless each one of them goes to the poll they 
shall not be able to exercise the influence which they must 
exercise in order to secure themselves from a harsh pushing 
out immediately and to secure at least a transition from one 
stage to another. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): Not all Brahmins. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The class which is apathetic and which 
does not care to vote is the middle class. Their existence 
does not seem to depend so much upon the Governmental 
activity. They have their granaries, if not full, half full and 
they know that without resort to any kind of Government help 
they can carry from season to season and from year to year. 
They therefore do not care about it. That is my experience. 
Therefore, what we need do at the present moment is to tell 
those Members who represent the middle class that there 
is a duty cast upon them, to see that this class becomes 
politically conscious and to call them to the election so that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


555 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 555 

they may participate in the same way as those at the top 
and those at the bottom do. I do not think that any legal 
remedy is necessary. 

Then I come to the last point raised by my hon. friend 
Mr. Sonavane. It is really no argument that he presented. He 
wanted to know certain facts. He wanted to know what was 
the system of voting that was going to be. He was under the 
impression that there was going to be some kind of marking 
on the ballot paper as used to be in former times. My friend 
will know that under the single-member constituency system, 
with one-man-one-vote, crossing is absolutely unnecessary. 
Voting now becomes very much like buying a post card, 
writing the address of the addressee on it and dropping it 
in the postal box on the road. All that the voter has got 
to do is to go to the ballot clerk and to obtain the ballot 
paper which is a blank thing. He will know beforehand that 
there is a particular kind of coloured ballot box assigned to 
a particular candidate with a symbol chosen by him, out of 
the many that are improvised by the Election Commissioner 
and if he is properly informed beforehand he can take the 
paper and drop it inside without any necessity for marking. 
That is going to be the system. 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay): What about the colour and 
symbol ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is a matter of convenience. 

Shri Sidhva: Separate box for each candidate ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, certainly. Otherwise how would it 
happen ? 

There are, Mr. Speaker, the points which I thought I ought 
to touch upon because they were not covered by any particular 
amendment. I do not think that there is any other point of 
a similar sort which requires any explanation at the outset. 

With these words, Sir, I commend my motion to the House. 

Shri Kamath: May I ask one question ? Though the Law 
Minister said that he is not in favour of imposing a penalty 
or fine upon electors who 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


556 


556 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: I am afraid he is asking for some 
explanation and going into the merits. 

Shri Kamath: I am asking for information. 

Mr. Speaker: It is coming of course, in the form of asking 
for information ; in substance it comes to an argument again. 

The question is: 

“That the Bill to provide for the conduct of elections to 
the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications 
for membership of those Houses, the corrupt and illegal practices 
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with such elections, as reported by the Select Committee, be 
taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: We will now take the Bill clause by clause. 
We shall take up clause 2. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I suggest. Sir, that clause 2 is the 
definition clause and might be taken up last? 

Mr. Speaker: All right. Then we shall begin with clause 
3 and the consideration of clause 2 will be postponed. I shall 
call the amendments one by one and hon. Members wishing 
to move them will please indicate that they want to move 
them. In case I miss any, my attention may be invited. 


*Mr. Speaker: All right. Let him move his first 
amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I beg to move. 

In sub-clause ( 1 ) of clause 3, for the words “A person shall 
not be qualified” substitute the words “No person shall be 
qualified”. 

This is only a verbal amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Is each one to be disposed of, Sir ? 

Mr. Speaker: Yes. 


*P,D., Vol. 14, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8657-58. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


557 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 557 

Dr. Ambedkar: As the author of the amendment himself 
has said it is a purely verbal amendment. But I would like 
to add one more point. That is that the form that has been 
adopted in the Bill is the form which has been adopted in the 
Constitution. We would like to follow the form used in the 
Constitution consistently in all the Bills which relate to this 
matter. I therefore cannmot accept the amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I do not wish to press it. 

Mr. Speaker: Then I am not putting it to the House. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I beg to move. 

In sub-clause ( 1 ) of clause 3 for the words “Parliamentary 

Constituency” substitute the words “House of the People 

Constituency”. 


*Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: There are a number 

of amendments and if this is accepted or rejected, it would 
dispose of a large number of similar amendments. As the 
expression appears frequently in this Bill, I think it is better 
not to encourage any confusion of thought. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot accept this amendment. In the 
first place there is no difference in substance. The effect 
remains the same. All that we are trying to do is to keep up 
the uniform phraseology which is used in this Act as well 
as . in the Representation of the People Act already passed. 
If my hon. friend were to see the definition in sub-clause 
if) of clause 2 he will see that ‘Parliamentary constituency’ 
is defined to mean “a constituency provided by section 6 or 
by order made thereunder for the purpose of election to the 
House of the People.” Therefore, there is really no difference 
at all. Secondly, I would like to draw his attention to the 
interpretation clause, clause 2, sub-clause 1(a) where it is 
stated: “each of the expressions defined in section 2 of the 
expressions defined in section 2 or sub-section (2) of section 27 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), 
but not defined in this Act, shall have the same meaning as 
in that Act.” Therefore, this is quite unnecessary. 


*P.D., Vol. 14, Part II, 11th May 1951, pp. 8659-60. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


558 


558 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

In sub-clause ( 1 ) of clause 3, for the words “parliamentary 
constituency” substitute the words “House of the People 
constituency”. 

The motion was negatived. 


*Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I believe that the Constitution 
has laid down that parliament may lay down the qualifications 
as well as the disqualifications. I suppose the Constitution 
likes that these articles should be taken advantage of. If Mr. 
Bhattacharya’s argument is going to be carried to its logical 
conclusion it will set at nought two, or rather four, articles of 
the Constitution relating to the Central and State Legislatures. 
I therefore submit that Mr. Bhattacharya has displayed more 
enthusiasm than wisdom in this respect. 

Dr. Ambedkar: When the Resolution was moved by Prof. 
K. T. Shah some time ago in this House I pointed out to 
him that his Resolution was very vague, that he had not set 
out any category of people whom he regarded as specially 
qualified for standing as candidates to Parliament or to the 
State Legislatures. We have now from Prof. K. T. Shah distinct 
categories of people whom he regards as suitable candidates for 
election to parliament. That is undoubtedly an improvement, 
because we have got now concrete proposals to consider on 
their own merits. One thing is quite clear and that is that 
these are disqualifications for candidature. It means that if 
the amendment is accepted only a certain category of people 
who fall in one of the seven categories mentioned here will 
alone be entitled to stand as a candidate. I hope my friend. 
Sardar Hukam Singh realizes that although it is not possible 
to say what will be the total number of people who will become 
eligible for standing as a candidate if this amendment was 
accepted, there can be no doubt about it that the number of 
people who will become eligible for standing as candidates 
as compared to the vast number of the voters would’ be very 
small. In fact the effect of this amendment would be to create 
a sort of monopoly for certain people, who by adventitious 


*P.D., Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8687-90. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


559 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 559 

circumstances happen to belong to the categories mentioned 
in this amendment. I have no doubt in my mind that such a 
monopoly would be a vicious thing to introduce into the political 
life of this country. I should also like to state that I am not 
at all satisfied that merely because a person has intelligence 
or merely because he has experience, he is the only person 
necessarily fitted to fill a seat in Parliament. As I stated in 
the course of the debate, I attach far greater importance to 
character than to intelligence or experience and the amendment 
certainly does not ensure that the people who would be elected 
under the provisions of the Constitution would be of better 
character. The motive, if I understand correctly, of the Mover 
of that amendment is to improve the efficiency of parliament 
generally. I take it that is so. Now, let us examine each of 
the categories from that point of view. Take the first namely, 
one year membership of a legislative chamber. I am unable 
to understand what one year’s experience of the membership 
of a legislature to a person who has no education who is not 
even literate, can mean in terms of efficiency ? Take the second 
category; elected member of any local self-governing body like 
the muncipality or the district local board. Here again the same 
question arises. I have not got much experience of a municipal 
corporation or a council. I happen not to have the experience 
but I have some knowledge of the district local boards and all 
that I remember is this, that the members of the district local 
board are generally most anxious to hold a meeting on the 
bazar day so that they can come there, take their travelling 
allowance, buy their weekly or monthly purchase in the bazar 
and go back. (. Interruption ) I do not know; there may be others 
and I know that case also, ( some hon. Members: Not now.) 
That is my experience. Now in the village panchayat I again 
fail to understand what efficiency can there be in a member 
who is a villager, who happens to be a member of a village 
panchayat. What are their functions ? What resources have 
they ? What technical knowledge of administration do they 
possess ? Take a public servant who has been in service for 
five years undoubtedly must have certain experience, certain 
knowledge of all administrative processes, ( interruption ). A 
public servant, I take it is of a high character. I do not know 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


560 


560 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

if it means a chowkidar also. With regard to this category. 
I am afraid the same observations must apply but if my hon. 
friend means by ‘public servant’ an I.C.S. officer or a higher 
Civil servant, I think there is a possibility of this danger 
arising. Most public servants are in possession of certain 
official secrets which they come to know during the course of 
their administration. I am not at all prepared to disbelieve 
the possibility that it may be open for a civil servant after he 
retires and becomes a member of the legislature to use the 
secret knowledge which he may possess. Take the next case; 
a teacher of any school, college or university for one year. 
Take a primary school in the village. What is his knowledge ? 
What is his information ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh: Are these persons debarred from 
standing ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is my main argument. I am coming 
to that. Therefore, I cannot see much in that. Take the next 
category, volunteer in a recognised association for social 
service. Will my hon. friend Sardar Hukam Singh permit 
for instance, the Mahabir Dal to be a body the membership 
of which would qualify one to stand ? May I mention the 
R.S.S. and the Akali Dal ? Some of them are very dangerous 
associations. It may be that one Government may recognize 
them and another Government may not recognize them, all 
these posibilities are there. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): Can they be excluded ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. What I was trying 
to submit to the House was that none of the categories which 
have been set out in this amendment are of such a character 
as to give anybody the impression that the membership of the 
particular body to which they belong is such as to make them 
more efficient members of parliament. I am sorry I give a very 
positive answer to that question. Now the other thing that 
I wish to say is this : Is there anything in the Constitution 
or in the present Bill which can prevent an elector from 
electing any one of the people mentioned here ? Suppose, for 
instance, there are two candidates, one who is just a voter 
and is not disqualified under our disqualifications and as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


561 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 561 

against him there is a candidate who has been a member of 
a legislative chamber for one year. Is there anything under 
which we are required to suppose that the electorate will not 
give preference to the second man and no the first ? Take each 
one of these ; they are free to stand aid if the electorate thinks 
that there is something in them more valuable from the point 
of view of giving greater efficiency to Parliament, I do not 
quite understand why the electors will not give preference to 
these people as against a mere voter who is a citizen and no 
more. It seems to me, therefore that on these grounds, this 
amendment is unnecessary and I oppose it. 

Sardar Sochet Singh (P.E.P.S.U): You have not said 
anything about the category of those who are able to read 
and write Hindi. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I replied to it last time. I should have 
thought that that would certainly create complications. This 
matter was considered at great length when we were framing 
the Constitution. Why did we make a provision ‘after 15 years’ 
and not make Hindi to come into operation as a national 
language immediately ? Because, we realised that there were 
various parts of the country where Hindi was not the language 
of the people and therefore some amount of time must be 
given to the people to study. After having recognised that 
principle, suddenly now to derogate from it seems to me to 
be going contrary to the sprit of the Constitution. 

The motion of Prof. K. K. Bhattacharya was negatived. 


*Clause 4 . — {House of the People membership). 

Shri B. K. Das (West Bengal): I beg to move. 

In clause 4, after the words “Jammu and Kashmir” insert 
the words “or to the Andaman and Nicobar islands”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In clause 4, after the words “Jammu and Kashmir” insert 
the words “or to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept the amendment. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8699-700. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


562 


562 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar Hukam Singh: I would request the Hon. Law 
12 Noon Minister to consider whether it would not be 
better to have this amendment in the definition 
of “election”. Sub-clause (d) of clause 2 says : 

“ ‘election’ means an election to fill a seat or seats in either 

House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the 

Legislature of a State other than the State of Jammu and 

Kashmir ” 

So far as Jammu and Kashmir are concerned they 
are there and the Islands of Andaman and Nicobar may 
also be put in there, so that there will be no necessity of 
repeating it anywhere else. 

*Shri Hussain Imam : The difficulty does not arise 
because the man has to be an elector in any State not 
necessarily in the State in which he is standing. Therefore 
the choice of the President is open and he can nominate 
a person who is an elector in any constituency in India. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That would exclude the residents 
of the Andamans and Nicobars. They cannot be registered 
as electors in any other place because of the residential 
qualification. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): Does “chosen” include nomination also? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, both election and 
nomination. 

Shri Sidhva: Cannot we amend the language ? The 
Government will certainly know who is who in the 
Andamans and they would suggest the name for nomination. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: A person should be otherwise 
qualified to be an elector and should have residential 
qualification. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The simplest method is to accept the 
amendment. As you have pointed out the obstacle arises from 
sub-clause ( d ). We have no parliamentary constituency in the 
Andamans and therefore this would create difficulty in the 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8701-02. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


563 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 563 

matter of giving representation to the people of the Andamans 
and Nicobars. Therefore this amendment in my judgement is 
a necessary one. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: As to the future it can take care 
of itself. Any amendment can be moved. It is not as if this 
Act will stand as it is without any amendment before the 
next elections. We are all the time gaining experience. The 
question is: 

In clause 4, after the words “Jammu and Kashmir” insert 
the words “or to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands”. 

The motion was adopted. 


Clause 5 — ( Legislative Assembly membership) . 

*Dr. Deshmukh: May I be permitted to move Prof. Shibban 
Lai’s amendment. Sir ? 

Shri Santhanam : These amendments of Prof. Saksena 
are consequential amendments. They were not allowed earlier 
on clauses 3 and 4. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Does not matter. We can give this facility 
to State Legislature elections although, it is barred so far as 
the Parliament is concerned. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No. no. The electoral roll is the same. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes. 

Shri Sonavane : Sir, I also desire to move two amendments 
to clause 5 notice of which I have given this morning. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But I have not got a copy of those 
amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Nor have I got a copy. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Unless the amendment is given 
to the Hon. Minister and Government is prepared to accept 
it, I shall not allow it now. 


*P. D., Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8763-64. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


564 


564 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: But if we put Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes together in part (a) there 
would be duplication in part (b). But part (b) deals only 
with Scheduled Tribes and therefore for the sake of greater 
clarity it is necessary to separate the two parts of part (a), 
namely the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes. 
With regard to part (b) it should remain as it is. In fact, 
Scheduled Tribes are of two classes ; Scheduled Tribes in 
ordinary cases and Scheduled Tribes who have something do 
with the cantonment or the municipality of Shillong. So, in 
order to keep the Scheduled Tribes of the cantonment area 
and the Scheduled Tribes in other areas absolutely distinct, 
I suggest that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
must be treated separately. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There does not appear to be any 
ambiguity. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no ambiguity. Because the 
Constitution contains two separate articles, it does not follow 
that we must everywhere give two separate clauses. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it necessary to pursue this 
matter ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: In view of the unfavourable 
reception it has received at the hands of the Hon. Minister. 
I do not think any useful purpose would be served by my 
pursuing it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 5 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted 

Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 6 . — (. Legislative Council Membership) as amended, 
was added to the Bill 

** Clause 7. — (. Disqualifications for membership) 


*P.D., Vol. 11, Part II, 14th May 1951, pp. 8705-06. 
** Ibid., pp. 8706-12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


565 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 565 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I would request you to hold over 
clause 7. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: We should have a clear 
knowledge beforehand as to what clauses would be taken 
up. In that case we can concentrate our attention on them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall ask the Hon. Minister to 
state in the beginning of each day the particular clauses he 
proposes to hold over... 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not suppose I would be forced to take 
any clause out of order, except clauses 7 and probably 9. The 
rest of the clauses I am quite prepared to take in the order 
in which they are. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala (Bihar): When will these be taken up ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I propose to circulate the amendment this 
evening. If hon. Members would be prepared to take it up 
tomorrow I shall have no objection. But if they desire to have 
time, I shall take it up later. At any rate, I do not want to 
keep it back for a long time. I am prepared to give one day 
for Members to consider my amendment to clause 7. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think it may be taken up 
conveniently day after tomorrow for the reason that hon. 
members may have sufficient time to study it. If the 
amendments are tabled sufficiently in time, the office will 
circulate them and hon. Members may come prepared with 
them. 

Clause 8 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 9. — (. Disqualifications for membership of electoral 
colleges) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to hold it over. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Clause 9 is also held over. 

Clause 10. — ( Election to the Council of States ) 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I beg to move: 

In the heading over clause 10, for the word and Roman letter 

“Chapter I” substitute the word and Roman letter “Chapter V”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


566 


566 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The point is that in this Bill, unlike many other Acts, 
separate Chapter No. has been given in each part. That 
would lead to inconvenience in the matter of reference, e.g., 
whenever we refer to a Chapter, we shall have to say, Chapter 
so and so of Part so and so. In all other Acts, except of 
course in the Constitution, namely, the Civil Procedure Code, 
the Criminal Procedure Code, the Transfer of Property Act 
and in all other Acts, although there are parts, the Chapter 
Nos. are not separate with regard to each Part. The result 
is tremendous convenience. When we refer to a Chapter, we 
need not refer to the Part. That will lead to the avoidance 
of a lot of mental botheration. I suggest it as a matter of 
convenience only. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not agree with that argument. If 
dividing the Bill into Parts and Chapters we had also given 
separate numbers to clauses, that would have created a 
certain amount of difficulty. But in view of the fact that 
the number of the clauses is continuous I do not think any 
difficulty such as the one anticipated by my friend can be 
really apprehended. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : But this is the uniform practice 
in all the Acts. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Never mind uniformity. It depends upon 
how big the matter is. If the matter is so big that it requires 
to be divided and sub-divided under appropriate heads I do 
not see what other method one can follow than giving Parts 
for broader heads and Chapters for smaller heads which come 
under those Parts and many other smaller heads which come 
under those Chapters. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: The Hon. Minister says that 
there should be Parts, Chapters and sub-divisions and further 
sub-divisions. I do not object to that at all. All that I want 
is that the Chapter numbers from beginning to end should 
bear a continuous numbering and that is in accordance with 
the practice of all Acts. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That means that the parts must be 
omitted, otherwise it would have no meaning. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


567 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 567 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If the Chapters have a continuing 
number and if the Parts also are there it will lead to 
confusion. We will not know to which particular part it 
relates. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: But that is the practice in 
all Acts. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But when the Constitution has set 
up a new practice, after the Constitution, that is our Bible. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Not in all respects. We are 
going to change it very soon! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Very good. Then this will also be 
changed ! Is it necessary for the hon. Member to press this ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: No. Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The next amendment is No. 222 
which says: 

In sub-clause ( 1 ) of clause 10 for the words “the Council 

of States”, in line two substitute the words “the first Council 

of States”. 

The hon. Member will kindly explain what this amendment 
is. Or, is he not pressing it ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not know where I am. 
The House is proceeding so fast that even an acrobat will 
not be able to follow. I will have to look into the matter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The brake is always there at 
that end ! 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Could we not adjourn till 
tomorrow ? We have made very quick progress. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This must be easy. The hon. 
Member will take his own time. There is no hurry. In 222 
he wants for the words “the Council of States” the words 
“the first Council of States”. Is it because he thinks there 
is no provision here for rotation ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Yes, Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Rotation is there in sub-clause (2). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


568 


568 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I have now got my bearings ! 
The introduction of the word “first” was suggested to me 
from a sample which is to be found in clause 11 in the 
second line — “For the purpose of the first constitution”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is in respect of electoral 
colleges for Part C States. That relates only to a portion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They have no connection at all. 

Shri Sidhva: He is puzzled. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Not that they are connected, 
but as a sample of very good draftsmanship. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member must be 
satisfied with some bad drafting! 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: We are already accustomed 
to it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But there does not seem to be 
any need for this change. So amendment No. 222 is not 
moved. 

I take it that amendment No. 224 is going to be moved. 
What about 225 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no objection. It can be moved. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What about No. 228 ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I shall move that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No. 229 is going to be carried 
out. Then we come to No. 231. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : It is a substantive 
amendment and I will move it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment No. 224. The hon. 
Member is absent. Shall I allow this to stand over ? What 
is the attitude of the Hon. Minister to this amendment 
which the hon. Member was discussing with him ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think it is necessary to have 
that amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


569 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 569 

Amendment made: 

In part (a) of sub-clause ( 1 ) of clause 10, for the words “orders 

thereunder” substitute the words “orders made thereunder”. 

— [Shri Naziruddin Ahmad] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Then we come to amendment No. 
231 standing in the name of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: That amendment is out of order, it 
cannot be moved as it is. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me see. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: May I refer you to Article 80 of the 
Constitution, sub-clause 4, according to which only the elected 
members of any Assembly can elect members to the Council 
of States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is provision for certain nominations 
for Anglo-Indians. 

Shri J R. Kapoor: There may be nominated members 
but they have no right to participate in the election. There 
is article 30(4) according to which only the elected Members 
of any Legislative Assembly can participate in the election of 
the Members to the Council of States. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am afraid this is out of order. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My amendment is out of 
order ; not I. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All right, the amendment is out 
of order, not allowed to be moved 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: But, we have come to identify the 
hon. Member with his amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 10, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 10, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 11. — ( Notification for constitution of electoral 
colleges ). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


570 


570 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment No. 238. I think this 
will be taken notice of by the draftsmen. Amendment No. 
239. I think it is a printer’s mistake. It will be corrected by 
the draftsmen. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: It has already been corrected by the 
corrigenda. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is nothing in the correction 
slip. Why should this be out to the House ? It is a Printer’s 
mistake. I will ask the office to note it and the Hon. Minister 
may also note it down so that it may be useful for reference 
later. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no corrigenda on the subject. It 
may therefore be better to accept the amendment. 

Shri Santhanam: It is only a printer’s mistake. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Instead of ‘this’, it has been printed 
as ‘his’ That was not the intention of the framers of the Bill. 
It is only a printer’s mistake. Tomorrow, a spelling mistake 
may occur in the Gazette. I shall in the end formally say 
that all such formal corrections may be carried out. I am not 
satisfied that I should bring it to the notice of the House. 
Once again, a spelling mistake may be committed in the final 
draft. However, to avoid any difficulty, I will put it to the 
House. The question is: 

In clause 11, for the words “in his behalf’ substitute the 

words “in this behalf’. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment No. 240. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: That is necessary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Singular includes plural. This amendment 
is not necessary. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, singular includes plural. The 
question is: 

“That clause 11, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 11, as amended, was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


571 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 571 

Clause 12 . — ( Elections to the House of the People). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No amendment is being moved 
to clause 12. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I suggest amendment No. 
246 may be considered. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But the Member who has proposed 
it does not want to move it now. What is the particular 
importance of it ? It says : 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 12, omit the words “in order that 

a new House of the People may be constituted”. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : We should supply the 
machinery only, we need not give the purpose behind it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: These words do not do any harm. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not give permission to the 
hon. Member to move this amendment. It is not necessary. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Sir. I want to say some thing ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member is always late. 
What does he want to say now ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Sir, I have given notice of an amendment 
to clause 15, but I find that at this stage it is relevant. 
There should be some provision, somewhere to say that the 
first general elections both for Parliament and for the State 
Legislatures should be held simultaneously, on one and the 
same day. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is going to be the case, to 
save expenditure. Subsequently there may be bye elections 
at different times, because some Houses may be dissolved 
before others and so on. I do not think such an amendment 
is necessary. 

The question is: 

“That clause 12 stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 12 was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


572 


572 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Clause 13 was added to the Bill. 


* Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us hear the Hon. Minister. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh (Punjab): Sir, so far nobody has spoken 
in support of the amendment and everybody, who has spoken 
so far, except Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, has opposed the 
amendment. I would request you to give a chance to somebody 
who is likely to support the amendment. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Are you supporting 
the amendment? 

Ch. Ranbir Singh: Yes ; I stand to support the amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister would like to 
intervene. Let us hear the Hon. Minister. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Yes, I should 
like to make a few observations. 

The object underlying this amendment is, no doubt, very 
laudable. I do not think that looking at the mere motive and 
the objective, there could be much objection to the amendment. 
But, added to the motive, there are certain other provisions 
contained in this amendment which are intended to give the 
motive and the object its proper effect. It is from that point 
of view that I find it difficult to accept the amendment. 

The amendment empowers the President to carry out the 
objects mentioned in this new amendment. No doubt, the Mover 
of the amendment thinks that the amendment has no political 
complexion. I should have thought that the introduction of 
the President in this business is enough to give a political 
colour to it for the simple reason that although the President, 
as an individual, as the Head of the State, may be above all 
parties and party considerations, there is no doubt at all that 
in giving effect to this particular amendment, the President 
as usual will have to act upon the advice of the Ministry. 
No one can have any doubt that the Ministry is a political 
institution of the day. It is therefore very difficult 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8755-57. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


573 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 573 

Shri Kamath: This is an all-parties Ministry. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a different thing. It is therefore 
very difficult to be sure in the interests of fair elections that 
nothing will be introduced in the text of the Message which 
may not be objected to by some political party. I submit, 
therefore, that it would be wrong to bring in the President in 
the political arena charged with emotion and bitter feelings 
as it is likely to be in the course of the elections. 

Another thing I find is that the amendment speaks of the 
purposes being carried out by a prescribed authority. There 
is no mention in this amendment as to what is to be this 
prescribed authority, or who is to prescribe this particular 
authority. Again, if the prescribed authority is to be the State 
Governments in the various parts of India or the administrative 
agents who are working under the State Governments, there 
again, we are introducing a very dangerous political instrument 
in a proposition which, apart from all other things, is, no 
doubt, as I said, very laudable. Again, the requirement that 
it shall be read in every village, and every mohalla seems to 
me to demand too much from the administrative machinmery. 
What is to happen if the Message is not read in some villages 
and in some mohallas ? Is the election to be held over until 
that requirement is satisfied? There is no mention about it 
in the whole of this amendment. Therefore, from political 
and administrative points of view, I think the amendment is 
a very impracticable one. 

However, there is I think, another aspect of the matter 
which might be taken into consideration in determining 
one’s view as to whether this amendment is to be accepted 
or not accepted. Supposing there was no such amendment 
as suggested by my friend, is it not possible to suppose that 
the purpose of this amendment will be given effect to by the 
various political parties themselves ? I am sure about it that 
every party will cherish the underlying object and therefore, 
I cannot see what can prevent all the political parties and 
each one of them, trying to issue some kind of a message as 
is mentioned in the opening part of this amendment, that 
there is our Constitution which has got a Preamble and we 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


574 


574 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are supposed to give effect to the Preamble and to the 
Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles. So let each 
one of us try our level best to select the proper candidates 
in order to give effect to the Fundamental Rights and the 
Directive Principles and the Preamble to the Constitution. I 
therefore submit that even if such an amendment were not 
to be carried — and I think it cannot be carried by reason of 
the administrative difficulties I have referred to — the purpose 
of it would undoubtedly be given effect to by the various 
political parties. I therefore suggest that rather than accept 
this amendment I would leave the matter to the various 
political parties to give effect to it in the best way they think 
it can be done. 

Shri Kamath : Is the Hon. Minister not in favour of every 
political party making free use of the radio ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think that is a matter which really 
requires to be considered. I have paid some attention to this 
question of the radio, both in England and in Australia. 
When the question is raised at the appropriate stage. I shall 
be glad to make such observations as I can profitably make 
for the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it necessary to pursue this matter 
after what the Hon. Minister has just now stated ? 

Clause 14 to 16 were added to the Bill 

Clause 17. — (. Definition ) 

*Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): The point is we 
have two Councils. In order to prevent confusion we should 
call the State Council as Legislative Council as we call the 
Upper House as Council of States. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept it. All these terms are 
defined in the Representation of the People Act. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Then I do not press the 
amendment. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8764-65. 


575 

575 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 17 stand part of the Bill.” 

Clause 17 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 18 . — (. Returning Officer for each Constituency ) 
Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): I beg to move. 

In clause 18, for “who shall be such officer of Government 
as” substitute “whom”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK SJ+YS 8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


* Dr. Ambedkar: It is difficult to accept this amendment. 
I agree with my friend Sardar Hukam Singh that we might 
to some extent depend upon non-official agency. Certainly our 
election would be much quicker if we can expand the staff under 
the Election Commissioner by drawing upon people who are 
not in the administrative service of the Government. But at 
the same time we have to recognise that all the Governments 
and bodies whom the Government of India had consulted in 
this matter have insisted that the machinery should be entirely 
official. That being so I am afraid it is not possible to accept 
the amendment. 


**Shri J. R. Kapoor: I beg to move: 

In the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 20, at the end, add : 

“In which case the seniormost Government servant among the 
Assistant Returning Officers shall perform the said functions.” 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: Who is to decide as to who is the 
seniormost ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The answer is very simple. There is 
a civil list which gives the seniority of officers. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But if they are from different 
Departments ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : If the point is that my suggestion does 
not solve difficulty, we can find out some method by which 


*P. D. Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, p. 8765. 
**Ibid., pp. 8774-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


576 


576 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it could be specifically laid down as to which one of the 
Assistant Returning Officers should perform the functions. 
If there is any difficulty in accepting my amendment in the 
present form, this might be kept in mind in forming rules. 
My object is that nothing should be left to uncertainty. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept this amendment. It should 
be remembered that we are dealing with three functions; 
acceptance of nomination paper, scrutiny of nomination 
papers and the counting of votes in certain contingencies. 
It does not seem to me that any of these functions are of 
such a special character as to require an officer of such a 
type that in him only we can put confidence and in no other. 
Unless my friend is able to satisfy me that these functions 
are such that they require some kind of a special character 
or confidence in the officer, I do not see why one assistant 
Returning Officer should not perform these functions in the 
same manner as any other. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: That is the presumption in the 
proviso. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The idea of my hon. friend is to grade 
officers ; the seniormost, the next seniormost, the juniormost, 
etc. I do not understand why this should be done unless 
the functions are of such a character that we must be sure 
that the man in whom we can lodge the highest confidence 
is the man who should perform it. And it might create 
administrative difficulties as well. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think there is one point in the 
amendment. The Election Commission may appoint one or 
more Assistant Returning Officers to assist the Returning 
Officer. Let us assume that two persons are appointed and 
suddenly the Returning Officer stays away without leaving 
any instructions. There are two persons on the spot. Which 
of them is to Act ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Any one of them may 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Suppose each one thinks it is the 
duty of the other man. What happens ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


577 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 577 

Dr. Ambedkar: Suppose there are two Benches. 
Whichever Bench is there, the Registrar of the High Court 
puts the case before the Bench and the Bench hears it. One 
may go to one and another to the other. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: One may pass 
one order and another may pass another order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: How can that be ? 


*Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan): That word ‘unvoidably’ is 
very important. In my humble opinion, the amendment that 
has been moved by Mr. Kapoor is not worthy of acceptance, 
in so far as it is specifically provided that no assistant 
Returning Officer shall, subject to the control of the Returning 
Officer, be competent to perform all or any of the functions. 
The Returning Officer has got to supervise and control in 
the discharge of that function. He can nominate one of his 
Assistants to perform a particular job. It is perfectly within 
his competence as a Returning Officer and in the exercise 
of his control to select one out of so many of his assistants 
to do a particular job. Where there is a difficulty, he can 
appoint one of them. 

Shri P. Basi Reddi: How could he authorise ? Suppose 
by accident he is prevented on the way, what will happen ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am afraid that a large number of 
bogeys are being raised in order to press a point to which 
some people seem to be quite attached. The position is this 
and I think lawyer Members would understand what I am 
saying. 

Shri Sidhva: Quite the contrary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We know in law the distinction between 
what is called ‘court’ and what is called persona designata. 
In certain cases although a person may be a member of 
the court or forming a court for certain other purposes, he 
is specifically designated, so that he himself must perform 
the functions and he is not a ‘court’. The same principle 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8780-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


578 


578 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

underlines this. The Returning Officer — whoever is appointed 
beccomes a persona designata — must perform personally 
those functions. Then the proviso says that although he is 
a persona designata and must perform some of the functions 
mentioned in the proviso, in certain circumstances, namely, 
those mentioned in the last sentence of the proviso, the other 
persons who are working under him, that is, the Assistant 
Returning Officers shall become persona designata and step 
into his shoes. That is what it means. 

Pandit Manishwar Datt Upadhyay : Which of them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Any of them may step into his shoes. 
I do not understand it but my hon. friend Mr. Santhanam 
said that at the most there might be one. Well we will take 
the other contingency that there are two. Supposing if two 
are sitting, both of them are persona designata. Any one 
can go to A or to B and both of them can discharge the 
functions of a Returning Officer. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The difficulty will arise 
about scrutiny of the nomination papers by each Assistant 
Returning Officer acting as Returning Officer. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sorry and I want to draw 
attention to the fact that rather inadvertently I accepted 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad’s amendment for substituting the 
word ‘functions’ for the word ‘function’ I think that is not 
correct. The original word is singular, that is, ‘function’ is 
the correct one and that is where the difficulty has arisen 
because he may be absent on the day of nomination. The 
Returning Officer may be present on the day of scrutiny 
and so the scrutiny will be done by him. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This can be corrected only in the 
third reading by amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I want to draw attention to the fact 
that because an Assistant Returning Officer accepts the 
nomination papers he must also perform the function of 
scrutiny and he must also perform the function of counting. 
That is not so. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


579 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 579 

Shri Hanumanthaiya: The difficulty is about the words 
“unavoidably prevented” and that may be a subject for 
interpretation in a court of law. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What is the other word that you will 
supply? 

Shri Hanumanthaiya: I will suggest a solution. Instead 
of the words ‘unavoidably prevented’ let the word ‘absent’ be 
used. Then there will be no controversy. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not want him to be absent. That 
is my point. Once he is appointed to perform the duty and 
especially when he is regarded as a persona designata it should 
be obligatory upon him that notwithstanding other functions, 
he must attend to this function first. 

Shri Hanumanthaiya: Then it can easily be answered in 
a court of law. ‘Unavoidably prevented’ is a matter of proof. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It may be a matter of proof. 

Shri P. Basi Reddi: Why not give previous authorisation 
to one of the Returning Officers ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He has answered that point. This 
argument is getting endless. If he was not really unavoidably 
prevented and if it is only a question between the Returning 
Officer and the Assistant Returning Officer, it does not matter. 
The point is that the election may be called in question. Is 
there any posibility to rectify this? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think that is a matter between the 
Election Commissioner and the Returning Officer so far as I 
can interpret it. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): In sub-clause 
(2) the words are: “Every Assistant Returning Officer shall, 
subject to the control of the Returning Officer, be competent 
to perform all the functions etc.” So this is the only limitation. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The last portion is not the enacting 
portion; the earlier portion is the enacting portion. The Election 
Commission may take the Returning Officer to task if it came 
to know that he absented himself without any unavoidable 


reason. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


580 


580 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Hanumanthaiya: As the Deputy Speaker pointed 
out, it may be between the Returning Officer and the Assistant 
Returning Officer but what about the candidates in the 
election ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is quite enough for the candidate to 
prove that the Returning Officer was absent. Whether he was 
absent for any unavoidable reason or not is a matter to be 
regulated by the Election Commissioner. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: It has to be proved 
whether he was unvoidably prevented or not. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: May I put a question to Mr. 
Hanumanthaiya ? Who will decide whether the absence was 
unavoidable or not; Election commissioner or the officer 
concerned ? The Election Commissioner knows whether he 
was unavoidably absent or not. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The Tribunal shall have 
to decide if he was unavoidably prevented. 

Shri Shiv Charan lal (Uttar Pradesh) : I think it will 
be all right if only one line is added, that if there are more 
than one Assistant Returning Officer, the Returning Officer 
shall nominate one of them as the seniormost one. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That has already been said. That 
is Mr. Kapoor’s amendment. Now, I shall put Mr. Kapoor’s 
amendment to the House. 

Shri Hanumanthaiya: I want to make a motion... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That we will come to later. 

Shri Hanumanthaiya : With respect to this clause I make 
a definite motion that this clause may be taken up later for 
consideration. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

“That further consideration of clause 20 be postponed.” 

The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


581 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 581 

*Shri Barman : Let me make the position clear, from 
my personal experience. In my constituency, two districts 
are tagged together and the Divisional Commissioner is the 
Returning Officer. We have all along been submitting our 
nomination papers to the personal assistant. This has gone 
so for a very long time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If I Understand the hon. Member correctly, 
what the amendment means is this. In the Proviso as it 
stands, three functions can be performed by the Returning 
Officer, or the Assistant Returning Officer in the absence of 
the Returning Officer. They are : acceptance of nomination 
paper, scrutiny of nominations and the counting of votes. What 
my hon. friend wants by his amendment is that only two 
functions may be performed, that is scrutiny of nominations 
and counting of votes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The wording is, shall not perform 
these two unless the other is unavoidably absent. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no such thing in amendment 
No. 284. 

Shri Barman : I want elimination of that clause only. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is the sub-clause relating to 
acceptance of nomination paper and the rest will remain ? 

Shri Santhanam : Both the Returning Officer and the 
other Assistant Returning Officer will be persona designata. 
That will be the result. 

Shri Barman : So far as scrutiny and counting of votes 
are concerned, they are important and they should remain 
with the Returning Officer. In case he is unavoidably absent, 
some other Assistant Returning Officer may do them. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is a vast difference between the 
two sides. 

Shri Barman : But, so far as acceptance of nomination 
paper is concerned, my submission is this. This filing of 
nomination papers goes on for days together. If the Returning 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8784-86. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


582 


582 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Officer alone is authorised to accept them, then he will have 
to be present all the 24 hours in the station. That is not 
always possible. 

An hon. Member : It is only from eleven to three. 

Shri Barman : But, it goes on all the days. Even the 
assistant receives the nomination papers. He will only have 
to scrutinise whether the nomination paper tallies with the 
voters’ list, and whether the deposit has been made. Scrutiny 
is done by the Returning Officer on a fixed date. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not understand why my friend is 
objecting to the acceptance of the nomination paper by a highly 
important officer such as the Assistant Returning Officer and 
prefers to lodge the paper with an assistant. 

Shri Santhanam : The point is that the Assistant 
Returning Officer should be able to accept the nomination 
paper at any time without reference to the Returning Officer. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The proviso says that the 
Returning Officer alone shall perform these functions. Three 
categories of functions are taken away from the Assistant 
Returning Officers. Normally, all the functions which a 
Returning Officer can discharge, can also be discharged by 
the Assistant Returning Officers. The earlier portion of the 
proviso says that these following three functions shall not be 
discharged by the Assistant Returning Officers except under 
an extraordinary circumstance, namely, that the Returning 
Officer is unavoidably prevented from performing the said 
function. Out of these three categories, he wants to remove one 
category. That means, that it is only in the case of scrutiny and 
counting of votes that the Assistant Returning Officers shall be 
prevented from discharging them unless the Returning Officer 
is unavoidably prevented. With respect to the acceptance, even 
if the Returning Officer is there, the Assistant Returning 
Officer may receive. Or, if he is not there, his unavoidably 
being prevented from performing the said function does not 
arise. Let us assume that he is not unavoidably prevented. 
He may come in at any time. The Assistant Returning Officer 
may receive. There is no harm. With respect to scrutiny and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


583 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 583 

counting of votes, he must be satisfied that the Returning 
Officer is unavoidably prevented. Let not the Assistant 
Returning Officer but in and exercise the functions of the 
Returning Officer which are of a more onerous nature. For 
receiving nomination papers, simultaneously he can receive. 
Suppose the Collector is the Returning Officer. The Deputy 
Collector who may be the Assistant Returning Officer will 
say, the collector is there and he will receive. That would 
normally happen. This appears to be reasonable. I leave it 
to the Hon. Minister. 

12-00 Noon 

Dr. Ambedkar : No change in the proviso is necessary. 
As we know, a lot of gol-mal takes place. 

Shri Bharati : We would like to know what acceptance 
means really. Does it mean merely receiving the nomination 
or the final acceptance of it, which implies final rejection also 
in some cases ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It merely means scrutiny 
immediately at the first stage and receiving it. It is not the 
final acceptance. 


*Clause 22. — ( General duty of the Returning Officer ) 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

In clause 22, for “It shall be the general duty” substitute “It 

shall be the duty”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is a presiding officer at a 
polling station and it is the special duty of the polling officer 
to receive papers. Likewise those are special duties. It is the 
general duty of the Returning Officer to arrange for these. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : If we say “It shall be the duty” 
of the officer, it will be general duty. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think that any harm can arise 
by the retention of the word ‘general’. I have examined the 
matter and have seen that this clause is an exact verbatim 
reproduction of the English law. That also contains ‘general’. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8790-91. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


584 


584 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 22, for “It shall be the general duty” substitute 

“It shall be the duty”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 22 stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 22 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 23 . — ( Provision of polling Stations etc.) 

Shri Venkatraman : As regards amendment No. 294 in 
the Consolidated List, I thought the Hon. Minister might say 
that he would include it in the rules. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Such a provision will be made in the 
rules. 

Shri Venkataraman : Then 1 do not move it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As regards amendment No. 295 of the 
Consolidated list, this also will be considered in the framing 
of rules. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : With regard to the second part of my 
amendment No. 293 of the Consolidated List, I understand 
that Law Minister is prepared to incorporate such a thing 
in the rules in which case I will not move the amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I will now put the clause to the 
House. 


*Shri Shiv Charan Lai : What I submit is this. If the 
Government is going to be very strict about any sort or 
conveyance being prohibited, the distance should be shortened. 
The polling stations should be more in number. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Five points have been raised and I have 
been asked to make a statement on each one of them. The 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 15th May 1951, pp. 8806-9. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


585 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 585 

first point is, the number of polling stations. I have been 
asked to say whether the Government would so arrange the 
polling stations that not more than a certain number of voters 
would be clustered or fixed for a particular station. It is very 
difficult for me to commit to any particular figure. But, I can 
say this that the Government will undertake to fix the number 
of polling stations on such a scale that from the point of view 
of the capacity of a polling station to put through a certain 
number of voters and from the point of view of distance, the 
polling stations would be so arranged in their numbers that no 
voter who is willing to vote and present himself to the officer 
for voting will have to go disappointed either on account of 
distance or on account of over-crowding. 

The second question that has been raised is the fixation 
of the polling stations. I have been asked to say whether the 
authority of the election Commissioner in this matter would 
be final or whether there would be an opportunity for the 
persons interested to make representations to the Election 
Commissioner. It is quite obvious that persons, either voters or 
candidates, might be interested in having a particular polling 
station fixed at a particular place from the point of view that 
that suits them or gives them an advantage over certain 
other candidates. Obviously, no candidate or no voter could 
be allowed to have the final say in this matter. The ultimate 
authority must remain with the Election Commissioner. But, 
I am prepared to say this that arrangements would be made 
whereby before the election Commissioner finally fixes the 
polling stations, he will either invite representation or consult 
the people concerned in the matter before he makes his final 
decision. 

Then I come to three other points which relate to the 
conduct of elections. One is the despatch of a voting card 
by Government to each voter. The second is the despatch 
on account of Government of an election manifesto of a 
prescribed length to each voter and the third is the supply of 
electoral rolls on a concessional basis. The House will realise 
that it is very difficult for me to commit the Government on 
this matter, by giving a definite opinion or assurance, for 
it involves finance. But speaking not as a member of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


586 


586 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

government, but as a Member of the House. I have great 
sympathy with the first two proposals, namely, the despatch 
of the voting card and the despatch of an election manifesto. 
With regard to the supply of the electoral roll, it seems to 
me that if Government were to undertake the despatching 
of a voting card to such individual voter, the necessity for 
the supply of electoral rolls on a concessional rate or more 
copies than one, does not appear to me to be urgent. After 
all what a candidate does after putting the electoral roll is 
to come into contact with the voter and tell him his number 
and also the polling booth at which the elections will take 
place. 

Dr. Deshmukh : What about the canvassers ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Well, I do not know whether any 
particular candidate will be so lucky and fortunate as to have 
the means to employ such a large number of canvassers as 
to put the candidate actually in touch with each voter. It 
seems to me quite an impossible task. The candidate must 
rely upon his own individual personality and depend on 
how far he is known to the public, and if he is already not 
known, do something by which he becomes notorious in the 
district so that everybody may know him (an Hon. Member : 
Notorious ?) Famous or notorious, whatever it may be. 

I can quite understand that each candidate must have at 
least one set. Without that he cannot manage and that must 
not be prohibitive in price. Although I said that it involves 
financial consideration and I could give no assurance without 
consulting Government on this matter, I feel that the task 
of undertaking this responsibility has considerably eased on 
account of the suggestion made by Mr. Kapoor that there 
should be no great objection for distributing the cost between 
the Government and the candidate. I think that is a very 
reasonable and feasible proposal and I can assure the House 
that I will put this matter before Government and ask them 
to come to their own conclusions. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Will this decision be announced during 
the course of the passage of this Bill ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


587 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 587 

Dr. Ambedkar : Well, before you stand for election I will 
announce it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. I take serious 
objection to the Members moving about like this. A certain 
degree of decorum has to be maintained here. 

The question is 

“That, clause 23 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 23 was added to the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : And the new clause 23A is not 
moved. Is there time to take up clause 24 ? 

Hon. Members : No, Sir. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the clock 
on Wednesday, the 16th May, 1951. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


588 


588 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (No. 2 )—contd. 

*Clause 24. — ( Presiding officer for polling stations ) 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 24, for the words “in or about 

the election” substitute the words “in the election in question”. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I do not 

accept it. 

Mr. Speaker : Shall I put to vote both the amendments 
Nos. 299 and 300 ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I should like amendment No 
299 alone to be put to vote. If that is rejected, amendment 
No. 300 does not arise. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras) : May I ask the 

Hon. Law Minister to explain what he means by the words 
‘about the election’ in the amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The answer is simple. The word 
‘election’ may be used in a narrower sense, that is to say 
the act of election, when polling takes place. On the other 
hand an election may have a larger context, of other acts 
relating to an election, that is to say other than polling. 
This is the reason why the words are there. They are exactly 
the words from the English statutes. 

Prof. Ranga (Madras) : May I ask for an elucidation ? 
There are a lot of people who are Presidents and Vice- 
Presidents of Local Boards and also Ministers and Deputy 
Ministers. They have a number of these subordinates in the 
constituencies in which they stand as candidates. Would 
it be open to a Returning Officer to appoint such of the 
employees who are directly under their control as Polling 
Officers according to this provision ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think any difficulty arises so far 
as this particular clause is concerned. All that it says is that 
any person who is employed by the candidate in or about the 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part XII, 19th May 1951, pp. 9098-9105. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


589 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 589 

election shall not be appointed as polling officer. If there is 
a servant of the District Local Board or the Municipal Board 
who is not so employed, he is free to be appointed. 


Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think this amendment is 
necessary because the Returning Officer shall be a Government 
officer and if he fails to discharge his duty, he would certainly 
be liable to action either under the rules of conduct for the 
Government servants or under any law for misconduct. 

Prof. Ranga : Or under the Rules under this Act. 

Mr. Speaker : Does the hon. Member want me to put the 
amendment to the House ? 

Shri S. N. Das : No, Sir. 

Clause 28 . — (. Appointment of dates for nominations ) 

Mr. Speaker : Let me take the printed list. Master Nand 
Lai is absent. Mr. B. K. Das. 

Shri B. K. Das (West Bengal) : Not moving, Sir. 

Shri M. V. Rama Rao (Mysore) : Not moving. Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : There are a number of amendments to clause 
28 in the Supplementary List No. 1. I think the better course 
for me would be to put all the amendments of hon. Members 
that are here and then if any Member is left out, it will be 
his business to rise up. Amendment No. 76 in Supplementary 
List No. 1. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Not moving. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This has been disposed of already. This 
is an amendment which he has been moving all along for the 
purpose of changing the Chapters. 

Mr. Speaker : He is not going to move it. 


Shri Hussain Imam : Sir, the Hon. Minister of 
Parliamentary Affairs himself is standing when the Speaker 
is on his legs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK SJ+YS 8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 590 

590 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Only small fries are caught. 

Mr. Speaker : No question of big or small fries. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think Mr. Chaudhuri may devote his 
attention to more serious matters. 

Mr. Speaker : In view of the time taken and in view of 
the points of order raised here. I think I had better say that 
those hon. Members who want to move their amendments 
may please stand up. No other ? 

Several Hon. Members : No, Sir. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

In part (c) of clause 28, for the words “date for the scrutiny” 
substitute the words “date appointed for the scrutiny”. 

My reason for bringing in this amendment is that the words 
“date for scrutiny” are rather loose and the words that I have 
suggested, i.e. “date appointed for the scrutiny” are more precise. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not accept it. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

In part (c) of clause 28, for the words “date for the scrutiny” 
substitute the words “date appointed for the scrutiny”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

In part (d) of clause 28, for the words “if necessary” substitute 
the words “where necessary”. 

The existing words “if necessary” indicate a condition 
precedent; but the words suggested by me, i.e. “where necessary” 
refer to the occasion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not accepting it. 

Mr. Speaker : The question is : 

In part (d) of clause 28, for the words “if necessary” substitute 
the words “where necessary”. 

The motion was negatived. 


Shri Meeran : I now move amendment No. 328 standing 
in my name, in a slightly amended form which is acceptable 
to the Hon. Law Minister. I beg to move : 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9114. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


591 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 591 

After sub-clause (5) of clause 31, insert the following new 
sub-clause : 

“(5a) If at the time of the presentation of the nomination paper 
the Returning Officer finds that the name of the candidate is 
not registered in the electoral roll of the constituency for which, 
he is the Returning Officer, he shall for the purposes of sub- 
section (5) require the person presenting the nomination paper 
to produce either a copy of the electoral roll in which the name 
of the candidate is included or a certified copy of the relevant 
entries in such roll.” 

I don’t think I need say much on this because the Hon. 
Minister has agreed to this amendment. 

Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved. 


Dr. Ambedkar : I have also given notice of an amendment 
to the same effect. So I agree to this amendment. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I also had an amendment 
to clause 5 in this connection. My feeling is, why should the 
huge cost of supplying copies of the electoral rolls which is 
going to be heavy, be borne by the candidate ? Why should 
not a copy of the relevant entries of the electoral roll of the 
constituency only be produced ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The word there is “or”. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes, I am trying to explain. 
The option in this case lies with the Returning Officer. 


Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I strongly object to the amendment 
which has been moved by my hon. Friend. But in order to bring 
about a uniformity of decisions of all the Returning Officers 
in different places, it would I think be better to substitute 
the word “shall” for the word “may”. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh) : I do not think 
that there is room for any fear, as expressed by my hon. friend 
Prof. Ranga and Shri Syamnandan Sahaya that the Returning 
Officer may not correct nomination papers, because it has been 
clearly laid down in section 34 that no nomination paper will 
be rejected on the ground of any technical mistake. Therefore, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


592 


592 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

whether he corrects it or not, it is not in his power to reject 
a nomination paper on the ground of technical mistake. 

Shri Rudrappa (Mysore) : There may be so many 

cases in these nomination papers where the date of birth has 
to be filled and if the candidate is living in the village he 
cannot get the date of birth. 

Mr. Chairman : Date of birth ? 

Shri Rudrappa : That will be one of the items. I am 
giving an instance. There will be the required age — above 
thirty or twenty years. How he may find out and put the 

correct date of birth, if necessary There must be some 

scope for the Returning Officer to rectify these clerical errors 
and technical mistakes. If such a provision is not included, 
I think it will result in very great injustice to many and it 
will also result in great litigation even after the election. 
Therefore this provision is quite necessary in the interests of 
the candidates as well as in the interest of the elections and 
the electors themselves. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not accept the amendment. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Then I would like to 
withdraw it. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : There is another amendment 
in my name (No. 14 in Supplementary List No. 3). This also 
is an attempt to clarify the position. The amendment reads : 

In the first Proviso to sub-clause (3) of clause 31, after 
the word “candidate” occurring in line 2. Insert the words 
“for the reserved seats”. 

The proviso reads like this : 

“Provided that in a constituency where any seat is reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, no candidate 
shall be deemed to be qualified to be chosen to fill that seat unless 
his nomination paper is accompanied by a declaration verified 
in the prescribed manner that the candidate is a member of the 
Scheduled Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes for which the seat 
has been so reserved ” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


593 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 593 

Now, we have in our experience found that sometimes 
the Returning Officers take queer views. Otherwise many 
difficulties in the matter of these nominations would not 
have arisen and there might not have been so many election 
petitions and cases. I therefore desire to clarify the position 
by adding the words “ for the reserved seats” after the word 
“candidate”. 

Mr. Chairman : Has the hon. Member seen the words “to 
fill that seat” in the proviso ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes, Further on also it is 
said “for which the seat has been so reserved”. I have seen 
all that. But I am suggesting the addition just to clarify the 
matter, because after all wherever there is a reservation there 
is one seat reserved and the other is a general seat. So if we 
add these words it appears to me to be a little clearer. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no ambiguity and no such 
clarification is necessary. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Then I will not press it. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay (Uttar Pradesh) : I do 
not wish to move my amendment No. 317 in the Consolidated 
List but I want to make a suggestion to the Hon. Minister 
which he may accept. 

My submission is that the phrase “and who is not 
subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 16 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950” is redundant 

and absolutely unnecessary Why should we have so 

many words and so many lines unnecessarily although they 
do not add anything to the meaning ? That is what I would 
like to submit. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is an economy measure, I understand. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : As a matter of fact 
these words are absolutely unnecessary, because if he is an 
elector then he is not disqualified in that manner. Because 
that is the qualification of an elector given in the section to 
which it refers, that is section 16 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950. So I submit that it is absolutely redundant. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


594 


594 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is better to be redundant than to 
be ambiguous. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : I do not think 
there would be any ambiguity. 

Mr. Chairman : The Hon. Minister does not accept it. 


*Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : Before the 
existing proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 31, insert the 
following new proviso : 

“Provided that any person whose name is registered in the 

electoral roll of the Constituency can subscribe as proposer 

or seconder on more than one nomination paper for the same 

candidate.” 

That point has not been provided for. It may be that 
he has signed one nomination paper. There may be some 
doubt about the entries. The same person as proposer can 
file more than one nomination paper in respect of the same 
candidate. I think that that should be allowed, and has been 
allowed in all the Election laws wherever they have been 
made. I think the Hon. Minister will have no objection to 
accept this. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot accept that. 

Mr. Chairman : I am not going to put it to the House. 

Shri A. C. Guha (West Bengal) : I want a clarification 
on this point. 

Mr. Chairman : The point has been disposed of. The 
amendment has not been moved. 

Shri A. C. Guha : I want a clarification whether it is 
the intention of the Government that a person cannot sign 
more than one nomination paper for the same candidate. 

Mr. Chairman : The amendment has not been moved 
and it is not put to the House. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 2128-29 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


595 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 595 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay) : I want some explanation as 
regards the first proviso to sub-clause (3) of clause 31, which 
says : 

“...unless his nomination paper is accompanied by a declaration 
verified in the prescribed manner that the candidate is a member 
of the Scheduled Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes for which...” 

Dr. Ambedkar : That was discussed. 

Shri Sonavane : I want some explanation. As regards the 
nomination of a Scheduled Caste candidate. I would like to 
know what would be the procedure of this verification in the 
case of a reserved seat. It is stated here, “declaration verified 
in the prescribed manner”. The procedure may be laid down 
by the rules. As far as I know, the rules will not come before 
the House in spite of the wish expressed by me. Therefore, 
we would like to know what would be the procedure for 
the verification. Otherwise it would be very difficult for us. 
Suppose, we were asked to go before a magistrate, and sign an 
affidavit it will take a long time. If it is a simple procedure, 
say, obtaining a certificate from Dr. Ambedkar, who is a leading 
Member of the Scheduled Castes, that should be a sufficient 
and acceptable, that should be a sufficient verification. We 
should not be asked to go to a tout, wait there, and do all 
sorts of things. Suppose there is a local J.P. and if he gives a 
certificate to the effect that a person belongs to the Scheduled 
Castes, such a certificate may be accepted. At the eleventh 
hour, a person may choose to send his nomination and contest 
the elections. If he has to go through all this procedure, it 
would be very hard for him. Therefore in the interest of the 
simplification of the procedure. I would request the Hon. Law 
Minister to see that such an ordinary procedure is followed. If 
a respectable person of the locality or a Justice of the Peace 
gives a certificate that should be accepted. 

Shri Ramaswamy Naidu (Madras) : In the second proviso 
to sub-clause (3) of clause 31, the last portion reads as follows : 

“ unless the nomination paper is accompanied by a 

declaration verified in the prescribed manner that the candidate 
is a member of any of the Scheduled Tribes of that district ” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


596 


596 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I wish to know whether the wording “of that district” 
does not imply that he must be a resident of that district. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. that is so. 

Shri Ramaswamy Naidu : I want to know whether any 
resident of another district, even though he belongs to one 
of the Scheduled Tribes of that district would be excluded 
from seeking election in that constituency. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Not at all; that is provided. 

*Ch. Ranbir Singh : ( English translation of the Hindi 
Speech ) Sir, I have a doubt regarding it and I want to get 
it clarified. There is a provision in it : 

“Provided also that where any person having held any office 

referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 7 has been 

dismissed and the period of five years ” 

I think the soldiers and officers of the Azad Hind Fauj 
are not affected by it, I want to know this thing. Whether 
this provision debars them as well ? And if this provision 
debars them then there should be some provision so that they 
may also acquire the right of participating in the elections. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I did not quite follow what the last 
speaker said. I would like to make some observations 
with regard to the point raised in relation to the proviso 
to sub-clause (3) relating to the procedure that might be 
adopted for ascertaining whether a particular candidate 
was Scheduled Caste candidate. The hon. Member who 
referred to this point, has had, of course, no experience as 
to how many people have been trying to pass themselves 
on as members of the Scheduled Castes in order to obtain 
some of the advantages that have been prescribed for them 
under the law. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Larger numbers are likely 
to come in. 

Dr. Ambedkar : And larger numbers are likely to come 
in. I, as a Member of the Government have had some 
experience about this, as to how for instance. Hindus also 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9130-31. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


597 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 597 

would grow a beard for six months, present themselves as 
Sikhs and obtain a job reserved for the Sikhs, and subsequently 
shave themselves clean up and return to the Hindu fold. 
Consequently, a rule has been made by the Government of 
India that any person for whom any reservation has been 
made, shall produce a certificate from certain recognised 
authorities that he belongs to that particular class. Such a 
provision, undoubtedly and beyond question, would be in the 
interests of the Scheduled Castes themselves. I think I cannot 
say what exactly is the procedure that the Commissioner would 
think of himself in order to ensure that nobody other than 
the Scheduled Castes stands for these reserved seats. I should 
have thought that there could be no harm if a provision was 
made that every person who wants to put in his nomination 
paper for a reserved seat should obtain a certificate from a 
magistrate on the basis of an affidavit signed in his presence 
that to their knowledge this man belongs to the Scheduled 
Castes. 

It might be a laborious or troublesome process ; but I think 
it would be better to have it rather than leave loop-holes for 
any other person to come in a fight for the seat. 

Mr. Chairman : The question is : 

“That clause 31, as amended, stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 31, as amended, was added to the Bill. 


Mr. Chairman : Does the hon. Member wish that I should 
put his amendment to the House ? 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : I want to know the reaction of the 
Hon. Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not accept it. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : Then I would like to have the leave 
to withdraw it. 

The amendment was by leave withdrawn. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


598 


598 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Clause 32, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 33 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 34 — ( Scrutiny of nominations ) 

* Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I have an amendment to 
this clause. It is No. 22 of Supplementary List No. 3. I beg 
to move : 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 34, for the word “refuse”, substitute 
the word “reject”. 


Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have no idea. It is a draftsman’s point. 
My hon. friend will see that the draftsman seems to be using 
‘refusal’ in respect of nomination and ‘rejection’ in respect of 
nomination paper. 

He is making a distinction and I think that a distinction 
is consistent made by him throughout the clauses. I therefore 
think it is better to retain that now. 

Mr. Chairman : Does the hon. Member want me to put 
his amendment to vote ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : There may be others who 
may want to speak. I beg for leave to withdraw the amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave withdrawn. 


**Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh) : I beg to move : 

To sub-clause (5) of clause 34, add the following Proviso : 

“Provided that in case an objection is made the candidate 
concerned may be allowed to rebut it not later than the next day 
but one following the date fixed for scrutiny and the Returning 
Officer must record his decision on the date to which the 
proceedings have been adjourned.” 

Shri Sonavane : On a point of order. The hon. Member 
has given no notice to the Members of this House and it was 
held by the Speaker previously and that no surprise should 

*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9156-57. 

** Ibid., pp. 9158-59. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


599 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 599 

be sprung upon the House. May I know whether this 
amendment moved at this juncture is admissible? 

Pandit Kunzru : Sub-clause (5) requires that 

Dr. Ambedkar : To shorten the proceedings, I would say 
that I am accepting the amendment. 

Mr. Chairman : The Hon. Minister in charge is going to 
accept the amendment. 


* Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay : I will not repeat 
the objections taken by some hon. Members. In view of the 
difficulties that arise on account of the acceptance of this 
amendment. I would suggest the acceptance of amendment 
No. 348 in the printed list, namely the insertion of the words 
“beyond second day” after the words “adjournment of the 
proceedings.” That will solve all the difficulties. 

“The Returning Officer shall hold the scrutiny on the date 
appointed in this behalf under clause (b) of section 28 and shall 
not allow any adjournment of the proceedings beyond second 
day except ” 

I do not think any such difficulty would arise in accepting 
that amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Apart from the question whether the 
existing rules in U.P. and other provinces contain such a 
rule as is stated in the amendment. I think it is possible for 
the House to consider this matter independently on its own 
merits. What is the Returning Officer’s job ? His job is set 
out in sub-clause (2) of clause 24 that he shall decide upon 
the points stated there from (a) to (e). Those are the possible 
objections that a candidate may raise against another. It 
does seem to me that if one candidate is confronted with 
an objection falling, for instance under (b), namely “that the 
candidate is disqualified for being chosen to fill the seat under 
the Constitution or this Act” or if he is confronted with the 
objection falling under (e) that the signature of the candidate or 
any proposer or seconder is not genuine or has been obtained 
by fraud, it seems to me somewhat difficult that he should 


* P. D. Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9163-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-9-2013>YS>27-ll-2013 


600 


600 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be required to meet those charges immediately then and 
there. Therefore sheer equity would require that some time 
may be given to him in order that the candidate may either 
produce some documentary evidence or the oral evidence of 
some witnesses to disprove the allegation and it is on that 
ground that I felt inclined to accept that amendment, because 
otherwise it would be permitting one candidate to take another 
by complete surprise by not giving any time to disprove the 
allegation. I think that this is an amendment which certainly 
appeals to me and ought to appeal to everybody 

Shri Santhanam : Will it be possible for the Returning 
Officer to accept those nominations for which no objections 
had been raised. He has to decide all the nominations at the 
same time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Where is the hurry for the man accepting 
some nominations. After all he has to accept the nominations 
on the final date after the adjournment. There is no harm. This 
will be done on the final day and that is what the amendment 
says. The amendment is very clear. The Returning Officer must 
record his decision on the date to which the proceedings have 
been adjourned. There is no discretion given to the returning 
officer to postpone decision. 

Shri Santhanam : Cannot objection be taken on the 
postponed day also ? It must be made clear. Supposing on 
the other day some objection is raised. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Objection must be raised on the day on 
which the scrutiny begins — there can be no objection on any 
other day except the date of scrutiny. 

Mr. Chairman : The question raised by Mr. Syamnandan 
Sahaya and Mr. Hussain Imam is : is there any provision for 
such a contingency ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no provision. Can anybody make 
any provision ? Can anybody know how long the riot will 
last ? In Bombay the riot lasted sometimes for twenty-nine 
days. Therefore it must be left to the Returning Officer to 
be convinced that matters are peaceful and he can hold the 
scrutiny. How can anybody say in a law that if the Returning 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


601 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 601 

Officer adjourns the scrutiny on the first day because 
there is a riot he should hold the scrutiny on the second 
day or the third day ? The riot may continue. 

Mr. Chairman: That is so far as the time is concerned. 
But there should be some provision that the Returning 
Officer should make his scrutiny. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It seems to me that it is quite implicit 
in the clause. Our dramatists have a habit. If I may say 
so. If somebody is dead they must carry the corpse on 
the stage, otherwise the audience does not understand it. 
As I said most of these things are implicit in the clause. 

Mr. Chairman : I will now put Pandit Kunzru’s 
amendment to vote. 

The motion (as mentioned earlier) was adopted. 


Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: I have an amendment to 
move, No. 24 in supplementary list No. 3. I beg to move: 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 34, for the word “refuse” 
substitute the word “reject”. 

The Hon. Minister pointed out that the word “refuse” 
has been used in reference to nominations and the word 
“reject” has been used in relation to nomination papers. 
I would like to draw his attention to sub-clause (4) of 
clause 34 where the word “refuse” has been used with 
reference to nomination papers. Perhaps “reject” may be 
accepted here. 

Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved : 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 34, for the word “refuse” 
substitute the word “reject”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If my friend’s aesthetic sense is 
affected I am quite happy to give him satisfaction. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: As a matter of fact, in this 
House we have to care for the aesthetic sense of people 
sitting opposite — nobody cares for our aesthetic sense. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


602 


602 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: In this case I will accept my hon. friend’s 
amendment. 

Shri. T. T. Krishnamachari: As regards scrutiny of 
nominations, may I point out, Sir, that direction may be given 
that clause 28(c) which has been passed by this House may 
be suitably amended in the third reading ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, I have another amendment also to 
move at that, stage. 

Mr. Chairman: I will now put Mr. Sahaya’s amendment 
to vote. The question is: 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 34, for the word “refuse” substitute 

the word “reject”. 

The motion was adopted. 


*Dr. Deshmukh : I beg to move : 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 34, after the word “substantial” 

insert the words “and vital”. . 

Sir, the reason why I wish that the words “or vital” should 
be added is, the meaning of the word substantial is not very 
definite. I referred to the dictionary and found a variety of 
meanings attached to the word ‘substantial’. It can mean 
having substance, material, stout, strong, bulky, real, solid, 
conforming to what is essential, involving essential etc. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What is the meaning of vital ? 

Dr. Deshmukh: That which will affect the candidature 
in a very direct and a vital manner. 

I have also an alternative to suggest which I hope the Hon. 
Minister will accept. If we omit the words “which is not of a 
substantial character” that will serve the purpose — that is, 
if we merely say that the Returning Officer shall not refuse 
any nomination paper on the ground of any technical defect. 
By the addition of the words “which is not of a substantial 
character” we make it still more ambiguous and give scope 
for interpretation in different ways. Hence I suggest that 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9166-67. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


603 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 603 

either the words “and vital” be added, or the words “which is 
not of a substantial character” be omitted. A technical defect 
is understandable. 

I now come to my second amendment. I beg to move: 

In sub-clause (5) of clause 34, omit the words “or obstructed 

by riot or open violence”. 

Why should we limit the obstruction of the proceedings 
to only riot and open violence ? I think it is very tantalising, 
Sir, to refer to only two causes. There might be a variety of 
causes by which the proceedings may be interrupted. Hence 
I suggest the deletion of these words. In fact this is in my 
view an invitation to riot and open violence, if some candidate 
chooses to do it. 

Shri Sidhva: What about a cyclone ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That would be covered under “causes 
beyond his control”. 

Dr. Deshmukh: If you omit the words “or obstructed by 
riot or open violence or” I do not think any harm would be 
done. I therefore hope that both of my amendments will be 
accepted. 

Mr. Chairman : Amedment moved : 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 34, after the word “substantial” 

insert the words “and vital”. 

In sub-clause (5) of clause 34, omit the words “or obstructed 

by riot or open violence or”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept them. 


*Mr. Chairman: I will now put the clause. 

Shri Meeran: I have two amendments to this clause — 
Nos. 343 and 349 in the Consolidated List. 

Mr. Chairman: May I know whether the Hon. Minister 
is prepared to accept any of them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not accepting any amendment. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9168-69, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


604 


604 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: I have an amendment — No. 99 
of Supplementary List No. 1. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not accepting it. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: That is about the appeal — that the 
appeal should be finally decided about the nomination paper 
and it should not be a subject of an election petition later on. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That matter is still under consideration. 
We will come back to it. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That clause 34, as amended, stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 34, as amended, was added to Bill. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the Clock 
on Monday, the 21st May, 1951. 


Clause 35 

* Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 35, for the words, brackets, letter 
and figures “and delivered to the Returning Officer either by 
such candidate in person or by his proposer or seconder before 
three o’clock in the afternoon on the day fixed under clause (c) 
of section 28”substitute the following: 

“and delivered before three o’clock in the afternoon on the 
day fixed under clause (c) of section 28 to the Returning Officer 
either by such candidate in person or by his proposer, seconder or 
election agent who has been authorised in this behalf in writing 
by such candidate”. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): I would suggest 
the addition of the word “duly” before the word “authorised” 
in the amendment so that the meaning may be more clear. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no objection. 

Mr. Speaker: The Chair will have no objection to add 
anything. But here it is expressly stated “authorised in this 
behalf in writing”. By the addition of the word “duly” it might 
create doubts that something else is required. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9174-78. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


605 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 605 

Dr. Ambedkar: I agree. Let us not be over-precise. 

Mr. Speaker: So I put the amendment as it is. 

The motion was adopted. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There is one amendment 
in the name of Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor — No. 102 in 
Supplementary List No. 1. 

Mr. Speaker: But is he here ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: No. But if you permit 
me I would like to move it. 

Mr. Speaker: Is it an agreed amendment? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. It is to drop those words “or to be 
renominated as a candidate for the same election in the same 
constituency”. 

Mr. Speaker: I will allow it. 

Further Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 35, omit all the words occurring 

after the words “to cancel the notice” to the end. 

— [ Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava ] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 35, as amended stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 35, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 36 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 37 . — ( Nomination at other elections ) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have four amendments — Nos. 26, 27, 
30 and 31 in Supplementary List No. 3. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): In the last portion of clause 37(1) the 
wording is “qualified to be chosen to fill that seat under the 
Constitution and this Act”. I would like to suggest that the 
words “under the constitution” may be omitted, they seem to 
be wholly unnecessary because no parliamentary enactment 
can override the provisions of the Constitution. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


606 


606 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: I think it should be left to the examination 
of the draftsman. The implications are not yet clear to me. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is a matter more or less for the 
draftsman and the Draftsman thinks that for the sake of 
clarity, certain words should be introduced. I think his wishes 
should be respected. 

Shri Santhanam: I merely pointed it out. 

Mr. Speaker: The Chair will have the authority of 
amending this, as advised by the Draftsman. We shall proceed 
to the other amendments. 

Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 37, for the words “the members” 
occurring in line 3, substitute the words “the elected members”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Further Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 37, for the words “the members of 
the Legislative Assembly” occurring in lines 1 and 2, substitute 
the words “the elected members or the members of the Legislative 
Assembly”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Further amendment made: 

For the first Proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 37, substitute 
the following: 

“Provided that any person who is entitled to vote at any such 
election as is referred to in sub-section (1) shall be qualified to 
subscribe as proposer or seconder as many nomination papers 
at the election as there are vacancies to be filled but no more.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Further amendment made: 

In part (a) of the second Proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 
37, for the words “by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of a State, as references to the list of members of that Assembly” 
substitute the following: 

“by the elected members or by the members of the Legislative 
Assembly of a State as reference to the list of elected members 
or to the list of members, as the case may be, of that Assembly”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


607 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 607 

Shri Ghule (Madhya Bharat): I have amendment No. 28 
standing in my name. I do not want to move but I want to 
speak on it. 

According to the present clause, a candidate should file 
his nomination within five days of the notification issued by 
the Provincial Government. I think that the period of 5 days 
is insufficient for a man who is living in the remotest corner 
of the Province to receive the gazette in which a notification 
is issued and send in his nomination to a place where the 
election would take place. As provided for the elections to the 
Lower House of parliament in clause 31, the same provision 
should be made in this clause also i.e., that the nomination 
would not be required to be filed before the 8th day. 

Mr. Speaker: The phraseology is “not earlier than the 
fifth day”. 

Shri Ghule : It may be issued on the 5th day and this 
period is insufficient and in the present state of communications 
in India, a man may require 3 days at least to get information 
about the notification and three days at least would be required 

to send the letter of nomination From this point of view 

I think that the period of 5 days, the minimum period referred 
to in this clause is insufficient and I suggest 8 days instead. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. I do not think there is such a necessity 
for this amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“that clause 37, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 37, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Clause 38 to 43 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 44 . — ( Polling Agents ) 

Amendment made: 

In clause 44, before the word “may” occurring for the Second 

time in line 4 insert the words “or his election agent”. 

— [Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


608 


608 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: With regard to the other 
10 00 amendment No. 380. I would request you kindly to 
suspend it for the time being. After you dispose of 
clause 45, this amendment will be relevant. 

Mr. Speaker: It means that we leave this clause alone 
and dispose it of after disposing of clause 45. 

Dr. Ambedkar: This may be disposed of because that 
deals with the question of time. 

Mr. Speaker: Then, I take up clause 45 at this stage. 

Shri Iyyunni (Travancore-Cochin): I have an amendment 
to clause 44. 

Mr. Speaker: I will take up clause 45 first and then come 
to clause 44. 

Clause 45 . — (. Disqualification for being a polling agent). 

Pandit Manishwar Datt Upadhyay (Uttar Pradesh): I 
have an amendment No. 381. 

Mr Speaker: It is a negative amendment, he may appose 
the clause when the clause is put. 

*Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: We have only lists 1 to 6. 

Mr. Speaker: Lists 1 to 7 have been consolidated. 
Supplementary List No. 1 contains the remark “Incorporating 
List Nos. 7”. this is No. 112 on page 18. 

Shri Iyyunni: What I submit is that in the case of a polling 
agent, he has very little work to do ? He has to come there 
early in the morning and stay there till six or seven o’clock in 
the evening and watch the proceedings. If there is any case of 
false personation etc., he has to examine whether the persons 
actually coming are the persons entitled to vote. That is his 
work. There is no need to ask him to satisfy all the conditions 
that are required of a candidate, who, if he succeeds, would 
go either to the Assembly or the Parliament as the case may 
be. I submit that it is enough if he is a voter. That would 
meet the requirements of the case. I therefore submit that 
my amendment may be accepted by the Hon. Law Minister. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, p. 9179. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


609 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 609 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know. I am not very much 
interested in these matters. But, in view of the difficulties 
raised that a large number of polling agents would be reduced 
and that if we were to subject them to certain disqualifications 
the number available may be very few and that it may create 
a lot of difficulty in conducting the elections. I am prepared to 
accept the amendment of my hon. friend Pandit Munishwar 
Datt Upadhyay. 

Mr. Speaker : That is for dropping the clause altogether ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No. the point is this. I am told that our 
friends who propose to contest the elections wish to draw upon 
the college students who are younger than the prescribed age 
and may not be even voters. I have told them privately that 
they have already done a great mischief to young college boys 
by drawing them into the political arena and that they had 
better not repeat the same thing. They said that they must 
have this facility. I am prepared to allow that. 

Mr. Speaker: It comes to as I was saying, if I mistake 
not, dropping and negativing clause 45 altogether. I shall put 
the clause first. The question is : 

“That clause 45 stand part of the Bill w . 

The motion was negatived. 

* Clause 44 . — (. Polling agents ) — contd. 

Mr. Speaker : Now we come to clause 44. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I beg to move: 

In clause 44, for the words “three days” substitute the words 

“one day”. 

Sir, now that we have dropped clause 45, the work of 
scrutiny does not require 3 days. It is enough if the Returning 
Officer gets the names one day previous. Therefore I have 
suggested that instead of the words “three days”, the words 
“one day” may be put in. 

Mr. Speaker: Amendment moved : 

In clause 44, for the words “three days” substitutes the 

words “one day”. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9180-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


610 


610 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mr. Speaker, prima facie it does appear 
that in view of the abolition of clause 45, one day ought to be 
sufficient. But frankly speaking. I have not had an opportunity 
of discussing this matter with the Election Commissioner 
and obtain his views whether this would or would not create 
any difficulty. Therefore, I suggest that so far as this point 
is concerned, the clause may be permitted to remain as it 
is. I can return to it afterwards by suggesting a suitable 
amendment if I am convinced that one day really is quite 
sufficient and nothing more is necessary. I do not want to 
rule it out for the moment. 

Mr. Speaker: That means that this clause is kept over ? 

Dr, Ambedkar: Yes. 

Mr. Speaker: Then we can dispose of the other 
amendments. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar (Madras): Before you leave 
this amendment, let me suggest that a polling agent may have 

to be appointed at short notice From the point of view 

of practical working of the thing, it may be inconvenient to 
have three days put in here. This point may be considered 
by the Law Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will, certainly. 

Now, I will move my amendment I beg to move : 

(i) In clause 44, for the words “one agent and two relief agents and 
not more to act as his polling agent” substitute the words “such 
number of agents and relief agents as may be prescribed to act 
as polling agents of such candidate”. 

(ii) In clause 44, omit the words “and to such other officer as may 
be prescribed”. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: I could not hear the second portion. 

Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: I am reading it again. (Amendment of Dr. 
Ambedkar as above moved. 

So I request the Hon. Law Minister that the words in the 
clause may be left as they are and not omitted. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair ] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


611 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 611 

May I draw, the attention of the Law Minister that the 
words ‘such other officer as may be prescribed’ should be 
allowed to remain so that the Returning Officer may prescribe, 
as usual, the presiding officer to take the application for 
appointment of the polling agents. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): May I know what is 
the second amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: My friend will see that the last words of 
clause 44 are as follows: 

“that notice of the appointment shall be given in the prescribed 

manner to the Returning Officer and to such other officer as 

may he prescribed.” 

The Rules may prescribe that either the notice of the 
appointment of polling agent may be given to the Returning 
Officer and to such other officer as may be prescribed. I am 
trying to delete by my amendment that sentence — “such other 
officer as may be prescribed” be omitted so that the result 
will be that the intimation shall be given to the Returning 
Officer only. 

Mr. Chairman : Now it is the discretion of the Government 
to appoint another officer also. This amendment is taking 
away the discretion. In practice it is the Presiding Officer to 
whom this notice is usually given or the polling officer at the 
time. Therefore I would request the Law Minister to consider 
if these words are rather enabling. 

Dr. Ambedkar : You know the internal history about these 
things. I am personally content with the words as they are 
in the Section; I am prepared to withdraw my amendment 
and leave the words as they are. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I would suggest that it may be 
‘Returning Officer or such other Officer’ 

Dr. Ambedkar: The Returning Officer ought to know 
everything. 

Mr. Chairman: Has the Hon. Minister anything to say 
to that suggestion? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


612 


612 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not prepared to accept that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: If ‘or’ is not substituted, the whole 
object of retaining the words ‘such other officer’ goes away. Our 
intention is that there should be facility to the candidate to 
submit the name of his polling agents to the presiding officer. 
I would prefer that these words should be deleted rather than 
both should remain if my amendment is not to be accepted. 

Mr. Chairman: It does not necessarily mean that notice 
is to be given to two officers. 


Mr. Chairman: The question of period is yet in suspense. 
Till then this cannot be decided. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The whole clause 44 may be held over. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My suggestion is that my first amendment 
may be considered and the second be held over. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: Why not hold over 
both because we have not definded whether two agents, one 
agent and one relief agent, will be appointed for every polling 
booth. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The first has no integral connection with 
the second amendment. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

In clause 44, for the words “one agent and two relief agents 

and no more to act as his polling agent” substitute the words 

“such number of agents and relief agents as may be prescribed 

to act as polling agents of such candidate”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Chairman: The second amendment is held over. 

^Clause 46 . — ( Counting agents) 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: There is an amendment — No. 382 
in Consolidated list No. 1 in the name of Pandit Bhargava. I 
may be permitted to move it. 


*P.D„ Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9184-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


613 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 613 

Mr. Chairman: I would like to know the reaction of the 
Hon. Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It may be permitted. 

Mr. Chairman: Yes, the hon. Member may move it. 
Amendment made: 

In clause 46, before the word “may” occurring in line 2, insert 
the words “or his election agent”. 

— [Shri Shiv Charan Lal\ 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 46, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Clause 47. — (. Revocation of appointment of polling agent 
etc.) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move. 

For clause 47, substitute the following clause: 

“47. Revocation of the appointment or death of a polling agent 
or counting agent. — (1) Any revocation of the appointment of a 
polling agent shall be signed by the candidate or his election 
agent and shall operate from the date on which it is lodged with 
the Returning Officer and in the event of such revocation or 
of the death of a polling agent before the close of the poll, the 
candidate or his election agent may appoint in the prescribed 
manner another polling agent at any time before the poll is 
closed and shall forthwith give notice of such appointment in 
the prescribed manner to the Returning Officer. 

(2) Any revocation of the appointment of a counting agent 
shall be signed by the candidate and shall operate from the 
date on which it is lodged with the Returning Officer and in 
the event of such revocation or of the death of a counting agent 
before the commencement of the counting of votes, the candidate 
may appoint in the prescribed manner another counting agent 
at any time before the counting of vote is commenced and shall 
forthwith give notice of such appointment in the prescribed 
manner to the Returning Officer.” 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: It is very difficult to follow the 
amendment without a copy before us. 

Shri Santhanam: As consequential to the previous 
amendment after the word “candidate” wherever it occurs the 
words “or election agent” should be inserted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no objection. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


614 


614 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: I shall now read the amendment in 
the amended form and it will be clear to hon. Members. 
Amendment (of Dr. Ambedkar as above) moved. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: As I have pointed out previously 
with regard to clause 44 if the words “or such other officer 
as may be prescribed” are put after the words “Returning 
Officer” in paragraph 1, it will make the position clearer and 
easier; because at the time when the polling is going on it 
is very difficult to search out the returning officer and get 
the name changed. 

Shri Santhanam : The words “Returning Officer” are not 
there; the only words are “in the prescribed manner”. 

Mr. Chairman: The returning officer may not be found 
at every polling station. If this is inserted, that notice may 
be given to any other officer, it would be better. 

Shri Santhanam: Does it refer to the counting agent or 
the polling agent ? So far as the counting agent is concerned 
it has to be only to the returning officer. 

Mr. Chairman: The wording is “may appoint another 

polling agent at any time before the poll is closed and shall 
forthwith give notice of such appointment in the prescribed 
manner to the Returning Officer.” This is not practicable. 
Either the mere giving on notice is sufficient or the notice 
may be given subsequently to the returning officer or such 
other officer or polling officer. 

Shri Santhanam: The words “in the prescribed manner 
will do”. The words “Returning Officer” may be dropped. 

Dr. Ambedkar : All these things have come upon me 
rather suddenly. I have not had time to go through them. 
This amendment was handed to me in the morning. I must 
safeguard my own position. My amendment may be accepted 
as it is subject to my right of reopening the question again 
in the House, if I find that the amendment creates any 
difficulty; or let the thing stand over. In that event the whole 
Bill must stand over now. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


615 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 615 

Mr. Chairman: Let it be held over, so that hon. Members 
may have the time to study the amendments. 

Clause 48 was added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would request you to take up those 
clauses to which there are no amendments. 

Clause 49 . — (. Attendance of candidate at Polling Stations ) 

Mr. Chairman: The amendment to clause 49 (No. 383) is 
the same which the hon. Member has accepted. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: If he has no objection I will move 
it Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no objection. 

Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 49, after the words “A candidate” 

insert the words “or his election agent”. 

— [Shri Shiv Charan Lal\ 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

“That clause 49, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 49, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 50 was added to the Bill. 

New Clause — 50A 

Shri S. N. Das (Bihar): I have an amendment standing 
in my name suggesting a new clause 50a, regarding the 
candidate’s right to send election address post-free. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If I may intervene at this stage to save 
time. Sir, you will remember that last time this matter was 
discussed as to whether provision should not be made for 
permitting the candidate to send his election address post-free 
and I said that I would refer the matter to the Government 
and see whether such a thing could not be done. I thought 
the House at that time accepted my assurance without any 
specific amendment to that effect. 

Shri Sidhva: This should be held over. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


616 


616 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: No. it is not necessary. 

Mr. Chairman: Am I to understand that the hon. Mover 
does not want to move his amendment in view of the assurance 
given that the Hon. Minister will refer the matter to the 
Government ? 

Shri S. N. Das: In view of the assurance given by the 
Law Minister, I want to know whether I might be permitted 
to move my amendment. 

Mr. Chairman: There is no question of being allowed. 
He is at perfect liberty to move it. I only suggested to him 
whether, when the Hon. Minister has given an assurance, it 
is desirable to move it. 

Shri S. N. Das: It may be held over. 

Mr. Chairman: There is no question of being held over. 
The reply will not come from the Government within such a 
short time. Either he should move it or not move it. 

Shri S. N. Das: In view of the assurance given I do not 
want to move it. 

*Mr. Chairman: Then there is another amendment No. 
385 in the printed list, standing in the name of Mr. Das 
suggesting new clause 50A. 

Shri S. N. Das : ( Hindi translation of Hindi Speech ) I 
want to say something on it. I submitted the suggestions 
because of the fact that in the election campaign propaganda 

wields great influence My suggestion is that everybody 

should be given an equal opportunity so that he may go to the 
voters to explain to them the objectives for which he stands. 
Therefore, many candidates would be saved of expenses if 
railway facility was made available to them. That is the 
purpose of the suggestion I have put forth for the consideration 
of the House. If the House deems it proper, it may accept it, 
if not, it may reject it. 

Mr. Chairman: This amendment has not been moved and it 
has not been placed before the House. I would rather like that 
the reaction of the Hon. Minister may be known to the House. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9189-90. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


617 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 617 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot agree to Government undertaking 
any such obligation at all. 

Mr. Chairman : Does the hon. Member want the 
amendment to be put to the House ? 

Shri S. N. Das: No Sir. 


Clause 51 (Death of cordinate) 

*Mr. Chairman: Amendment (of Shri S. N. Das) moved: 

For clause 51, substitute the following: — 

“51. Death of candidate before poll . — Whenever any candidate 
dies after being duly nominated and before the closing of the 
polls, all the election proceedings shall stand cancelled and all 
proceedings with reference to the election shall be commenced 
a new in all respect as if for a new election: 

Provided that the nomination of the deceased candidate was 
valid in the opinion of the Returning Officer: 

Provided further that no further nomination shall be necessary 
in the case of a candidate whose nomination was valid at the 
time of the cancellation of the election.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept the amendment, but I 
would like to say that in view of the fact that the House 
has carried an amendment to sub-clause (2) of clause 35 
with regard to withdrawal, there will have to be some small 
amendment made later on and I reserve the liberty to bring 
the matter up at a later stage 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I take it that the proposal of the Hon. 
Minister is to hold over this clause. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not want to hold it over. The only 
point is that it will be necessary to add one more proviso. 
The point is this : that by amending sub-clause (2) of clause 
35, it is now open for a candidate who had withdrawn to 
seek nomination if the contingency contemplated in clause 51 
arises. Consequently a positive provision will have to be made 
in clause 51. That can easily be done by adding a proviso. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9194-97. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


618 


618 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: As a matter of fact, in consequence of 
amendment No. 102 of Supplementary List No. 1 standing in 
the name of Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor having been accepted, 
a consequential amendment is necessary and it is only for 
the purpose of having that consequential amendment that 
an opportunity is being sought to add that amendment 
afterwards. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I entirely agree with the Hon. the 
Law Minister that another proviso will have to be added, 
in view of the amendment which has already been accepted 
(Amendment No. 102). but apart from that, Sir, I think that 
the suggestion contained in the amendment just moved by my 

hon. friend Shri S. N. Das deserves serious consideration 

There are two points contained in the amendment of 
Shri S. N. Das. His first contention is that if a particular 
candidate dies after scrutiny, but before the commencement 
of the poll, then the electorate should be given an opportunity 
for making another nomination in place of the candidate who 
is dead. This is an accepted principle. 

The next question that arises is that why should this 
principle be confined to cases of candidates who die only 
after scrutiny ? A candidate may die between the date of 
nomination and the date of scrutiny. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is not the position. 


*Mr. Chairman : What is ‘due nomination’ ? Is it after 
or before security ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: In view of the fact that this clause will 
come back again to the House for the purpose of considering 
the proviso to which I have already referred, the whole thing 
might be held over. 

Mr. Chairman: Very well. Clause 51 is held over. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, p. 9197. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


619 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 619 

Clause 52 . — (. Procedure in elections). 

Amendment made; 

In sub-clause (3) of clause 52, for the Words ... the members 
of the State Legislative Assembly or electoral college concerned” 
substitute the following: 

“the elected members or the members of the State Legislative 
Assembly or the memembers of the electoral college concerned”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Further amendment made. 

In the Proviso to sub-clause (3) of clause 52, for the words 
“the members of the State Legislative Assembly or of the electoral 
college” occuring in lines 1 and 2, substitute the following: 

“the elected members or the members of the State Legislative 
Assembly or the memembers of the electoral college concerned”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

“That clause 52, as amended stand part of the Bill.” The 
Motion was adopted. 

Clause 52, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Clause 53 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 54 was added to the Bill. 

* Clause 56 . — ( Adjournment of poll ) 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: I have an 
amendment. No. 389 in the Consolidated List to include 
the words “on other polls” after the words “such election” in 
sub-clause (2). I think these three words would be necessary 
because otherwise you do not define to what election it refers. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Election means election under the Act. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: You mean election 
in respect of the same constituency. Then you have got to say 
“on other polls”. The sub-clause read : 

“and fix the polling station or place at which, and the hours 
during which, the poll will be taken, and shall not count the 
votes cast at such election until such adjourned poll shall have 
been completed”. 

“ That such election on other polls” makes the thing 

clear. Otherwise it is ambiguous. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9198-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


620 


620 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Santhanam: “Such election” covers it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think it is necessary. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

“That clause 56 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 56 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 57 . — (. Fresh poll) 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: May I be permitted to move 
amendment No. 390 standing in your name, Sir? 

Mr. Chairman: It would be better to know the reaction 
of the Hon. Minister. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: It seeks to substitute the words 
“before the votes are counted” for the words “at any election” 
in sub-clause (1). 

Shri Santhanam: It may be at any stage. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think it is necessary. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: I have an 
amendment (301) that in sub-clause (1) after the words 
“presiding officer” the words “or any other person on their 
behalf’ be inserted. It may be that the boxes are in transit, 
they might be placed somewhere else, they might be in the 
custody of someone else. And these things may not be covered, 
by the present working. I consider that the introduction of 
these words appears to be necessary. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari (Madras): The other words 
which follow are : “or is or are in any tampered with... ’’That 
covers that condition. It is unnecessary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think it is necessary. 

Mr. Chairman: The question is : 

“That clause 57 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 57 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 58 was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


621 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 621 

*Shri Karunakara Menon: I emphasize the words : “to 
enable a person to vote in a particular manner”. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The clause as it is quite all right. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: If the Hon. Law Minister does not 
think that these words are necessary, then I do not press it. 

As for amendment No. 117, I find that clause 59(d) reads 
as follows : “the wife of any such person as is referred to in 
clauses (a), (b) and (c) to whom the provisions of sub-section 
(6) of the said section 20 apply” I do not know why we are 
giving this right to the wife. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because she may be with him. 

Mr. Chairman : Supposing she is not with him, she is 
not given any right to vote in any other manner ? 


**Shri J. R. Kapoor: I beg to move: 

After part (e) of clause 59, add the following new part as 
part (f): 

“(f) any person subjected to preventive detention under any 
law for the time being in force.” 

This is one amendment. Another amendment, which I 
would like to move with your permission. Sir, is No. 396 in 
the printed list, which has the privilege of standing in your 
name. I beg to move: 

After part (e) of clause 59, add the following new parts: 

“(f) the candidates, their election agents and polling agents ; 

(g) the President, the Governors and the Rajpramukh of the 
States.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why does he want specifically reference 
to them ? They are voters. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: So far as amendment No. 396 is 
concerned, there are two parts which are intended to be 
inserted, parts (f) and (g). You may take them separately, 
because it is just possible that while the insertion of part (f) 
may be agreed to, perhaps part (g) may not be agreed to for 
reasons best known to the Hon. Law Minister. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, p. 9202. 
**Ibid, p. 9204. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


622 


622 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Mr. Chairman : Amendments moved : 

(i) After part (e) of clause 59, add the following new part 
as part (f): 

“(f) any person subjected to preventive detention under any 
law for the time being in force.” 

(ii) After part (e) of clause 59, add the following new parts: 

“(f) the candidates, their election agent and polling agents ; 

(g) the President, the Governors and the Rajpramukh of the 
States.” 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay): I rise to support part (f) of 
the amendment standing in the name of Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. I also support the addition of the new part (f). It 
is necessary to allow a candidate to vote through the post 
because he may be in a place which is not a constituency in 
which he is registered as the candidate. It may not be possible 
for him to go to that particular constituency and so he should 
be allowed to vote through the post. Similar circumstances 
may arise in the case of the election agents and polling agents 
also and so they also must be allowed this facility. When 
they have to work as election or polling agents, they may 
have to go to different places and they may not be able to 
be present in the constituency in which their names occur in 
the electoral rolls. So it is but proper that this facility should 
be extended to them also. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, Mr. Kapoor has placed before us three 
propositions, namely, that the facilities for voting by post may 
be extending to persons under detention, and to candidates, 
their election agents and polling agents and thirdly, to the 
President, the Governors and the Rajpramukhs of the States. 

I should like to say at the very outset that postal ballot 
is a very dangerous thing — one of the most dangerous thing 
that I have come across. I have noticed candidates appointing 
persons to go to various individuals who become entitled to 
voting by post, collect their ballot papers, get their signatures, 
and just post it themselves and thus a vast amount of illogical 
pressure — something like requisitioning — is brought about. I 
therefore think that this system ought to be confined to the 
shortest extent possible. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9207-09. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


623 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 623 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Then do not extend it to the wives 
of voters who live far away. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They are only (a), (b) or (c). 

As regards the candidates, election agents and polling 
agents, I do not see why the rule of postal ballot should be 
applied to them. I can quite understand that the candidate 
may not be present in the constituency in which his name is 
enrolled, because we have given the facility that a candidate 
can stand anywhere he likes. It is also possible that the 
various persons whom he engages such as the election agents, 
polling agents and so on, may not be able to work in the 
constituencies in which their names are enrolled. In such 
cases it is perhaps desirable to make it possible for them 
to vote in a constituency where they are working although 
that is not their constituency by registration. But that is a 
matter which must be considered separately and not under 
the postal ballot section. 

With regard to Rajpramukhs, Governors and the President, 
I do not see what valid ground there is for permitting them 
to cast their vote by postal ballot, except the fact that they 
are certain dignitaries of the State. But I do not think that 
the law in the matter of election should recognise any such 
distinction at all. 

An Hon. Member : They may be living far away from 
their constituency. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think so. They can arrange their 
tours in such a way as to be in their headquarters at the 
proper time. That is not a very difficult thing. 

Shri Sidhva: They have all the facilities for that. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to persons under detention, 
I think the general rule of law is this. First of all, whoever 
is under detention is not in a position to exercise the rights 
that are given to him. That is the rule under the English Law. 
The English Law makes no provision for what might be called 
“convicts” to vote, by reason of the fact that they have placed 
themselves, so to say, beyond the pale of the electoral law. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


624 


624 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: But that disqualification 
would not operate in this case. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know. Our disqualification 
would arise if the period is 2 years or if the detention is an 
indefinite sort of thing. So I would not commit myself to the 
proposition suggested now. I feel that we are really breaking 
a very salutary principle that a man if he wants to exercise 
his legal rights of voting, he must be within the pale of the 
law and not outside it. Therefore, on that ground I am not 
prepared to accept the suggestion with regard to persons 
under preventive detention. 

As I said I am prepared to consider the question as to 
whether a candidate, his polling agents and other agents 
who are working for him and who are not registered as 
the voters in that particular constituency in which they are 
present, should be permitted to vote in that very constituency 
notwithstanding the fact that they are not registered there. 
But that is a matter which cannot come under this clause. 

Mr. Chairman: The present rule is then that they are 
allowed to vote wherever they happen to be ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If necessary, that will be provided for 
separately. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: Sir, I would like the House 
to be permitted to discuss this matter more fully, in regard 
to the persons under preventive detention. At the time the 
amendment was moved, we thought that as a matter of 
course, it would be accepted. Several Members hold that the 
persons detained under the Preventive Detention Act under 
the Constitution are detained for something for which they 
are not responsible and Government fight shy of taking these 
persons to a court and get them convicted. And so long as 
they are not convicted, they must be held to be innocent of all 

crimes It is a matter of principle with many of us and in 

view of the importance of this question we want a separate 
vote taken so that we can voice our opinion on this matter. 

Mr. Chairman: There are two questions — not only the 
question whether these persons should be allowed to vote. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


625 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 625 

*Dr. Ambedkar: I think I could set matters right ? — at 
any rate put them in a proper perspective so that the House 
may come to its own conclusion. 

I first of all wish to dispose of the point with regard to 
sub-clause (d) of clause 59, relating to wives. I think in order 
to understand what exactly sub-clause (d) seeks to do, it is 
necessary to go back to section 20 of the Representation of 
People Act. Section 20 of that Act deals with the question of 
the meaning of the words “ordinarily resident”. What is the 
meaning of the words “ordinarily resident”? Now, the words 
“ordinarily resident” are quite clear with regard to persons 
who are residing in India-. But with regard to persons, for 
instance, who are in the armed forces of the Union and who 
under the Army Act and Regulations can be transferred from 
one place to another, they cannot be presumed to have any 
particular fixed place of residence. They are in one place 
for a few months, they are then transferred to some other 
place. They are there for a few months and again they 
are transferred. They are so to say a mobile force with no 
particular attachment to any particular area. In that case, 
the question arises as to what is to be their constituency. 

Similarly, there is another class of people who are 
employed in the service of the Government of India outside 
India. In regard to these persons the provision that is made 
in section20 of the Representation of People Act is this: that 
option would be given to them to make a statement as to 
which constituency they regard to be their constituency and 
whatever choice they make is accepted by the Registration 
Officer for the purpose of recording their names in the electoral 
roll. That is the position. 

Obiviously along with that the question of wives of such 
persons also arises, because they are also sometimes living 
with their husbands who are either in are armed forces of 
the country or in the services outside India. Just as the 
question arises with regard to the males who are employed, 
the question also arises with regard to their wives. The answer 
given in section 20 is that the constituency of their husbands 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 21st May 1951, pp. 9220-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


626 


626 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

shall also be deemed to be the constituency of the wives. 
Consequently it is necessary to make a provision for voting 
by postal ballot with regard to the wives also. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: If the wife is here in India ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If the wife is here, that will be the 
constituency, because she will be entered in the electoral 
roll independently of the provisions contained in section 20 
of the Act. 

Suppose she is outside and her husband selects a particular 
constituency. If the husband has a right to vote by ballot, 
obviously the wife must be given the same right and I do 
not see any reason why my hon. friend Mr. Chaudhuri got 
so excited over such a simple proposition. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: Supposing the wife is employed ? 
Will the husband get the same privilege? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a contingency that may arise. 

Now, I am coming to the question of detenus. Personally, 
I do not mind saying that I have a great deal of sympathy 
with the proposition that no person in India who has got 
the right to vote should not be free to vote. But I would like 
the House to consider what actually we could do in order to 
ensure that the detenus will be able to vote. There are three 
possible ways of doing it. One is this that we have to set 
up a polling station in each jail so that all persons who are 
placed in that particular jail may have the right to vote and 
to constitute the Jailor either the Returning Officer or the 
Presiding Officer or the Polling Officer. That is one way of doing 
it. The second way is that we should allow the detenus to be 
taken to the general polling booth, undoubtedly accompanied 
by police and probably handcuffed and taken out of the jail 
walking two or three miles. And the third way would be by 
the postal ballot. Obviously it would be very difficult in my 
judgment to constitute a polling station in each jail, because 
there may be in some jail quite a large number of detenus, 
in some other jail there may be one or two, in some there 
may be none. 

The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs (Shri 
Satya Narayan Sinha): It will be possible. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


627 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 627 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think the Home Minister might be in 
a better position to enlighten the House as to how it could 
be done. 

Shri Satya Narayan Sinha: I have consulted the Home 
Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the second method I do. 
not think that any detenus would like the alternative of 
being taken under police escort, handcuffed and paraded for 
a distance of two or three miles. 

Mr. Chairman: Why two or three miles ? It may be fifty 
miles or more because the constituency may be very far from 
the jail. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is another difficulty. The only other 
method that is therefore left for consideration is the postal 
ballot. I want to point out what is likely to happen under 
the postal voting system. It is quite obvious that the ballot 
paper will have to be distributed a long time before the 
date of polling takes place. For that purpose the Election 
Commissioner will have to write a circular to the various 
Jail Superintendents to find out how many detenus there are 
under their custody and in accordance with the information 
so obtained he will, on the estimate made on that day — this 
is important — distribute the ballot papers. The circular must 
certainly go to the Jail Superintendents at least some time 
before, may be a month or three weeks before the actual 
polling takes place, and then accordingly the ballot papers 
may be sent to the Jail Superintendents to be distributed to 
the various detenus under their custody. The question that 
the House has to consider is this : what is to happen to the 
detenus who are brought into jail custody between the date 
on which this enquiry is made and the date on which the 
polling takes place ? Obviously there could be no ballot papers 
in respect of them because the ballot papers would have been 
sent to the jailor on the basis of the estimate that he has 
submitted on that particular day. It may be that after that 
date is over fifty more detenus are sent to the jail. They are 
there. Therefore, by adopting this system of postal ballot you 
are not giving effect to a general desire that every person under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


628 


628 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

detention should get the right to vote. (. Interruption ). Most of 
them will get, but some will not. If you are keen that every 
person who is under detention shall get an opportunity to 
vote... 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: So far as is physically possible. 

Dr. Ambedkar: that purpose is not going to be 

carried out. There are some people who are bound to be omitted. 
And it is perfectly possible, so far as I can imagine, that the 
number of people who may be sent under preventive detention 
after or just nearer the time when the polling takes place 
may be much larger than before. I do not want to anticipate 
anything, but my fear is that this sort of thing may happen. 
Therefore you are really not making a provision which is, 
shall I say, either fool-proof or knave-proof. ( Interruption ). 
This matter really has ben raised without reference to the 
clause. This matter can arise only under clause 61 because 
there is a specific provision in sub-clause (5) of it. It cannot 
come under clause 59. Sub-clause (5) of clause 61 says that 
“No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in 
a prison, whether under a sentence of imprisonment or 
transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the 
police, or is subjected to preventive detention...”. Therefore, 
if any amendment is to be made, it must be made to sub- 
clause (5) of clause 61. I think this matter is quite outside 
the scope of clause 59. 

Shri Sidhva: If we pass it, it will go under 61. 

Dr. Ambedkar : How can we pass it now ? I have told 
you what difficulty is likely to arise, If notwithstanding it you 
want it to be done, it is a different matter. It is not a matter 
of conscience with anybody. I do not know what arrangements 
Government can make. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): One difficulty is that some of 
them may be illiterates. 

An Hon. Member: They are too literate ! 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have only pointed out the administrative 
difficultives. If supposing for instance there is a very large 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


629 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 629 

concentration of detenus in a particular jail and a candidate 
comes to know that a good many of them are illiterate and 
not able to sign, it is perfectly possible that he may approach 
the jailor and say “Get these things signed for me ? 

Shri Sidhva: There are so many officials. There is a 
Superintendent, jailor and so many officials are there. Should 
we assume that all of them are going to be corrupt ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If the evil exists on a small scale, should 
we tolerate it on a large scale ? ( Interruption ). 

Several Hon. Members: Put it to vote. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): I would like the Law 
Minister to explain as to what will be the position of a husband 
whose wife is employed outside, in government service and 
whether he will exercise the right of vote or not ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far as the law is — my women friends 
in the House will forgive me — the husband does not carry 
the status of the wife; it is the wife that carries the status 
of the husband. 

I cannot consent to this kind of irregularity. I said there 
is a regular clause for it, namely 61(5). When you want to 
move an amendment, move an amendment to that. But there 
is no text of amendment before us. 

Mr. Chairman: There is an amendment which has been 
moved. This amendment has not been ruled out of order. At 
the same time the acceptance of this amendment involves two 
things, not only the right of voting but voting in a particular 
manner, that is by postal ballot. Therefore, even if this 
amendment is not accepted by the House it would not preclude 
its consideration under clause 61. So I would rather prefer. 
If the House agrees, that it may be taken under clause 61. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: May, I submit that I have tabled an 
amendment to the same effect under clause 61 also? But if I 
have tabled an amendment there also it is because I consider 
it necessary that the amendment here also should be made. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


630 


630 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The other amendment is a consequential one. Because clause 
59 relates to the manner of voting and clause 61 relates to the 

right to vote When we come to clause 61 the following 

words occurring in sub-clause (5) “or is subjected to preventive 
detention under any law for the time being in force” should 
be deleted there. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. Unless and until we succeed 
in getting it established that the detenu has a right to vote 
we cannot do anything. The manner how he would vote would 
naturally come after that. In the present arrangement, clause 
59 precedes clause 61. So it would be better first of all if the 
House establishes that a detenu has got a right to vote. Then 
the question will arise how he should vote. If the House is of 
the opinion that the detenu has the right to vote, then the 
Government shall have to make some arrangements as to 
how he should exercise the vote. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: But not without this law authorising 
the Government to make any such arrangement. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, Order. Let us hear the Hon. 
Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If the House adopted it, what I would do 
would be to delete the last sentence, namely “or is subjected 
to preventive detention under any law for the time being in 
force” and then say “that for purposes of enabling persons 
under preventive detention to cast their votes, the Government 
may make provision either by establishing polling stations or 
by ballot paper” or put something like that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The other course will be to take clause 
61 and then clause 59. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: It does not preclude 
this House from deciding on the amendment proposed by 
Mr. Kapoor because the acceptance of the amendment will 

naturally involve a deletion in clause 61 The procedure is 

quite right. I think you can put Mr. Kapoor’s amendment to vote... 

An hon. Member: What about the illiterate voters ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


631 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 631 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would prefer this matter to be considered 
under 61 (5) which is more direct rather than to do it in this 
indirect fashion. 

Mr. Chairman: I think that so far as the right to vote 
is concerned, first of all it should be established by the 
House. As Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari pointed out there is 
no rule precluding us from considering clause 59 because 
the acceptance under clause 59 also establishes two things, 
namely, the right to vote as well as the right to vote in a 
particular manner. All the same it is an accepted principle 
that before we take to the latter course, it would be better 
to get the right to vote established. Then the Government 
shall have to prescribe the manner in which that right is to 
be exercised. Then when the amendment comes in, it will be 
right for us to say whether the particular mode which the 
Government proposes for obtaining the vote of the detenu is 
proper or not. We shall have occasion then to consider whether 
establishing polling stations or the voting by postal ballot 
would be a preferable method. Then, we shall have occasion 
to agree to that method. I think Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor has 
already agreed that this may be taken up when we consider 
clause 61. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: My suggestion is that the 
House should decide this matter. If you think that the House 
had better decide clause 61 first leaving clause 59 without 
being decided on now. I am quite agreeable to that. But we 
do not want this House to leave it to the tender mercies of 
the mover of the Bill either to move a similar amendment 
or not. We would like clause 61 to be disposed of first before 
clause 59. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. It is not right to suggest 
like that, because the matter is in the hands of the Chair. 
The Chair has to find which thing has to be moved first and 
which thing next. The Mover has expressed his sympathy 
with the amendment. Why should it be said that the matter 
be left to his tender mercies ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I would submit that there does 
not seem to be any difference of opinion with regard to the 
acceptance of the principle of my amendment. So, I would say 
nothing on that. The only question is how the substance of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


632 


632 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it should be incorporated and where The right to vote 

already exists under the existing statutes. Clause 61 is a 
disqualifying clause. It does not confer any right of voting. 
It takes away the right of voting from certain persons who 
are enumerated in clause 61. But, here, we must specifically 
provide for that because here we are laying down the procedure 
by which various classes of persons are enabled to vote and 
this is the proper place. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. The point is absolutely clear. 
There is no dispute about that. The right of voting and the 
method in which the vote will be recorded, are the two matters 
before the House. There is provision in clause 61 which takes 
away the right of a detenu. We have first to see whether we 
succeed in seeing that that right is not taken away. Then the 
question will arise as to the method in which that vote is to 
be recorded. Then we can revert to clause 59, to see whether 
we can adopt this method of recording their vote or the other 
methods suggested by the Hon. Law Minister. 

With the concurrence of the hon. mover of the amendment. 
I am not putting this amendment to the House now. We can 
come back to clause 59 again if necessary. 

Several Hon. Members: All right. 

Mr. Chairman: I shall put the other amendment to the 
House. No. 396. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: About that. I want clarification 
on one point. 

Mr. Chairman: All the points have been clarified. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: The Hon. Minister while replying 
to amendment No. 396 said that this is not the place for 
bringing in the candidates, their election agents and polling 
agents. My submission is that the heading of this clause is 
“Special procedure for voting by certain classes of persons” 
and I think this is the proper place to bring them in. 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member will realise that herein 
the special procedure is given for postal ballot. The Hon. 
Minister has already explained that this is not the proper 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


633 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 633 

method. It is for the Hon. Minister to make provision 
somewhere to see that these persons get the right to vote. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If my friend wants an explanation, I 
would like to give this explanation to him. This clause 59 
makes special reference to provision for voting by postal ballot 
by certain persons. It does not take away the right of the 
Government or the Election Commissioner to make provisions 
by rules for the method of voting of some other classes of 
people. If he wants specifically any rule, he can do so when 
we come to clause 167 where power to make rules is given. 

Mr Chairman: I shall put amendment No. 396 to the 
House. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I would request you, Sir, to put it in 
parts seperately (f) and (g). 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

After part (e) of clause 59, add the following new part: 
“(f) the candidates, their election agents and polling agents 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The Ayes have it. Sir. 

Mr. Chairman: I will again put it to vote. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Sir, most of the Members have not 
understood what is being put to vote. 

Dr. Ambedkar: This matter will be provided for separately, 
and I do not understand why my friend should insist on 
introducing this clause for the purpose of postal ballot. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Then I take it that it will be provided 
for somewhere else ? 

Mr. Chairman: Then I think the hon. Member wants to 
withdraw his amendment ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Yes, on that assurance. I beg for leave 
to withdraw my amendments. 

The amendments were by leave withdrawn. 

Mr. Chairman: The amendment is withdrawn subject to 
our right to revert to clause 59, if the right is established in 
clause 61. We shall consider this amendment subsequently. 
The amendment is held over. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


634 


634 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: There is no point in 
proceeding with it now. It may be held over. 

Clause 60. — (. Prevention of personation) . 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: I want to move my amendment 
No. 120 in the Supplementary List 1, asking for the deletion 
of the clause. 

Mr. Chairman: That is a negative amendment. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: Then I shall only speak on the 
clause. 

This clause 60 requires the finger of the elector to be marked 

by some ink when the ballot paper is given to him There 

has been no such provision in our country till now and I do 
not think there is the slightest need for it even now. So we 
need not have this clause 60. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: The position seems to be 
that the hon. Member has not understood the implication of 
clause 60. We are now experimenting with adult suffrage and 
we are not having registration of voters followed by giving 
them identification cards. I believe certain State Governments 
contemplated taking photographs of voters and giving them 
identification cards, but the cost involved was tremendous 
and so we have to make some other arrangements. False 
personation is an inevitable factor associated with votings, 
especially when such huge numbers are involved and so we 
have the method suggested in clause 60. There is nothing 
wrong shout it, when the rich man and the poor man have 
all to get their thumbs marked. There is nothing infra dig 
about it. Because of our poverty as a country we cannot give 
registration or identity cards to everybody and you cannot 
expect every voter to sign in a particular place either for 
purposes of identification as many would be illiterate. So we 
have this device — a temporary expedient as I hope — during 
the first two or three elections. There is no use importing 
sentiment into this matter. It is just a wholesome provision 
against impersonation which is a common feature in all 
elections where such large numbers are involved. Dishonesty 
has to be provided against and if for that purpose we have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


635 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 635 

to put ourselves to some inconvenience, I do not think there 
is anything seriously wrong. The arguments that have been 
quoted in support of the amendment to delete this clause are 
made wholly without considering all aspects of the situation. 
Therefore I support the clause as it stands. 

Mr Chairman: The question is: 

“That clause 60 stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 60 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 61 — {Right to vote ) 

Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (5) of clause 61, omit the words “or is subjected 

to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force”. 

— [Shri J. R. Kapoor ] 

Dr. Ambedkar: The House should also take into 
consideration what I stated that although postal ballot appears 
to be the easiest method to adopt, as I said, unless elections 
are to be indefinitely postponed, we will have to make some 
provision for administrative difficulties and not being able to 
give ballot paper to everyone. That has to be borne in mind. 
What I thought was, — as I am not in a position to at once 
suggest an amendment which would give the persons under 
preventive detention the right to vote and also to meet the 
administrative difficulties, — I wanted to put it to the House 
whether it would not be desirable to deal with this matter 
under clause 167 which gives power to make rule. 

Mr. Chairman: Two courses are open — either it may be 
provided in the rules or since the amendment of Mr. Kapoor 
is before the House, any amendment to that may be moved. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What I wanted to say was this that some 
such words ‘as far as practicable’ would be necessary. The words 
‘as far as practicable’ do not occur in any of the clauses of 59. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: The clause itself reads like 
this: 

“Provision may be made by rules made under this Act”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


636 


636 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There is nothing mandatory about it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My point is, under this rule it would be 
obligatory to provide a ballot paper for every one of the voters 
who is covered by this while so far as detained persons are 
concerned, on account of the difficulties that I have mentioned 
it may not be possible to provide a ballot paper for everyone. 
Otherwise the detenu may file a suit. 

Mr. Chairman: Supposing the words “so far as practicable” 
are put in here along with the amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think the words “so far as 
practicable” should be made applicable to any of the other 
categories specified, because it is possible to provide a ballot 
paper for every one who comes under these categories. Only 
in regard to this will only cause bitterness among people. And 
if it is done it would only produce obstacles in the way of a 
popular Scheduled Caste candidate in contesting elections for 
the general seats. Not only this much but his right to contest 
elections for the general seats and win them would also be 
nullified. Keeping this in view I think, Shri Sonavane should 
realize that he should not move such an amendment which 
may result in accelerating communal differences and bitterness 
and which might prove dangerous for the Scheduled Tribes 
or Scheduled Castes themselves. My impression is that even 
if he does not get sufficient votes after contesting for the 
general seat, he would at least get the seat reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes. And in case he gets sufficient number of 
votes while contesting for the general seat then he would be 
elected on both the seats, the general as well as the reserved 
one. We should therefore declare it a separate seat, because 
this procedure cannot be followed with respect to a joint 
seat. And if the number of seats would be more in a plural 
constituency the voters only will have a right to give vote in 
the manner they like; of course the Harijans and the non- 
Harijans should have an equal footing for contesting elections 
for the general seat. In case the voters think that the Harijan 
candidate is a proper one and is capable, he will get votes of 
non-Harijans too and will be elected from that constituency. 
But in case he does not poll more votes then also he would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


637 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 637 

be entitled to get the second seat that has been reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 

1-00 P.M. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not prepared to accept this 
amendment. 

Shri Sonavane: I beg for leave to withdraw my 
amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I beg to move: 

For sub-clause (2) of clause 62, substitute the following: 

“(2) If an elector gives more than one vote to any one candidate 

in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (i) both the votes 

will be rejected.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: This matter was considered at great 
length in the Select Committee. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Many a thing was very seriously 
considered by the Select Committee. But you find what 
that careful consideration has come to when the report is 
scrutinised here. 

I would therefore, like to argue it out. 

Mr. Chairman: The hon. Member will do it tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the 
Clock on Tuesday, the 22nd May, 1951. 


Clause 62 

*Mr. Speaker: Amendments moved: 

(i) In sub-clause (1) of clause 62, for the words “but no elector 
shall give more than one vote to any one candidate”, substitute the 
following : 

“and may give all those votes to one candidate or distribute between 
such candidates and in such a manner as he thinks fit”. 

(ii) Omit sub-clause (2) of clause 62. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9248-49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


638 


638 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. Velayudhan (Travancore-Cochin): May I 
speak on a few points ? 

Mr. Speaker: There was an informal conference 
yesterday and the hon. Member I believe was present. I 
agree that he has the right to speak, but I do not know 
what right morally he has to take up the time of the 
House after having taken up three hours of the House 
yesterday in an informal conference. I do not want to come 
in the way of his right to speak as long as he likes 

Shri R. Velayudhan: But the other hon. Member 
spoke just now. 

Mr. Speaker: He was not present at the meeting as 
he did not belong to the Congress Party, to which the 
hon. Member belongs and that makes a lot of difference. 

Dr. Ambedkar: In view of what I stated in the remarks 
which I made on my motion I do not think I can accept 
this amendment. 

The motion was negatived. 


Clause 69 

*Mr. Speaker: Is he suggesting that the Election 
Commissioner should be given the power of making rules 
like that? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: He can ask the 

candidate to choose one seat. Under the rules he can 
himself say that he wants to retain such and such a 
seat. In case of illness or other contingency he should be 
asked by the Election Commissioner which seat he wants 
to retain. In case of gross contingency the penalty may 
come in if at all. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What the hon. Member is suggesting 
is really unnecessary, because this is entirely left to the 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9250-51. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


639 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 639 

candidate. All that is necessary is that he should exercise his 
choice within the prescribed time. He has been given power 
under this very clause to say whether he wants to retain 
constituency No. A. B. or C. Therefore there is no occasion 
or necessity for the Election Commissioner either to enquire 
from him or to make a decision on his behalf that he should 
be allowed to retain one seat. The choice is entirely in the 
hands of the candidate and I do not know whether such a 
provision is at all necessary. 

Mr. Speaker: His point seems to me to be that, it is possible 
that this contingency may be out of sight of the candidate who 
is elected and therefore the Election Commissioner would do 
better, if he sent something by way of a reminder informing 
the candidate that he stands to lose all the seats. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think that such a contingency 
could be contemplated for, the simple reason that every 
candidate elected will certainly arm himself with a copy of 
the rules. And he may be presumed to have read the rules. 
Another difficulty which I see is this, that even if an obligation 
was imposed upon the Election Commissioner to make an 
enquiry then he must fulfil that obligation with regard to 
every such candidate 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There will be very 

10 00 4 m ^ eW w ^ 0 re t urne d from more than one 

constituency — he must be a very popular man who 
is elected from more than one constituency. 

Mr. Speaker: The contingency is more academic. 


*Shri S. N. Das: I request the Hon. Minister again to 
agree to the suggestion that expenses should be minimized in 
the elections. The whole work should be done in accordance 
with it and the rule-making authority as well as the Ministry 
should frame rules keeping all these things in view so that 
the real representatives of the people, even if they are not 
rich, may be easily elected. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept the amendment. 


* P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, p. 9272. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


640 


640 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Clause 80 

*Shri Hathi (Saurashtra): Sub-clauses (a) and (b) deal 
with the category of persons who have to send the petition. 
Sub-clause (c) deals with the method. As it originally stood, 
the categories of persons and the methods were connected 
together. It is simply in order to separate the categories of 
persons and the method by which it is to be sent that this 
amendment seems to have been moved. The amendment does 
not in any way alter the substance. It is only a better way 
of expression. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, that is the same thing. I need not 
add anything more to what the hon. Member has said. 

Shri Kamath : Shall we add ‘with acknowledgment due’ ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We need not add it. All that is 
necessary is that it must be delivered to the other side. The 
question is: 

For sub-clause (2) of clause 80, substitute the following 
sub-clause: 

“(2) An election petition shall be deemed to have been 
presented to the Election Commission — 

(a) when it is delivered to the Secretary to the Commission 
or to such other officer as may be appointed by the Election 
Commission in this behalf — 

(i) by the person making the petition, or 

(ii) by a person authorised in writing in this behalf by the 
person making the petition; or 

(b) when it is sent by registered post and is delivered to the 
Secretary to the Commission or the officer so appointed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


**Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not think it is necessary to 
labour the point. What has the Law Minister to say on the 
amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept the amendment. 


* P. D„ Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9280-81. 
** Ibid., p, 9282. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


641 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 641 

Clause 85 

* Shri Satish Chandra: The House adjourned yesterday 
to discuss the amendments informally. We adjourned from 
that informal meeting at 1 o’clock and I gave notice of my 
amendment at 1 p.m. But it has been admitted in today’s date. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Was this matter discussed and 
agreed upon in the informal committe? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, it was agreed upon. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Was it agreed that no advocate 
ought to be there ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Nobody wants any advocate. The matter 
can arise only by deleting part (b) of sub-clause (2). It cannot 
arise on this. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Even accepting the clause as it 
stands he cannot avoid any advocate. 

Shri Satish Chandra: I would suggest that this clause 
may be held over. The Members had no opportunity of 
giving any notice of amendments after yesterday’s informal 
discussion. Notice has been given by me after the discussion 
but it will come up only tomorrow. If you allow me to move 
my amendment of which I have given notice, I shall do so. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Not that I am bound by any of those 
decisions, but anyhow the hon. Member also had sat in that 
informal meeting which came to an agreed arrangement with 
reference to this matter. A contrary decision was arrived at 
there. Is it worthwhile my allowing the clause to stand over ? 

Shri Satish Chandra: I would respectfully submit that out 
of the 320 Members of the House which adjourned yesterday 
for the specific purpose of holding an informal discussion on 
tabled amendments, not as many Members as the strength 
of the Select Committee on this Bill were present. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Who is to blame? The Hon. 
Minister ? 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9284-85. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


642 


642 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Satish Chandra: I do not blame the Hon. Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You yourself were present. Never mind 
whether others were present or not, you yourself were present. 

Shri Satish Chandra: I objected to the amendment, but 
I was not allowed to have my full say. So, what I wish is 
that 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am exceedingly sorry that the 
hon. Member has not tabled an amendment. 

Shri Satish Chandra: I have tabled an amendment and 
its copy is with me. It could not be on the order paper today. 
I gave it to the Notice Office yesterday after 1 p.m. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is a fundamental issue as to 
whether lawyers are to be trusted or not. Therefore, even 
before this amendment was tabled he had enough time to 
give notice of an amendment. I am prepared to waive notice 
if he is able to show either in the consolidated list or in any 
of the supplementary lists any amendment standing in his 
name saying that lawyers are taboo — I would not stand on 
formality. But if after yesterday’s discussion he thinks of a 
new thing I would not agree to it being moved now. 

Shri Satish Chandra: I would submit that this majority 
of lawyers in the Election Tribunal was created only yesterday. 
It was not there before. 

Dr. Ambedkar: In the amendment moved by my friend, 
Mr. Munishwar Datt Upadhyay there is no provision that 
there shall be a majority of lawyers. Only the chairman shall 
be a judicial officer, but the others may be non-judicial. 

Shri Satish Chandra: The two persons out of three may 
be advocates. I do not know what else is a majority. 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: His amendment, 
if there is any, refers to another clause — it has nothing to do 
with this clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He does not say he has any 
amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


643 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 643 

Shri Satish Chandra : I submit, Sir, that it may be held 
over. After all there is a difference of opinion among the hon. 
Members, some of whom feel strongly over this point. Just as 
other clauses have been held over. I suggest, this also may 
be held over and may be allowed to come up later. If it is 
held over it is possible there might be some agreed formula 
to satisfy all. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think there is any ground for 
holding it over. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I am not entirely in favour of what 
Mr. Satish Chandra has been arguing, but then all of a sudden 
it does strike me that there is some point of fundamental 
importance that he has been arguing, and it is that 
Mr. Munishwar Datt’s amendment to part (b) of sub-clause 
(3) of clause 85 stipulates that instead of one there shall be 
two members selected by the Election Commission from either 
of the lists maintained by it under sub-clause (2). But these 
two could be selected not necessarily only from the list under 
part (a) but from both the lists under parts (a) and (b). 

Dr. Ambedkar: In which case his objection vanishes. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: So that objection goes. 

Shri Kamath : May I point out that the acceptance of the 
amendment of Mr. Upadhyay by the Law Minister and perhaps 
later on by the House lends some point to the question raised 
by my friend Mr. Satish Chandra ? Clause 85 sub-clause (3) 
as it stands reads as follows: 

“Every Tribunal appointed under sub-section ( 1 ) shall consist 

of — 

(a) a Chairman who shall be either a person who is or has 
been a judge of a High Court or a person selected by the Election 
Commission from the list maintained by it under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2); and 

( b ) one other member selected by the Election Commission 
from either of the lists maintained by it under sub-section (2):” 

The acceptance of the amendment of Mr. Upadhyay will 
lead to this, that the two members he proposes in place of 
one can be selected from either of these lists, that is to say 
the posibility is there that both of them can be from the list 
mentioned in part (b). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


644 


644 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is also the possibility of all the 
three people being taken from the list mentioned under (a). 

Shri Kamath: I agree, but the clause as it stands would 
have precluded the majority of persons mentioned in part (b) 
because there were only two members of which one would 
necessarily be a District Judge, that is from the list under 
(a) or a High Court Judge, and the other would have been an 
advocate. And therefore, both of them would not have been 

advocates I do agree with my friend, Mr. Satish Chandra 

that either the clause be held over or you waive notice for the 
amendment which he has given notice of. If you waive notice 
his amendment will be discussed in the House, otherwise it 
will be unfair to him and the House if his amendment is not 
allowed to be moved and the clause is put to the House as 
amended by the amendment of Mr. Upadhyay. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: I think quite a lot is being 
made about a clause which does not merit so much time. 

Shri Kamath: That is in your view. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: That is my view and I hope 
it will be the view of the House. 

Shri Kamath: I hope not. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: The merit of accepting my 
hon. friend, Mr. Upadhyay’s amendment is that the elaborate 
improvision contemplated in clause 103 is done away with and 
I feel to that extent it is something which is commendable. The 
other point, as you were good enough to suggest, is whether 
the operation of clause 104 should continue in view of the fact 
that the chance of the High Court considering it as a side 

issue if there is a difference of opinion, is now removed 

Notwithstanding the vehement objection of my hon friend, 
Mr. Kamath I would allow the whole thing to pass as it is if 
the House approves. 

I commend the amendment for acceptance of the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it not a fact that as the Bill 
originally stood in case of a difference of opinion between the 
chairman and the member and the case taken up to the High 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


645 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 645 

Court there was a guarantee that two judicial officers will bring 
to bear their judgment on the case ? That provision is taken 
away now and now it is open to the appointing authority to 
appoint both the members from among advocates. Why should 
there be such a radical change between the provisions of the 
Bill and the amemdment contemplated, which may bring in 
persons who may take part in politics ? 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : So long as the appointments 
vest in the Election Commissioner, we can leave it to him to 
see that the people who are appointed are above suspicion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I say a word, Sir to clear the matter ? 
Really the substantial question that we have to consider is 
whether we should retain the provisions contained in clause 
103, — that is the fundamental point, — whether we want this, 
matter to be so dragged as to require the intervention of the 
High Court. The Committee all along felt that we have no 
idea as to the number of election petitions and we have no 
idea as to whether the judicial staff that would be wanted 
for the purpose of disposing of the election petitions would 
be adequate for the purpose of constituting the necessary 
number of tribunals. That was the difficulty that we have all 
along felt. Consequently we decided in the Select Committee 
that sub-clause (b) be added — I think you will remember 
that, — on account of the difficulty that was felt that if the 
personnel was confined only to judicial officers in the service 
of the Government there may be great difficulty. Therefore 
sub-clause (b) was brought in. 

Now, with regard to the question that a lawyer may be 
appointed who might have played some part in politics and 
may have developed some kind of a bias in favour of one party 
as against the other, or who may have been a candidate in 
an election that difficulty is sought to be met in two ways. 
The first is this: that it is not every advocate who would be 
eligible for the purpose of being appointed. The restrictions are 
very many. First of all he must be a lawyer who is approved 
by the High Court. You will see the words are: “a list of 
advocates of that High Court who have been in practice for a 
period of not less than ten years and who are in the opinion 
of the High Court, fit to be appointed as such members.” I 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


646 


646 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have no doubt in my mind that when the High Court 
recommends any particular advocate to be appointed to the 
Tribunal, it will take into consideration the political affiliations 
of the particular advocates whom it is recommending. Secondly, 
the High Court again is only a recommendatory body. The 
final appointment is to be made by the Election Commission 
and I have no doubt in my mind again that the Election 
Commission in order to maintain fair practices in election 
will further examine the list given by the High Court to find 
out whether any man is there on their list as recommended 
by the High Court who should be excluded by reason of the 
fact that he is a political individual or has been a defeated 
candidate or belongs to any particular party. 

I agree the question whether advocates should be admitted 
or not to these appointments is a seperate question. But the 
possibility of including political advocates as members of the 
Tribunal, I think has been for all practical purposes more 
or less eliminated by the two provisions, namely, that it has 
been made subject to the recommendations of the High Court 
and secondly it has been made subject to the right of the 
Election Commission to select any particular individual or not. 
I, therefore, think that the fear is more or less groundless. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Advocates of ten years’ standing 
are eligible to be appointed as High Court Judges — is it not ? 
Therefore, persons who are qualified to be High Court Judges 
will alone be selected. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Even after that if it is found out that he 
is politically interested in anybody, the Election Commission 
has got the power to exclude him. These are very rigorous 
and stringent conditions. 

Shri Kamath: A person when he goes from the Bar to 
the Bench behaves differently but here the posibility is not 
obviated of this Tribunal being weighted by two advocates, 
thereby detracting from its judicial character. 

Dr. Ambedkar: At that rate, why do you suppose that a 
retired sub-judge may not be a politician ? After all he is a 
retired man and is free to take part in politics. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


647 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 647 

Shri Kamath: Then delete that even. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That would be further reducing the 
available resources for appointing the Tribunal. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): I think, Sir, 
the contingency which Mr. Kamath thinks might arise was 
already there. Previously also, when two persons were to 
be appointed, one a Chairman and the other an advocate, 
both could be advocates. Sub-clause (a) says “a Chairman 
who shall be either a person who is or has been a judge of a 
High Court.” You know, Sir, that at least half of the Judges 
of the High Court are appointed from the advocates of the 
High Court. Suppose a man who was an advocate last year 
has been appointed a Judge of the High Court and he was 
appointed Chairman ? In that case both would be advocates. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Once he is appointed a judge he 
sheds his colour of an advocate. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: He might have been appointed 
a High Court Judge only a month before. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The only apprehension that is troubling 
the minds of some of my hon. friends is that there is a 
possibility that the two members of the Tribunal other than 
the Chairman, may be advocates. To remove that apprehension. 
I would suggest a slight amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have asked my hon. friend Pandit 
Munishwar Datt Upadhyay to move an amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I suggest that part (b) of sub-clause 
(3) of clause 85 be amended in the following manner, that for 
the present words the following words be substituted: 

“(6) two other members selected by the Election Commission 
either from the list maintained by it under part (a) of sub- 
section (2), or one from each of the list maintained by it under 
sub-section (2).” 

It means that both the non-Chairman members may be 

from the list maintained under part (a) of sub-section ( 2 ) 

This is my amendment and if I have your permission I might 
move it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


648 


648 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay: This difficulty will 
be solved by the omission of the words “either of’ occurring 
in part (b) of sub-clause (3). The amendment will read as: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 35 omit the words 

“either of’. 

Shri J, R. Kapoor: That would not meet the point. 

Shri Satish Chandra: I would suggest the substitution 
of the word “each” for the word “either” in part (b). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If it is understood that the hon. 
the Law Minister is also agreeable to this amendment, we 
can make it easy. Even in item (a) of sub-clause (3) we 
can say that the Chairman and one other member shall be 
persons who are either High Court Judges or who are in the 
list under sub-clause (2)(a) and one other member shall be a 
person from the list under sub-clause (2) (b). 

Dr. Ambedkar: If the words “either of’ remain it may be 
possible that both of them may be appointed exclusively from 
one list. We do not want that. If we drop the words “either 
of’ then that possibility does not remain. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Even then it remains. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It does not prevent the Commission 
from appointing from either list. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: It should be one from each. 

Shri Kamath: Instead of “from either” if you make it “one 
from each” it will be clear and free from doubt. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: “One from each of the lists”? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: So that the advocate must always 
necessarily be there ! 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no objection. If people have so 
much prejudice against advocates what can I do ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall put the amendments in their 
order. I shall first put Pandit Munishwar Datt Upadhyay’s 
amendment. The question is: 

In part (b) sub-clause (3) of clause 85, for the words “one 

other member” substitute the words “two other members”. 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


649 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 649 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now, the other amendment is 
that for the words “from either” the words “one from each” 
be substituted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is a very tightening situation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I leave it to the Hon. Minister. Is 
it his desire that I should put it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Shri Karunakara Menon: May I point out that it takes 
away the possibility of the Tribunal consisting of all the three 
members being government servants ? Whether it is proper 
or not is a matter to be considered. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is pointed out that it is 
advantageous to the lawyers also because there must be at 
least one lawyer and not all Government servants. 

Further amendment made: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 85, for the words “from 

either” substitute the words “one from each”. 

— [Shri T. T. Krishnamachari\ 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Now I shall put amendment No. 
18 (consolidated List No. 2). It is a consequential amendment. 

The question is : 

In the second Proviso to sub-clause (3) of clause 85, for the 

word “member” substitute the word “members”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 85, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 85, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 86 to 93 were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I was going to suggest that the House 
might adjourn now and allow me to sit with the Members 
who have tabled amendments, to consider the clauses from 
94 and then we can meet tomorrow, so that we may not have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


650 


650 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

again the difficulty of moving amendments which subsequently 
may be withdrawn or amendments which I have not yet had 
time to consider and come to any definite conclusion. I make 
this humble suggestion for your consideration and for the 
consideration of the House whether they would agree to it, 
so that we could meet right now for that purpose and also, 
if necessary, in the afternoon. 

Several Hon. Members: Yes, yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Very well. I think the suggestion 
is acceptable to the House, but I would like to make one 
suggestion before I adjourn the House. I find that though the 
conferece was very fruitful still a number of hon. Members did 
not avail themselves of it. I would urge upon hon. Members, 
all of them, to gather in the conference so that whatever 
they want to say here they may thrash out there and try to 
reach an agreement. If in spite of it there is a difference of 
opinion, they can always come to the House and take a vote. 
But many matters or matters in respect of which their may 
be misunderstanding may be thrashed out at the conference 
in an informal way and the misunderstanding removed. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Everyone is invited. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Though it is not a formal reference 
to a Committee of the whole House, it is as good as that. It 
is for hon. Members to sit there, voice forth their views and 
support or oppose amendments and come to conclusions. I 
hope that much of the discussion will be cut off tomorrow 
and that many of the clauses will be carried. 

Shri Kamath : Your suggestion will apply only in respect 
of matters where there is unanimity of opinion. If there is 
difference of opinion, they have to be a discussed here. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The majority decision must be accepted. 

Shri Kamath: Not at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Unanimity is always a percentage. 
As far as possible, doubts will be ironed out at the conference. 

The House now stands adjourned till 8-30 tomorrow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


651 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 651 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the Clock 
on Thursday, the 24th May, 1951. 


^REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (No. 2) 
BILL — contd. 

Mr. Speaker: The House will now proceed with the further 
discussion of the Representation of the People (No. 2) Bill. 
9 00 P M ^ auses U P were disposed of yesterday when 

‘the House adjourned for an informal discussion of 
the amendments tabled on the remaining clauses with the 
Hon. Minister of Law. The House will now take up clause 
94. I should like to know what has been the result of the 
informal conference among Members. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Sir, we have 
gone quite a long way up to clause 135. But I would be still 
asking your permission and the permission of the House to 
adjourn at about 11, or half-past eleven, as it suits us, because 
I would like to have a meeting again to finish off the whole. 
The difficulty is that in the afternoon there is another meeting 
and it would not be possible for the Committee of the House 
to meet to discuss this matter. I hope you will grant me this 
indulgence. 

Mr. Speaker: I am prepared even to rise earlier, provided 
we could finish this off. 

Dr, Ambedkar: The trouble is this that every Member 
regards himself as a possible candidate when he is discussing 
this Bill and he sees all sorts of difficulties that may come 
in his way. 

An hon. Member: Including the Minister. 

Mr. Speaker: When he says every Member of course the 
Minister is included. 

I shall follow the procedure which we followed yesterday. 
I shall first ask as to whether any amendments are going to 
be moved and if so to what clauses. There are no amendments 
to clauses 94 to 97. 


*P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9296-9305. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


652 


652 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Clauses 94 to 97 were added to the Bill 

Clause 98 . — ( Other orders by the Tribunal .) 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): There are two 
amendments standing in the name of Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. He being absent, if you will permit me. I will move 
them with some changes in the phraseology. 

Mr. Speaker: Are they accepted amendments ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 119, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 119, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 120 . — ( Payment of costs.) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have an amendment to clause 120. It 
merely divides the clause into two sub-clauses and the second 

sub-clause would begin from the words “If there is ”, 

omitting the word “and” before them. The clause has been 
divided into two sub-clauses because it is a very big clause 
running into fifteen lines. 

Amendment made: 

For clause 120, substitute the following clause: 

“120. payment of cost out of security deposits and return of 
such deposits. — (1) If in any final order as to costs under the 
provisions of this Part there is a direction for payment of costs 
by any party to any person, such costs shall, if they have not 
been already paid, be paid in full, or so far as possible, out of 
the security deposit and the further security deposit, if any, 
made by such party under this Part, on an application made in 
writing in that behalf within a period of six months from the 
publication of such final order under section 105 to the Election 
Commission by the person in whose favour the costs have been 
awarded. 

(2) If there is any balance left of any of the said security 
deposits after payment under sub-section ( 1 ) of the costs referred 
to in that subsection, such balance, or where no costs have 
been awarded or no application as aforesaid has been made 
within the said period of six months, the whole of the said 
security deposits, may on an application made in that behalf in 
writing to the Election Commission by the person by whom the 
deposits have been made, or if such person dies after making 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


653 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 653 

such deposits, by the legal representatives of such person, be 
returned to the said person or to his legal representatives, as the 
case may be.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 120, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted 

Clause 120, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 121. — (. Execution of orders as to costs.) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have to move a consequential amendment 
on account of the division of the original clause 120 into two 
sub-clauses. 

Amendment made: 

In the proviso to clause 121 — 

(а) for the words and figures “under section 120” in the first 
place where they occur, substitute the words, brackets and figures 
“under sub-section (1) of section 120”; 

(б) for the words and figures “under section 120” in the second 
place where they occur, substitute the words “under that sub-section”; 

(c) for the words “in that section”, substitute the words “in 
that subsection”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That Clause 121, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 121, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker: Then we come to the other amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suggest that clauses 122, 123 and 124 
may be kindly held over. 

Mr. Speaker: Clauses 122, 123 and 124 are held over for 
the time being. 

Clause 125 — ( Prohibition of election meeting on the election 
day.) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

(i) In sub-clause (1) of clause 125, for the words “political 
meeting” substitute the words “public meeting”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


654 


654 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) In sub-clause (1) of clause 125, omit the words “or on the 
day immediately preceding that date or the first of those dates”. 

Mr. Speaker: Then I shall put the clause to vote. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): May I ask the Hon. 
Minister for a clarification, whether the preceding day means 
the day up till midnight or the day up to sunset ? 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): Anyhow the word is being deleted and 
the question does not arise. 

Shri Kamath: It does because meetings on the previous 
day will not be prohibited. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is an academic question but if my hon. 
Friend presists I think that ‘midnight’ would be the proper word. 

The motion (of Dr. Ambedkar as mentioned above) was 
adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 125, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 125, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 126. — (Disturbances at election meetings.) 
Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 126, for the words “political 
meetings”, substitute the words “public meeting of a political 
character”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 126, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 126, as amended, was adopted to the Bill. 

Clause 127 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 128 — ( Officers not to influence voting) Amendment 
made: 


In sub-clause (1) of clause 128, for the words “shall act as an agent 
of a candidate in the conduct or the management of the election”, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


655 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 655 

substitute the words “shall in the conduct or the management 
of the election do any act (other than the giving of vote) for the 
furtherance of the prospects of the election of a candidate”. 

[Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (3) of clause 128, for the words “three months”, 
substitute the words “six months”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

‘That clause 128, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 128, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 129. — (. Prohibition of canvassing.) 

Mr. Speaker: I take it that there are no amendments to 
this clause. 

Shri S. N. Das (Bihar): I have an amendment, No. 174 
in consolidated List No. 2 and that amendment was accepted 
yesterday. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 129 as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 129, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 130. — (. Penalty for disorderly conduct.) 
Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 130, for the words “during the 
hours fixed for the poll”, substitute the words “on the date or 
dates on which a poll is taken”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 130, as amended, stand part of Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 130, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would at this stage request you to 
adjourn the House, because we have exhausted all the clauses 
which we had agreed upon. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


656 


656 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker: The House may adjourn now for the informal 
meeting which will take place, as I am told, in the council 
of State hall and immediately after we disperse from here. 

Shri Kamath: Have you. Sir, any objection to our meeting 
in this Chamber which is cooler? 

Mr. Speaker: The convention up to now has been that 
unless the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker or the Chairman is 
in the Chair, no meetings can take place in this House. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is a good ground for not meeting here. 

The House then adjourned till half Past Eight of the Clock 
on Friday, the 25th May 1951. 


^REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(No. 2) BILL. — contd. 

Mr. Speaker: The House will now resume discussion on 
the Representation of the People (No. 2) Bill. Clauses upto 
130 were disposed of yesterday when the House adjourned 
for an informal discussion of the amendments tabled on the 
remaining clauses with the Hon. the Minister of Law. The 
House will now take up clause No. 131. I should like to know 
how the position stands today. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): We have finished 
the whole thing except one or two clauses, which I would 
request to be held over. 

Mr. Speaker: Then I shall follow the same procedure. I 
shall call the particular clause and any hon. Member who 
wishes to move an amendment will kindly invite my attention 
to it. 

Clause 131 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 132. — ( Penalty of illegal hiring ) 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay): Further consideration of clause 132 
may be postponed as it is related to clause 122. So long as 
clause 122 is not taken up this clause also may not be taken up. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 25th May 1951, pp. 9308-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


657 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 657 

Mr. Speaker: Has the Hon. Law Minister heard what the 
hon. member has stated ? He wishes that further consideration 
of clause 132 be postponed and be taken along with clause 122. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I agree that it may be held over. 

Clause 133 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 134 was also added to the Bill. 

Clause 135 . — ( Other offences ) 

Amendment made: 

After part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 135, insert the following: 

“(aa) fraudulently defaces, destroys or removes any list, notice 
or other document affixed by or under the authority of a Returning 
Officer; or”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 135, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 136 . — ( Special provisions for complaint ) 
Amendment made: 

For clause 136, substitute the following clause: 

“136. Prosecution regarding certain offences. — (1) If the Election 
Commission or a Regional Commissioner appoiinted under clause 
(4) of article 324 or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State has 
reason to believe that any offence punishable under section 128, or 
under section 133 or under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 
135 has been committed in reference to any election within a 
State, it shall be the duty of the Election Commission, the Regional 
Commissioner or the Chief Electoral Officer, as the case may be, 
to cause such inquiries to be made and such prosecutions to be 
instituted as the circumstances of the case may appear to it or 
him to require. 

(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under section 128 or under section 133 or under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 135 unless there is a complaint made 
by order of or under authority from the Election Commission or a 
Regional Commissioner appointed under clause (4) of article 324 
or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 136 as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


658 


658 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Clause 136 as amended was added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are no amendments to clauses Nos. 
137 to 143. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): With regard 
to clause 139, unless clauses 122 to 124 are disposed of, it 
will be difficult to dispose it of. You have been pleased to 
hold over clauses 122 to 124 and clause 139 has relation to 
those clauses. 

Mr. Speaker: The hon. Member wants clause 139 to be 
held over? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Yes, Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : I will put the motion in a different way then. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): I suppose it will be 
open to move for an addition of a new clause i.e. clause 132A 
later on, because that will also depend upon some previous 
clauses. I would like to add a new clause. 

Mr. Speaker: In case it does not contravene the previous 
decision of the House, the hon. Member is entitled to move 
it. I will put the motion in a different form now. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 137 and 138 were added to the Bill. 

Clauses 140 to 143 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 144 . — (. Disqualification for being an election agent ) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

In clause 144, omit the words “or a polling agent”. 

Shri Iyyunni (Travancore-Cochin): I have also an 
amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: Has he anything to say on this amendment ? 
We will come to his amendment later. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is his amendment which I am moving. 

Shri Iyyunni: My amendment is that in the marginal 
heading to clause 144, the words “or polling agent” be omitted 
and the clause 144 also the words “polling agent” be omitted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


659 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 659 

Dr. Ambedkar: Marginal headings will be corrected 
afterwards. 

Mr. Speaker: I am not putting the marginal headings at 
all to the House, hon. Members will have noticed that I am 
dropping out the marginal headings. That is the business of 
the draftsmen. It is not part of the statute. The question is: 

In clause 144, omit the words “or a polling agent”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 144, as amended, stand part of the Bill” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 144, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Clause 145 was added to the Bill 

Clause 146. — ( Casual vacancies in Council of States ) 

Amendment made: 

In clause 146, for the words “the members of the Legislative 
Assembly or electoral college concerned” occurring in line 5, 
substitute the following: 

“the elected members of the Legislative Assembly or the 
members of the electoral college concerned.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 146, as amended stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 146, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 147, 148 and 149 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 150. — ( Vacancies in State Legislative Councils ) 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: An amendment was 
agreed that the election shall be held within four months. 
But, that is not here on the paper. Therefore, I would beg of 
you to hold over this clause. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It was not accepted, I believe. My record 
does not show that. Let the amendment be moved, whatever 
it is. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


660 


660 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar Sochet Singh (P.E.P.S.U.): It was agreed. 

Mr. Speaker: Let us hold it over. 

Clause 151 . — ( List of members to be maintained). 
Amendment made: 

For sub- clause (1) of clause 151, substitute the following: 

“(1) The Returning Officer for an election by the elected 
members of the Legislative Assembly of a State to fill a seat 
or for an election by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of a State to fill a seat or seats in the Legislative Council of 
the State shall for the purposes of such election maintain in 
his office in the prescribed manner and form a list of elected 
members or a list of members, as the case may be of that 
Legislative Assembly.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 151 as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 151, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 152 to 156 were added to the Bill. 

10-00 A.M. 

Clause 157 . — (. Return or forfeiture of deposits) 
Amendment made: 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 157, after the words “by whom” 
occurring in line 1, insert the words “or on whose behalf. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (1) of clause 157, for all the words beginning 
with he words “the deposit shall be returned” to the end, 
substitute the following: 

“the deposit shall be returned to the person by whom it was 
made and, if any candidate dies before the commencement of 
the poll, any such deposit, if made by him, shall be returned to 
his legal representative or, if not made by the candidate, shall 
be returned to the person by whom it was made.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


661 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 661 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 157, after the words “by whom” 
occurring in line 1, insert the words “or on whose behalf.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 157, after the words “deposit made 
by” occurring in line 1, insert the words “or on behalf of”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (4) of clause 157, for the words “be returned 
to him” occurring in line 3, substitute the following: 

“be returned to such candidate or to the person who has 
made the deposit on his behalf, as the case may be.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Further amendment made: 

In the first Proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 157, after 
the words “deposits made by him” occuring in line 3, insert the 
words “or on his behalf ”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Further amendment made: 

In the second Proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 157, after 
the words “deposits made by him” occuring in line 4, insert the 
words “or on his behalf.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar\ 

Shri Bhatt: There is an amendment No. 212. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will move that separately. 

Further amendment made: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 157, for the word “one-eighth” in 
the two places where it occurs ; substitute the word “one-sixth”. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 157, as amended, be added to the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 157, as amended was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


662 


662 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Clause 158 was added to the Bill. 

New Clause 158A. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, I have to move for 
the insertion of the following amendment. In England, they 
have not only a provision similar to the one. I am asking, but 
they have framed certain rules for regulating the granting of 
accommodation for this purpose and these have not led to any 
difficulty whatsoever. I therefore, urge that this amendment 
may be accepted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid this will create a lot of 
difficulties and I am not prepared to accept this amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me first of all ascertain from the 
hon. Member if it is necessary for me to place the amendment 
before the House. 

Dr. Deshmukh: No, but some hon. Members may desire 
to speak. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member has moved his 
amendment and as I understand it, the procedure is if I place 
it before the House, the House gets seized of it. I asked for 
the reaction of the Law Minister and he said that he is not 
accepting the amendment. And the hon. Member has rightly 
said that it is not necessary for me to place it before the 
House. When I place it before the House, then every Member 
is entitled to talk on it; and at that stage the hon. Member 
who has moved it can withdraw it with the leave of the House. 

Dr. Deshmukh: In view of the fact that there are a lot 
of hon. Members of this House who are keen and who are 
impressed by the reasonings I have given, they may be allowed 
to speak on this amendment and then 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Sir, this will be a bad 
precedent. If it is not to be put to the House, it need not be 
discussed. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): The hon. Member 
moved the amendment and it should be discussed. When an 
amendment is moved, the House is seized of it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


663 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 663 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I take it as a point of order. My 
ruling is this that until the moment 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Parliamentary system 
of Government is by discussion and persuasion. The hon. 
Dr. Deshmukh is not able to persuade the Hon. Law Minister. 
It is possible my friend Mr. Kamath may be able to persuade 
the law Minister by his arguments. So, why not give some 
chance for discussion ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The point raised here is at what 
stage does the House get seized of a motion. It is not as if 
as soon as any hon. Member gives notice of an amendment, 
moves it, the House gets seized of it. The Speaker has to place 
it before the House and then only the House gets seized of it. 
But at that stage it is open to the hon. Member not to press it. 
I asked the Law Minister to give his reaction. He said briefly 
that he is not agreeable to it. If the hon. Member wanted me 
to put the Amendment to the House, I would have done so 
and then there could be some discussion, and the Hon. Law 
Minister would have convinced the House about his attitude, in 
reply. Then ultimatly it would be for the House to decide the 
matter. At that later time if the hon. Member who made the 
motion wanted to withdraw, the consent of the House would 
be necessary. It is quite possible that the House might have 
been convinced one way or the other and therefore it would 
be for the House to allow the hon. Member to withdraw or 
not. Here I asked the Hon. Law Minister and after hearing 
him the hon. Mover did not press the motion. Therefore, I 
did not put the motion to the House and it is not seized of 
it. I cannot therefore, put any motion to the House merely to 
satisfy a number of hon. Members for the purpose of talking 
on this matter. I am not going to allow any improper spending 
of the time of the House. 

So far as Mr. Sahaya’s point is concerned, it is open to 
any other Member if he was satisfied with the amendment, to 
have himself given notice of the amendment. I cannot allow 
any hon. Member to take advantage of any amendment in 
somebody else’s name. The time of the House is so precious 
that I cannot allow any discussions which are not germane 
to any issue before it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


664 


664 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath: Do the Rules of Procedure of the 
House 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is there no rule to regulate the 
hon. Member not to stand in his seat when the Deputy 
Speaker is standing ? 

Shri Kamath : There is a convention that when a Member 
wishes to be heard, he should be allowed to have his say. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am afraid that accusation cannot 
be levelled against me. I am always erring on the other side. 
I allow him to speak often. Now the amendment is not before 
the House. This is my ruling. The hon. Member must have 
some sense of decency and decorum. 

Shri Kamath : I must protest against the use of the 
word “Decency”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Protesting is improper. 

Shri Kamath: I must protest again. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This kind of unruly conduct in 
the House cannot be tolerated. An hon. Member moves a 
motion and another says that he wants to speak on this. 
Who is to decide ? Shall I ask the hon. Member to take 
my place here ? There must be somebody to regulate the 
proceedings. I come to the conclusion that the House is not 
seized of this problem as the Hon. Mover does not press 
it. Till I put it to the House, the matter is not before the 
House at all. In spite of this the hon. Member Mr. Kamath 
wishes to speak and speak on what ? He wants to speak on 
a motion which is not before the House. When I say it is not 
right, he protests. Therefore it is for the House to regulate 
the conduct of Members. I am only the spokesman-. It is not 
right that any Member should take the time of the House 
and go on protesting against it. I have no objection to ignore 
what has happened. 

Shri Kamath: I would like to protest strongly 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If he protests, then I will ask 
him to quit the House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


665 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 665 

Shri Kamath: I protest 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: For the day the hon. Member 
will not enter the House. I do not want to turn out any 
hon. Member but there must be some sense of decency 
and decorum in this House. He must submit to the ruling 
of the Chair, submit to the majority view. Ultimately it 
is the Chair that reflects the majority view. It also has 
the right to rule what is a point of order. In spite of that 
the hon. Member goes on stating that he must control 
the rest of the House. I do not know if the House will 
put up with that. It is not my intention to castigate any 
Member. 

Shri Kamath: Dr. Deshmukh never withdrew the 
amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He did not press it. I come to 
the conclusion rightly or wrongly that this motion is not 
before the House. Is it not final ? 

Shri Kamath: By that Dr. Deshmukh means that he 
does not wish to press it to the vote of the House. 

Dr. Deshmukh: I do not want to go back on anything 
that has happened but in many cases there has been 
discussion although the motion has not been formally put 
and even after two or three speeches, the motion has not 
been put. There have been precedents like that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I have been suggesting to hon. 
Members that if any hon. Member is insistent upon his 
amendment being put to the House and heard by the 
House, let him have the courage of moving it and insisting 
on it being heard by the House. But if he does not want 
me to put it to the House, he cannot compel the Chair 
to allow discussion on that. 

Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava: No amendment which 
is not asked to be put to the House has a claim to be 
discussed in the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I will now proceed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


666 


666 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath rose — 

Shri Sidhva: Order, order. 

Shri Kamath: You have no business to call me to 
order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The House will now proceed 
to its normal work. 

Clause 159. — ( Requisitioning of premises ) 
Amendment made: 

To sub-clause (1) of clause 159, add the following Proviso: 

“Provided that no vehicle, vessel or animal which is 
being lawfully used by a candidate or his agent for any 
purpose connected with the election of such candidate shall 
be requisitioned under this sub-section until the completion 
of the poll at such election.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 159, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 159, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 160 to 166 were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I want clause 167 to be held over. 
Clauses 168 and 169 may be put to the House, as there 
are no amendments to them. 

Clauses 168 and 169 were added to the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I want the House to be adjourned 
and I do want to say also that it may not be possible 
for me to be ready tomorrow to take up the Bill again. 
I therefore suggest that the House might consider the 
possibility of taking some other Bill tomorrow and I shall 
be ready thereafter. There is I understand, the Boilers 
Bill which is a small Bill and can be taken up tomorrow. 
(Some Hon. Members: Why not today ?) The Member in 
charge is not ready as he has had no notice. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


667 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 667 

The Deputy Minister for Works, Production and 
Supply (Shri Buragohain): I have not got the papers 
here. 

The Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs 
(Shri Satya Narayan Sinha): The House may adjourn 
for half an hour and in the mean time he can go and get 
the papers. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): Sir, I understand that the Hon. 
Minister of States, Mr. Gopalaswami Ayyangar, will be 
ready to take up his Bill relating to Part C States but he 
has had no notice. Perhaps if the House adjourns for half 
an hour he might be in a position to take up the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The House may be adjourned 
till 11 o’clock and in the mean time hon. Members may 
go through the Bill and be ready with their amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have also to look into the odds and 
ends with regard to the amendments which I have accepted 
on the spur of the moment. I have to see to what extent 
they require modification and that is why I may not be 
ready tomorrow. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): May I suggest that the 
discussion on clause 7 may go on but the decision could 
be postponed for sometime later ? ( Several Hon. Members : 
No, no.) In any case the discussion on it is bound to go 
on and only the decision may be held over. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member is aware 
that if they come to an agreement with respect to clause 
7 and other clauses relating to disqualifications much of 
the discussion may be avoided. Otherwise they will be only 
beating the air. So I adjourn the House till 11 o’clock when 
the House will take up the next motion on the agenda, 
namely the Government of Part C States Bill. 

The House then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


668 


668 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (NO. 2) BILL 
*Shri Ghule : I beg to move : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, printed as No. 

2 in Supplementary List No. 7 of amendments, in sub-clause (2) 
of the proposed new clause 47 — 

(a) for the word “commencement” occuring in line 5 substitute 
the word “end” and 

( b ) before the words “counting of votes” occurring in line 7, 
insert the words “end of the” 

My amendment is very simple. The provision here should 
be that before the counting is finished or before the close of 
the counting he should be able to revoke his name. 

The Minister of law (Dr. Ambedkar): I am not accepting 
the amendment. 

Shri Kamath: May I suggest a minor alteration in the 
marginal heading ? The draftsman may bear in mind that 
the construction of the marginal heading “Revocation of the 
appointment or death of a polling agent” is not to my mind 
happy. It might mean that the word death also is qualified by 
the word ‘revocation’. If ‘death’ comes first, it will be all right. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That will be borne in mind. 

Shri Ghule: I do not press my amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I hope the House is agreeable to 
the amendment of the marginal heading. 

Motion was adopted. 


*Clause 51 . — {Death of candidate before poll) 
Amendment made: 

To clause 51, add the following further proviso: 

‘Provided further that no person who has under sub-section 
( 1 ) of section 35 given a notice of withdrawal of his candidature 
before the countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for 
being nominated as a candidate for the election after such 
countermanding.” 


*P. D., Vol. 12, 28th May 1951, pp. 9480-81. 

** P.D., Vol. 12, Part II, 23rd May 1951, pp. 9482-95. 


[Dr. Ambedkar ] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


669 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 669 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

“That Clause 51, as amended, stand part of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 51, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Clause 59 . — ( Voting by certain classes of persons ) 

Prof. S. L. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I have given 
an amendment to this clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What is the number and on which 
list? 

Prof. S. L. Saksena: I am unable to find it; it is not in 
the printed list. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): It is amendment 
No. 233 in the Revised Consolidated No. I. p. 24. 

Sir, Dr. Ambedkar promised to make provision for the 
candidate and his agents, if they are working in another 
constituency. That has not been included in his amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): He said that 
rules will be made by which candidates and their agents will 
be afforded an opportunity of voting by some other method. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is an amendment to clause 167 
which deals with this matter. My friend might move his 
amendment when we discuss clause 167. We can consider 
then whether we could not add the words “a candidate”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall permit this amendment as 
an amendment to clause 167. 

Shri Hussain Imam: In the amendment of Dr. Ambedkar 
no provision has been made for transferred officers. An officer 
transferred from Delhi to Madras, for instance has a right 
to demand a postal ballot. A clause should be provided here 
whereby government servants can on transfer demand postal 
ballot. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That matter may also be considered when 
we deal with clause 167. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The returning officer may get the 
ballot papers transferred through post. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


670 


670 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a matter which can be regulated 
by rules when we come to clause 167. 

Amendment made: 

For clause 59 substitute the following clause: 

“59. Special procedure for voting by certain classes of persons . — 

Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained 
in section 58, provision may be made by rules made under this 
Act for enabling — 

(a) any of the following persons to give his vote by postal ballot, 
and not in any other manner, at an election in a constituency 
where poll is taken, namely: — 

(i) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union to whom the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 20 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), apply; 

(ii) a person holding any office in India declared by the 
President to be an office to which the provisions of sub-section 
(4) of that section apply; 

(iii) a person who is employed under the Government of India 
in a post outside India and; 

(iv) the wife of any such person as is referred to in sub- 
clauses (i), (ii) and {iii) to whom the provisions of sub-section 
(6) of the said section 20 apply; 

(b) any person subjected to preventive detention under any 
law for the time being in force to give his vote by postal ballot 
and not in any other manner, at an election in a constituency 
where poll is taken subject to the fulfilment of such requirements 
as may be specified in those rules.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is “That clause 59, 
as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 59, as amended was added to the Bill. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There is an amendment 
to clause 34A regarding the finality of nomination papers. 
What is happening to that? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It has not been taken up. I will 
first dispose of the Government amendments and will come 
back to the other amendments of private members. 

What about the amendment to clause 122 in list 7 to 
consolidated list No. II ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


671 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 671 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not ready with that for the moment. 

Clause 7 . — (. Disqualification for membership ) 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): We have given 
amendments to the amendments of Dr. Ambedkar. It is better 
that we take up the clause tomorrow. We have not had any 
time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: They can be taken up today. All 
notice will be waived. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I move 7A, with this modification 
namely, that in sub-clause (f) for the words “as such member” 
the words “a Member of Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State as the case may be” have been substituted. I beg to move: 

For clause 7, substitute the following clauses; 

7. Disqualifications for membership of Parliament or of a 
State Legislature . — A person shall be disqualified for being chosen 
as and being a member of. either House of Parliament or of the 
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State — 

(a) if, whether before or after the commencement of the 
Constitution, he has been convicted, or has in proceedings for 
questioning the validity or regularity of an election been found 
to have been guilty of any offence or corrupt or illegal practice 
which has been declared by section 138 or section 139 to be an 
offence or practice entailing disqulification for membership of 
Parliament and of the Legislature of every State, unless such 
period has elapsed as has been provided in that behalf in the 
said section 138 or section 139, as the case may be ; 

(b) if, whether before or after the commencement of the 
Constitution, he has been convicted by a court in India of any 
offence and sentenced to transportation or to imprisonment for 
not less than two years unless a period of five years or such less 
period as the Election Commission may allow in any particular 
case has elapsed since his release; 

(c) if having been nominated as a candidate for Parliament 
or the Legislature of any State or having acted as an election 
agent of any person so nominated he has failed to lodge return of 
election expenses within the time and in the manner required by 
or under this Act, unless five years have elapsed from the date 
by which the return ought to have been lodged or the Election 
Commission has removed the disqualification; 

(d) if, whether by himself or by any other person in trust 
for him or for his benefit or on his account he has any share or 
interest in a contract for the supply of goods to or for the execution 
of any services undertaken by the appropriate Government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


672 


672 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(e) if, he is a director or managing agent of or holds any office 
of profit under any corporation in which the appropriate Government 
has any share or financial interest; 

(f) if, having held any office under the Government of India 
or the Government of any State or under the Crown in India or 
under the Government of an Indian State he has whether before 
or after the commencement of the Constitution been dismissed for 
corruption or disloyalty to the State unless a period of five years 
has elapsed since his dismissal. 

7A. Savings. — (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 7 — 

(a) a disqualification under clause (a) or clause (b) of that section 
shall not, in the case of a person who becomes so disqualified by virtue 
of a conviction or a conviction and a sentence and is at the date of 
the disqualification a member of Parliament or of the Legislature of 
a State, take effect until three months have elapsed from the date 
of such disqualification, or if within these three months an appeal 
or petition for revision is brought in respect of the conviction or the 
sentence until that appeal or petition is disposed of; 

(b) a disqualification under clause (c) of that section shall not 
take effect until the expiration of two months from the date by 
which the return of election expenses ought to have been lodged 
or of such longer period as the Election Commission may in any 
particular case allow ; 

(c) a disqualification under clause (d) of that section shall not 
where the share or interest in the contract devolves on a person by 
inheritance or succession or as a legatee executor or administrator 
take effect until the expiration of six months after it has so devolved 
on him or of such longer period as the Election Commission may 
in any particular case allow; 

(d) a person shall not be disqualified under clause (d) of that 
section by reason of his having a share or interest in a contract 
entered into between a public company of which he is a shareholder 
but not a director holding an office of profit under the company or 
a managing agent and the appropriate Government. 

(e) a person shall not be disqualified under clause (e) of that 
section by reason of his being a director is declared by Parliament 
by law to so disqualify its holder; 

(f) a disqualification under clause (e) of that section shall not, 
in the case of a director, take effect where the law making any such 
declaration as is referred to in clause (e) of this section in respect 
of the office of such director has come into force after the director 
has been chosen a member of Parliament or of the Legislature of a 
State, as the case may be, until the expiration of six months after 
the date on which such law comes into force or of such longer period 
as the Election Commission may in any particular case allow; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


673 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 673 

(g) a disqualification under clause (f) of that section may, in 
the case of any of the candidates for the first elections under this 
Act, be removed by the Election Commission for reasons to be 
recorded by it in writing. 

7b. Interpretation, etc. — (1) In this chapter — 

(a) “appropriate Government” means in relation to any 
disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member of either 
House of Parliament, the Government of India, and in relation to 
any disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member 
of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, the 
Government of that State; 

(b) “public company” means a public company as defined in 
section 2 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913). 

(2) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that where 
any such contract as is referred to in clause (d) of section 7 has 
been entered into by or on behalf of a Hindu undivided family and 
the appropriate government, every member of that family shall 
become subject to the disqualification mentioned in the said clause 
(d); but where the contract has been entered into by a member of a 
Hindu undivided family carrying on a separate business in course 
of such business, any other member of the said family having no 
share or interest in that business shall not become subject to such 
disqualification.” 

(3) If any question is raised as to whether a person who, 
having held any office referred to in clause (f) of section 7, has been 
dismissed is disqualified under that clause for being chosen as a 
member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly 
or Legislative Council of a State, the production of a certificate 
issued in the prescribed manner by the Election Commission to 
the effect that such person has not been dismissed for corruption 
or disloyalty to the State shall be conclusive proof that he is not 
disqualified under that clause.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendments moved. 

12-00 Noon. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Are there any amendments ? 

Prof. K. T. Shah: I have an amendment in consolidated 
list No.l 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But it seems to be an amendment 
to old clause 7 ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


674 


674 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. K. T. Shah: That is our difficulty. This new clause 
has been suddenly put forward. If you do not allow us to 
move our amendments and at least try to bring out the new 
ideas that are there 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I understand the difficulty of 
hon. Members. The notice of the new amendment proposing 
substitution of old clause 7 seems to have been circulated 
only last night or this morning. That has to be remembered. 
So. we shall take up clause 7 at 3-30 P.M. And whenever 
notices are given they will be cyclostyled and circulated to 
all hon. Members. Without any formality all amendments 
may be handed over to the Secretary. We will take them up 
at 3-30 today. 

So clause 7 will stand over. What other clause shall we 
take up now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I want to add a new clause 166A. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Clause 7 has been held over. Let 
us proceed in order. The other ones that are standing over 
are clauses 122, 123 and 124. I do not know when they will 
be ready — it depends upon how soon the draftsmen will be 
ready. If they are ready this afternoon we will take them up. 

Shri Kamath: There is a lot of last skipping. Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We will not skip over — of course 
whenever a clause is not ready we will skip it over. 

New Clause 166 A 

Dr. Ambedkar: We shall take up clause 166A. My 
amendment is No. 8 in supplementary list No. 7 to consolidated 
list No. 2. But I have to make one or two verbal changes 
in that amendment. In line 9 of sub-section (1), instead of 
“nomination as a candidate”. I want to put it as “nomination 
as such candidate”, thereby substituting “such” for “a”. Then 
in sub-section ( 2 ) I want to renumber (a) and (b) as (b) and (c) 
and I want to add a new part (a) which will read as follows: 

“(a) “Candidate” has the same meaning as in section 78.” 

I want to move the amendment, as modified above. I beg 

to move: 

In Part X after clause 156, insert the following clause: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


675 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


675 


“166A. Special provisions with respect to Rulers of former 
Indian States — (1) If the Ruler of a former Indian State is 
nominated as a candidate for any election under this Act, the 
provisions of sub-section (i) of section 87B of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) and of sub-section ( 2 ) and (5) of 
section 197A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 
1898), shall not apply in relation to such Ruler during the period 
commencing on the date of his nomination as such candidate and 
ending on the date on which the result of the election is published 
under section 66, and shall not apply thereafter in relation to 
any proceedings for questioning the validity or regularity of such 
election under Part VI of this Act or in relation to any criminal 
proceedings against such Ruler for any offence under Chapter 
IX-A of the Indian Penal Code or Chapter III of Part VII of this 
Act alleged to have been committed by him at or in connection 
with such election. 

(2) In this section — 

(a) “Candidate” has the same meaning as in section 78; 

(b) “former Indian State “ means any such Indian State as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify for the purposes of this section. 

(c) “Ruler”, in relation to a former Indian State, means the 
person who for the time being is recognised by the President as 
the Ruler of that State for the purposes of the Constitution.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment of Dr. Ambedkar 
moved. 

Prof. K. T. Shah: Sir, we cannot follow the amendment. 
Will you please give us some explanation ? Are the Rulers 
also going to be candidates and will they be exempt from the 
Criminal Procedure Code ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The position is this. As the House will 
remember, when the report of the Select Committee was 
discussed, it was suggested that the ruling princes should 
be disqualified from being members of a legislature. Various 
grounds were urged. One of them was that they were holding 
a sort of office of profit under the Government of India by 
virtue of the engagements that they had with the Government 
of India and under which the Government of India had agreed 
to give them certain sums annually. I then said that it did not 
appear to me that this was an office of profit and therefore, 
it could not come under the provisions of the article in the 
Constitution which deals with the holders of offices of profit. 
I also said at the time when the matter was discussed that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


676 


676 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I did not find any valid justification as to why a ruling 
prince, qua a ruling prince, should be disqualified from 
being a member of a legislature. Subsequently it was urged 
that these ruling princes had been given certain protection 
under ‘the Criminal Procedure Code and the Civil Procedure 
Code, by virtue of which it was not possible for a person to 
file a criminal complaint against them or to file a civil suit 
without the previous sanction of the Government of India. 
On this ground it was said that if this protection extended 
to the period intervening between the nomination and the 
polling, a Prince may commit any offence or he may commit 
any corrupt practice or illegal practice and it would not be 
possible for any individual to bring him to book, because the 
permission of the Government of India was necessary. I felt 
that this was a legitimate complaint — that if a Prince wanted 
to stand for election he should not be permitted to claim the 
protection, that has been given to him by the provisions in 
the Criminal Procedure Code and the Civil Procedure Code. 

Therefore, what is proposed in this amendment is this that 
if a Prince stands as a candidate for an election, whether it is 
an election from a Parliamentary constituency or an election 
to the State Legislative Assembly, he shall automatically cease 
to obtain the benefits conferred upon him by the provisions 
contained in the Criminal Procedure Code and the Civil 
Procedure Code so that he may be prosecuted for an offence 
without the sanction of the Government of India. An election 
petition may be lodged against him without the consent of 
the Government of India and any other proceedings may be 
taken against him as though he was a common citizen having 
no special privileges. This, I think, is a via media between 
the old provision in the Select Committee’s Report that they 
should be qualified to stand for election and be Members of 
Parliament without abrogation of the privileges that were 
given to them under the Civil and Criminal Procedure Codes 
and the other position taken by other Members of the House 
that they should be straightway disqualified from standing 
for election. 

I hope the House will accept this amendment, because it 
strikes a middle path. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


677 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 677 

Moulvi Wajed Ali (Assam): May I put one question to the 
Hon. the Law Minister ? If the candidate fails to be elected 
or for some reason or other does not stand for election will 
the exemptions stand or will they be revived ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The suspension of the protection will 
operate only during the period of the nomination and the 
ending of the election. 

Dr. Pattabhi (Madras): Will he have to face all the natural 
consequences of the election ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: He will be subject to all the consequences 
of the election. 

Prof. K. T. Shah : May I enquire if the House is committed 
to the principle that the Princes may be allowed to stand for 
election ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is no restriction in the 
Bill as it emerged from the Select Committee — there is no 
prohibition prohibiting a Prince from standing as a candidate 
either in the Constitution or in the Bill as it emerged from 
the Select Committee. Hon. Member ought to put the question 
the other way. 


The motion was adopted New Clause 166A was added to 
the Bill. 

Clause 167 . — {Power to make rules ) 

*Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

After part (c) of sub-clause (2) of clause 167, insert the 
following: 

“(cc) the manner in which votes are to be given by a presiding 
officer, polling officer, polling agent or any other person, who 
being an elector for a constituency is authorised or appointed 
for duty at a polling station at which he is not entitled to vote.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The effect of the amendment will 
be, the rules may provide for regulating the manner in which 
a candidate or the election agent or other agent of a candidate 
in which he is not a voter can vote. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9498-9501. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


678 


678 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): That will not solve 
the difficulty, because the candidate may be a voter in a 
particular constituency, but the constituency is such a wide 
one that at the particular time that he has to record his vote, 
he may not be at the particular polling station within the 
area in which his vote has to be recorded. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The constituency is there. There 
are a number of polling stations in a constituency. After all, 
there may be two or three divisions in a constituency. He 
will be in some polling station. Is it necessary to provide for 
all this ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: So that, he may be 
allowed to vote in any of the polling stations where he happens 
to be at that time. He may be in the constituency, but not in 
the particular polling station. The constituency may extend to 
a whole district. He will be in one polling station. He should 
be allowed to vote at the polling station where he happens 
to be at that time. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are two questions to be considered 
with regard to candidates. One question is that a candidate 
belongs to another province altogether. His constituency is not 
in the State in which he stands. That is one question. The 
other question is this. In a constituency, there are various 
polling stations. He is residing in the area of a particular 
polling station, he is supposed to go and vote. That is the 
logical consequence. Suppose in his daily peregrinations on the 
election day, he is not anywhere near the particular polling 
station or the polling booth, but somewhere else. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Law Minister may kindly 
consider whether the words candidate or his agent may not 
be included in the clause (ee) which he has proposed. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. What I suggest is 
this. As I said, there are two cases which have to be provided 
for. Prof. Shibban Lai Saksena is providing only for the case 
of a candidate who is coming from another province. The other 
case still remains unprovided. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


679 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 679 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That can be included here “the 
manner in which votes are to be given by a presiding officer, 
polling officer, polling agent or a candidate or his agents etc.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: The clause refers to presiding officer, 
polling officer, polling agent or any other person who being 
an elector for a constituency is authorised or appointed for 
duty at a polling station at which he is not entitled to vote. It 
does not include the two categories of candidates. Therefore, 
one has to make provision for both categories. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: You may include them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Probably, the better course would be to 
reconsider the amendment. We can take it up at 3 o’clock so 
that we can have a proper amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Include candidate and 
his election agent. 

Shri Hussain Imam: I suggested in the morning that 
Government servants who are transferred from one place to 
another should be given facilities for recording their vote. This 
may be included in the rule making power of Government. I 
may remind the Hon. Minister that proper facilities should 
be extended to government servants and those engaged in 
local self-government and public utility services who have 
been transferred from one place to another after enrolment. 

Shri Kamath: Sir, I have two amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am coming to them. Let me put 
Prof. Saksena’s amendment to the House. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am thinking that perhaps if it is put in 
a proper form I may be in a position to accept it. So we may 
hold it over to 3 o’clock. In the meantime we may be able to 
find some suitable language. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The remaining amendments also 
may be handed over to Dr. Ambedkar. 

Shri Kamath: I beg to move: 

After part (g) of sub-clause (2) of clause 167, insert the 

following new part and re-letter the subsequent part accordingly: 

“(h) the maximum scales of expenses at elections- and the 

numbers and descriptions of persons who may be employed for 

payment in connection with elections.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


680 


680 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: In the section relating to expenses, 
we have already provided for this. We have it stated that the 
maximum scales and election expenses shall be as may be 
prescribed, and any other matter required will be prescribed. 
Since that is already there, is it necessary to have this 
amendment now ? I think it is unnecessary. 

Shri Kamath: All right Sir. But I have another. I beg 
to move: 

After sub-clause (2) of clause 167, insert the following new 
sub-clause : 

“(3) The rules so made shall be laid before Parliament as 
soon as may be after they are made and shall be notified in the 
Official Gazette with such modifications as may be made therein 
by Parliament within a period of ten days after they are so laid.” 

Shall I speak on it, or is to be held over till 3 o’clock ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: He may speak now, but the voting may 
be held over. 


Clause 7 

*Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: I have only one amendment 
unlike other Members who had several amendments to place 
before the House. My amendment is No. 201 in the Revised 
Consolidated list on page 20. I beg to move: 

To clause 7, add the following explanation : 

“Explanation . — A lawyer who renders professional services 
to Government or any department thereof and who is paid by 
retaining fees and other fees shall not be deemed to be holding 
an office of profit and shall not be disqualified to be chosen as 
a member of either House of Parliament or Legislative Assembly 
or Legislative Council of a State.” 

This is the only amendment that I have and I shall deal 
with it with all the firmness that it deserves and I hope the 
Hon. Law Minister will also be so pleased as to give some 
attention to what I say on this occasion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I always do. I think. 


*P. D., Vol. 12; Part II, 28th May 1951, p. 9549. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


681 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 681 

*Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved : 

In part (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7, for the words “five 

years” substitute the words “three years”. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I could have adopted the same procedure 
which I had adopted with regard to most of the amendments, 
namely, to stand up and say that I do not propose to accept 
these amendments. In this case it seems somewhat necessary 
to make an exception, because some questions have been 
raised which I think call for some explanation. 

In the first place, I would like to give a reply to my hon. 
Friend there who said that the House has been taken by 
surprise at the fag end of the debate on this Bill by bringing 
in clause 7 at this time. It is quite true that clause 7 is 
brought before the House in a formal way only today. But 
I think my Friend will agree that there is no clause in this 
Bill to which the House as a whole, although informally, 
has devoted such a large part of its attention as clause 7. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee (West Bengal): Most important 
clause. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot remember the number of 
meetings that were held of the Select Committee, of the 
larger Committee that was appointed, and also of the 
Committee of the whole House. I do not therefore think 
that there is any ground for the complaint that sufficient 
attention has not been paid to the provisions of clause 7. I 
think the clause has undergone a great deal of examination 
both from the point of view of propriety and from the point 
of view of meeting practical difficulties. 

Now, Sir, I will take some of the individual points 
that were made by various speakers. I will not devote any 
attention, to what my Friend Mr. Kamath said, and I do 
not think that he expects much attention being paid to his 
suggestion for provision being made for shutting out the 
deaf and the dumb. 

Shri Kamath : It exists in England. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9564-70. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


682 


682 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is true that it exists in England but I 
think we can very safely leave it to our electorate to see that 
this Parliament is not constituted of the deaf, the dumb and 
the maimed and that we have people here who are physically 
fit to hear, to speak and to move about. 

Some Members have said that we have not included in 
our disqualification clause persons like blackmarketers and so 
on. I think that was a point made by Prof. K. T. Shah. With 
regard to that all that I would like to say is that in making 
a law it is not enough to pursue an ideal: It is very necessary 
to see that the ideal must be a practical one. And I do not 
think that my Friend Prof. K. T. Shah has applied his mind 
to the practical side of giving effect to some of the idealistic 
theories that he has propounded with regard to this clause. 

Another point was with regard to disqualifications arising 
out of offences and sentences passed for certain crimes. With 
regard to that it is possible to take three different positions. 
One position is this that punishment for a crime is enough 
of a punishment and that it should not involve any further 
disqualification for standing as a Member for Parliament. I 
think that is one view which can be taken. The other view 
that can be taken is this that we should have a disqualification 
attached not to the punishment but to the nature of the offence, 
whether it involves moral turpitude or does not involve moral 
turpitude. That is the second view that one can take. The 
third view is the view that is taken in this Bill. This view 
has been adopted in this country ever since elections began. 
I do not know of any period when we had a provision in our 
law saying that although a man has committed an offence 
and has been sentenced to imprisonment for a certain period 
he shall not incur any disqualification. 

Right or wrong, that is the law that we have adopted 
throughout. Consequently there has been no departure so far 
as this Bill is concerned. We are not introducing anything 
that is new. We are merely adopting what has already been 
in existence. 

Sardar Sochet Singh: What about heavy fines such as 
Rs. 50,000? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


683 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 683 

Dr. Deshmukh: May I know, Sir, under what provision 
so many of the Congress people who went to jail and were 
convicted were able to stand and how their disqualification 
was removed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The disqualification was removed by the 
Governor- General. In some cases the time expired and in 
some cases he was empowered to issue an order to remove 
the disqualification. That is the second point. With regard to 
the other points that have been raised about public company 
directors, etc. I think it is unnecessary for me to defend 
the clause as it stands. All those points were raised at the 
various meetings where these questions were considered 
and ultimately the Committee came to the conclusion that 
the clause should stand as it has emerged from the midst 
of that Committee, and I, therefore, do not propose to go 
at any length with regard to the question. 

Shri Sondhi: Co-operative Society. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: There was no definite decision in 
the informal meeting with regard to 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not propose to go into the details 
of what happened at the informal meeting, because we are 
not supposed to disclose what happened there. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: The quantum of financial interest 
in a limited company 

Dr. Ambedkar: Ultimately, as I said, this is how the 
clause emerged. With regard to the question of co-operative 
societies, I do not wish to commit myself nor should I be 
understood to have enunciated a legal proposition to which 
I would be bound for all times; but it does seem to me that 
a co-operative society is incorporated under a separate law 
and, therefore, as we are referring to a public company 
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, ‘co-operative 
societies’ in my present judgment would appear to be 
excluded. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


684 


684 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now, I come to the question about the lawyers. I do 
not know whether my Friend, Mr. Chaudhuri has gone (An 
hon. Member: He is here). There are two different questions 
that have been put. The question that has been put by 
Mr. Chaudhuri is this: There are many people, lawyers, I 
mean, who are engaged by the various Governments to be 
their Government pleaders ; either they are paid a salary 
or they are paid a retainer and for every case that they do, 
they are paid a certain amount of money according to rates 
prescribed. He wants that a Government Pleader who has 
been engaged by a Government as its lawyer should not be 
disqualified from being a Member of the Legislature. As one 
of our friends here has referred to the matter, a lawyer who is 
a Government Pleader has been held long long before to be a 
person holding an office of profit. That seems to me to conclude 
the matter and if we wish, notwithstanding the provisions 
contained in Article 102 of the Constitution, to remove the 
disqualification, then there must be some good ground for 
saying that a Government pleader may be excluded. I do not 
think that my hon. Friend, Mr. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri has 
adduced any argument. He has only appealed, I believe, to 
my sympathy and to my professional interest in the lawyers 
(Interruption). Well I am not going to commit any kind of 
indiscretion or illegality for the purpose of helping my own 
profession. 

The other question that was raised was by my hon. 
Friend, Mr. Khandubhai Desai. His complaint has taken me 
by surprise, I must say. His complaint was that there were 
many lawyer Members of Parliament who appear before the 
different members of Government for their clients and charge 
fees, and that that also happens in the local legislatures. I 
say I am completely surprised at it because a lawyer has 
the right to practice in a court of law and I do not know 
whether there is any law which says that a Minister in 
the administration of a department is a court. Therefore, a 
lawyer cannot insist upon exercising the constitutional right 
that has been given to him to practice his profession, to go 
before a Minister and obtain a hearing. If any Ministers in 
the Government of India — they will forgive me — are permitting 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


685 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 685 

lawyers to appear before them, it seems to me that 
they are acting contrary to the provisions of law. If our 
Ministers were to observe the common rule that they are 
not courts and therefore they will not hear any lawyer, I 
think the practice which has been referred to by my hon. 
friend Mr. Khandubhai Desai will completely disappear. 

Mr. Chairman: Is there any such practice ? 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): 

I have never heard of this practice or of any instance. 
I would like it to be stated where this has taken place 
and when. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know. That is what Mr. 
Khandubhai Desai has said. 

The Minister of Works, Production and Supply 
(Shri Gadgil): On the other hand, the complaint has 
been that some of us have refused audience to lawyers. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is the proper thing. 

Shri Hussain Imam: Have any lawyer Member of 
Parliament been refused audience by the Hon. Ministers ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : So far as I know, there has 
been no case of lawyers appearing before the Ministers 
as lawyers. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know what that is : but this 
is what he said. I think that matter can be regulated in 
the manner I have suggested. Therefore, no legal provision 
of that sort is necessary. 

I now come to the amendment moved by my hon. Friend 
Pandit Kunzru. He wants to drop the words “disloyalty 
to the State”. To some extent, I accept his argument that 
the wording “disloyalty to the State” is not a very precise 
phrase. What does it mean ? It has nowhere been defined. 
But the point is this. When the Select Committee discussed 
this matter, they were considering two different categories 
of servants of the State. One was the personnel of the civil 
services ; they were also considering the army personnel. In 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


686 


686 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their judgment it was possible for an army officer to do an 
act which may undermine the security of the State, or may 
prove to be an act of disloyalty to the State and he may 
have been dismissed on that account. They did not want to 
confine the restriction to corruption of civil servants. They 
also wanted to extend the same provisions to any act done 
by a military officer. I admit that it has not been possible to 
use a precise phrase. But I would like to say this that there 
is sufficient protection in one part of clause 7, where the 
question whether one has been in fact dismissed for corrupt 
practices or for disloyalty has been left to be decided by the 
Election Commission. I should submit that if the Election 
Commissioner is an independent officer and we have every 
hope and right to believe that he shall be an independent 
officer — I think in sub-clause (3) there is enough protection 
against any kind of misuse of the provisions contained in the 
earlier part of clause 7. 

I do not think that there is any point which was made by 
any hon. Member which calls for explanation and with which 
I have not dealt in the course of my reply. 

Shri Kamath: I must bring to your notice Sir, a slight 
lapse on the part of Dr. Ambedkar whereby he transformed 
Mr. Chaudhuri into a woman by calling him Rohini, the 
name of a woman. I hope the name will be correctly put in 
the official reports. Rohitkumar is a man’s name. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. 

Mr. Kamath: This is a serious matter, Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What did I say ? 

Mr. Kamath: You said, Rohini. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is the name by which I call him. 

Mr. Kamath : He is Mr. Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri and 
not Rohini. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think he has misunderstood me. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: No. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He would refuse to misunderstand. I am 


sure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


687 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 687 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : In view of the fact that the Hon. 
Minister for Law has just expressed that co-operative societies 
may not be covered by the Public Companies Act, and as far 
as my information goes, I am definite that cooperative societies 
are registered under a different Act, may I know whether the 
shareholders of co-operative societies which hold contracts 
under any Government will be disqualified for contesting the 
elections or not ? 

Several hon. Members: Not disqualified. 

Mr. Chairman: I would like to know from the hon. 
Members who have moved amendments if any of them want 
to withdraw their amendments or they want me to put them 
to the House. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Sir, the matter of co-operative 
societies requires a little clarification. Dr. Ambedkar says 
that co-operative societies were not excluded. What is the 
meaning of the word ‘exclusion’ ; we do not understand. Will 
the director of 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no disqualification. None of the 
‘ disqualifications would apply to them. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: I beg for leave to withdraw 
the amendments. 

Amendments were by leave withdrawn. 


^Clause 9. (. Disqualification for membership of electoral 
colleges .) 

Amendment made: 

In clause 9, for the words “subject to any disqualification for 
membership of Parliament under any of the provisions of this 
Act” substitute the following: 

“disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House 
of Parliament under any of the provisions of article 102.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9578-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


688 


688 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: The question is: 

“That clause 9, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 9 as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clause 122. ( Major corrupt practices ) 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

(i) In part (a) (i) of the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 122, 
after the words “injury of any kind”, insert the words “including 
social ostracism and ex-communication or expulsion from any 
caste or community”. 

(ii) For sub-clause (6) of clause 122, substitute the following 
sub-clause : 

“(6) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, 
of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or by any 
other person with the connivance of a candidate or his agent for 
the conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself, 
the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling 
station provided under section 23 or a place fixed under sub- 
section ( 1 ) of section 27 for the poll: 

Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or 
by several electors at their joint costs for the purposes of conveying 
him or them to or from any such polling station or place fixed 
for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under 
this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is not propelled by 
mechanical power: Provided further that the use of any public 
transport vehicle or vessel or any tramcar or railway carriage 
by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or 
coming from any such polling station or place fixed for the poll 
shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause. 

Explanation . — In this clause the expression “vehicle” means 
any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road 
transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise, 
and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.” 

Mr. Chairman: Amendments moved. 


Dr. Ambedkar: I also beg to move: 

(iii) For the Explanation to part (8) of clause 122, substitute 
the following: 

“Explanation . — For the purposes of this clause — 

(a) a person serving under the Government of India shall not 
include any person who has been declared by the Central Government 
to be a person to whom the provisions of this clause shall not apply; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


689 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


689 


(b) a person serving under the Government of any State 
shall include a patwari, chaukidar, dafedar, lambardar, zaiidar, 
shanbagh, karnam, talati, talari, patil, village munsif, village 
headman or any-other village officer, by whatever name he is 
called, employed in that State whether the office he holds is a 
whole-time office or not, but shall not include any person (other 
than any such village officer as aforesaid) who has been declared 
by the State Government to be a person to whom the provisions 
of this clause shall not apply.” 

Mr. Chairman: Amendment moved : 

These are all agreed amendments 


* Mr. Chairman : Amendment moved : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (b) 
of the proposed Explanation to part 8 of clause 122, omit the 
words “Patil, village headman or any other village officer”. 

Shri Kamath : I have got amendments in supplementary 
list No. 3 to Consolidated List No. 2. I have got several 
amendments there but I will move only one of them. In 
Supplementary list No. 6 to Consolidated List No. 2 also I am 
moving only one of my amendments. And in supplementary 
list No. 6 to Consolidated List No. 2 also I have several 
amendments, but I am moving only one. I am not moving 
the rest. That is to say. I shall move amendment No. 5 
in supplementary list No. 3 to Consolidated List No. 2, 
amendment No. 3 in supplementary list No. 4 to Consolidated 
List No. 2, and amendment No. 2 in supplementary list No. 
6 to Consolidated List No. 2. 

I will take No. 6 in supplementary list No. 3 first. I beg 
to move : 

(i) In part (a) (ii) of the Proviso to part (2) of clause 122, for the 

words “an object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure”, substitute 

the words “a victim of a divine curse’. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not understand the difference between 
the two. 

Shri Kamath: Now, Sir, I would like to point out that 
this apparently has been taken from the English law on the 
subject and also perhaps from the Indian Penal Code which 


*P. D„ Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9582-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


690 


690 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

also borrowed it originally from English law. But in the 
English law the words used are “spiritual undue influence”, 
and there it is clear because in Christian religion the words 
“spiritual censure” or “spiritual injury” have got a definite 
connotation. With regard to this “spiritual undue influence” 
it was held in England — where certain Roman Catholic 
priests exercised their religious influence on voters in a 
manner inconsistent with their religious duties as minister 
of religion — it was held to be “undue influence”. “A priest 
may counsel, advise, recommend and point out the true line 
of moral duty and give the opinion about the candidate, 
but he may not appeal to superstition of the people he 
approaches.” Now, Sir, India. I am not quite sure in my 
own mind 


Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I do not wish to interrupt, but 
g I am total unable to follow what is happening in 

this House. I do not understand the relevance. 

Shri Kamath: That is due to the time. I suppose. The 
Prime Minister is tired. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: May I just point out that I 
should like to understand, and I am not supposed to be 
unintelligent. 

Shri Kamath: Nobody dare say so. 


*Shri Sarangdhar Das: The next amendment I have 
given notice of is to delete the proviso. I beg to move: 

Omit the proviso to part (6) of clause 122. 

I had given notice of this amendment to delete the proviso 
in the Bill saying: 

“Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector 
or by several electors at their joint, costs for the purpose of 
conveying him or them to or from the polling station shall not 
be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause.” 

This proviso is right under sub-clause (6) of clause 122. 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9590-91. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


691 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 691 

Shri Santhanam : His point is met by Dr. Ambedkar’s 
new amendment because all mechanically-propelled 
vehicles have been excluded from this proviso. Therefore, 
a substantial part of his point has been met already. 

Shri Sarangdhar Das: I do not agree. If my amendments 
are accepted then all the involvements in the Law Minister’s 
amendment should go. Motor transport should be entirely 
banned. That is my amendment to the Bill as amended 
by the Select Committee. It is a very radical amendment. 

Sir, I commend my amendment to the House. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept it, Sir. 

The motion was negatived. 


*Ch. Ranbir Singh: I beg to move: 

In the Explanation to part (8) of clause 122, omit the words 
“chaukidar, dafedar, lambardar, zaildar”. 


Dr. Ambedkar: I do not accept the amendment. 


Shri Satish Chandra (Uttar Pradesh): I support the 
previous three speakers. I myself happen to be a lambardar. 
I have about ten villages in my zamindari and for each 
of them I am supposed to be the lambardar. Fortunately 
there is no co-sharer in most of them. I may be the owner 
of the entire village, but because I pay the land revenue 
to the Government I am called a lambardar according to 
Government revenue terminology. I have never imagined 
in my life that I am a Government servant or that I 
am in any official capacity connected with Government. 
Anybody who has to deposit land-revenue in the government 
treasury is known as lambardar in Uttar Pradesh. I do 
not know what is the system in other States. But in 
Uttar Pradesh any person who deposits land revenue 
in the government treasury either solely on his own 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9592-95. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


692 


692 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

behalf or on behalf of his co-sharers in the village is known 
as lambardar. I do not know, in what sense exactly this 
word is inserted here. But if the word lambardar here means 
a zamindar who is responsible for the payment of land- 
revenue in Uttar Pradesh or elsewhere, it must be omitted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to say a word about this. 
I do not quite understand why my friend Pandit Kunzru 
got into temper over this. He was a Member of the Select 
Committee. This clause was introduced by the Select 
Committee. It was a unanimous clause. All the Members 
of the Committee represented their different States. I can 
speak with authority, say, for instance, about Bombay or 
about Madhya Pradesh. I cannot speak with authority with 
regard to the other States. These names and categories 
of people were introduced by the Select Committee, by 
Members from the different States who knew what they 
were talking about. At any rate I take it that they knew 
what they were talking about. I did not include it on my 
own responsibility and I do not know how he charges me 
with the sort of thing about which he gave an utterance. 
( Interruption .) I have not done it. It was done by the Select 
Committee. The Punjab Members, the U.P. Members, they 
were all present and they said that lambardar should be 
included. I never included the lambardar on my own. But if 
the view of the House is that the lambardar is in no sense 
an official, I am quite prepared to omit it. But they must 
take the responsibility. I cannot take the responsibility. I 
have not examined the revenue laws of different States to 
find out if the lambardar is an official or not. If the view 
of gentlemen here who can speak with authority about 
their States is that lambardar is not an official. I have no 
objection to omit it. I have no interest in this. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: My hon. Colleague has more or 
less explained the position. We are not wedded to this long 
list of appellations half of which I have never heard of in my 
life. These were given by the Select Committee and they were 
adopted. We are perfectly prepared now or at the third reading 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


693 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 693 

to go through the list very carefully in consultation with 
Members and to take’ out such of them as ought not to be 
there. 

Shri Bhatt: ‘Patil’ stands in a similar position. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It will be possible to find out from the 
various States whether any of them are Government officials. 
But with regard to Patil I can say that I know it — and nobody 
knows more about Patils than I do. 

Dr. Deshmukh : You do not know about Madhya Pradesh. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I know about Madhya Pradesh also. 

Some hon. Members : rose — 

Mr. Speaker: We are now prolonging discussion of a point 
which deserves consideration but which can be disposed of by 
mutual goodwill and compromise in no time. What I would 
suggest therefore, to the Law Minister, if the House agrees 
and he agrees, is that we cannot settle just at the moment 
as to whether the lambardar should be taken out or the Patil 
should be taken out or other persons should be taken out. 
After all, as the hon. the Leader of the House has stated, these 
are various appellations by which these people are known. 
Members may informally discuss the matter. It is more or 
less a matter of form really and it may be taken up after 
two or three days when we take the Bill for third reading. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It can be reserved till then. 

Mr. Speaker : It need not even be reserved for that 
purpose. They can pass this clause. They are only formal 
matters and not matters of substance, the substantial thing 
being that, a government official holding an office of profit 
should not be there. I do not think we need take time over 
these things. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What interest have I against the 
lambardar ? I am not a lambardar. 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am an inferior village officer, if you 
want to call me under the Watan Act in Bombay. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


694 


694 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Deshmukh: On a point of order, may I know what 
will happen now because you hurriedly put my amendment 
to vote and it was rejected by the House. Now that better 
sense is dawning on the House and everybody. I am grateful 
for the speech of my hon. Friend 

Mr. Speaker: The hon. Member is spoiling his own case 
by saying that better sense is prevailing in the House. That is 
not the way of compromise, of a peaceful settlement of affairs. 


*Clause 123 . — {Minor Corrupt Practices ) 

Amendment made: 

For sub-clause (5) of clause 123, substitute the following: 

“(5) The systematic appeal to vote or refrain from voting on 
grounds of caste, race, community or religion or the use of, or 
appeal to, religious and national symbols, such as, the national 
flag and the national emblem, for furtherance of the prospects 
of a candidate’s election.” 

Mr. Speaker: There is no other amendment, I think. 

Shri Kamath: I have two amendments. Nos. 5 and 6 in 
Supplementary List No. 4 to Consolidated List No. 2. I am 
moving No. 5 only. 

The motion was adopted. 

I wish the draftsman would pay some attention to this to see 
whether it could not be modified so as to bring into within its 
purview, any person besides a candidate or his agent. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I shall look that matter up. 

Shri Kamath: If the draftsman will look into it, I would 
not press it. 

Mr. Speaker: He may look into it. The motion was adopted. 


Clause 123. — As amended was added to the Bill. 
*Clause 124 . — {Illegal practices ) 


*P. D„ Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, p. 9598 

*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 28th May 1951, pp. 9599-9606. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


695 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 695 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

To sub-clause (1) of clause 124, add the following: 

“ Explanation . — Any such expenses as aforesaid incurred or 
authorised by any institution or organisation for the furtherance 
of the prospects of the election of a candidate supported by such 
institution or organisation shall not be deemed to be expenses 
incurred or authorised within the meaning of this clause.” 

Mr. Speaker: Amendment moved. 

Shri Kamath: I beg to move: 

In part (2) of clause 124, omit the words “of any building”. 

I raised this point to the Select Comittee, but it was not 
considered at any length and not much attention was paid to 
it. I would state my difficulty precisely and briefly. I know of 
some buildings in Madhya Pradesh where the lower floor is 
converted into a wine or liquor shop and the upper floor has 
been leased out to certain persons or to students or to other 
people for different purposes. Can a meeting be held on the 
top floor of the building ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no such fear at all. 

Shri Kamath: But it is open to doubt and I would like 
the Hon. Minister to omit the words “of any building” and 
thus avoid difficulties which it may be difficult to solve. The 
wording may be reconsidered so that the matter may be placed 
beyond the shadow of a doubt. 

Mr. Speaker: Amendment moved : 

In part (2) of clause 124, omit the words “of any building”. 
Pandit Kunzru wanted to sav something ? 

Pandit Kunzru: I was going to submit that the amendment 
proposed by Dr. Ambedkar is a very serious character and 
we ought to be given, in fairness time to consider it fully 
and to propose amendments to it. A mere perusal of the 
amendment shows that it will have a vital effect on many 
provisions of the Bill, and will seriously alter the balance 
between candidates of different parties. I suggest, therefore 
that we should be given time to consider this amendment. 
This is the only clause after all, that has not been passed and 
nothing will be lost and everything will be gained. I think, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


696 


696 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

if we are given more time to consider it and propose 
amendments to this provision. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The position is quite clear. There is 
nothing which need give rise to any doubt. As a matter of 
fact, some people had doubts as to what kinds of expenditure 
may be included in the election expenses and it is this sort 
of provision that I was able to think of in order to remove 
their doubts. If my friend has any other suggestion to make, 
I would like to hear. 

Mr. Speaker: What about Shri Kamath’s amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: About the words “of any building” there 
need be no doubt. The words need not be omitted. There is 
no doubt about the matter at all. 

Shri Kamath: This point was not discussed fully and it 
was added only at the last moment. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: Sir, I have to move my amendment 
No. 153 for dropping sub-clause (3) of clause 124. 

Mr. Speaker: He may move it. 

Shri Santhanam: It may be put separately. Part 3 may 
be put separately instead of moving it and making a speech. 

Dr. Ambedkar: My amendment may be put. 

Mr. Speaker: At the time of voting I shall see to it. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: I beg to move: 

“Omit part 3 of clause 124.” 

My object in doing so is that issuing of any circular, placard 
or poster having a reference to election which does not bear 
on it the names and address of the publisher and printer is 
an illegal practice. 

Mr. Speaker: If I mistake not, such provisions do occur 
in the election rules even to-day. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, there is nothing new. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: This entails a very serious 
consequences. If it will not do any harm to anybody, it should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


697 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 697 

not be an illegal practice. There is sufficient punishment 
awarded there but why should an innocent candidate be 
penalized, if some persons without his knowledge publish a 
circular saying ‘vote for so and so’ on the day of election and 
that would entail in the election being invalidated and his 
being punished with disqualification. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I wish to say that I do 
not think that we are in a position to delete this clause but 
all the same there is great force in the argument advanced 
by my friend Mr. R. K. Chaudhuri that if a person does this 
sort of thing, it should not affect the candidate unless the 
candidate has knowledge of it or he is conniving at it. It would 
be better to make it illegal under section 124. 

In regard to section 99, this should not have any effect 
on the candidate. This was the general view in the meeting 
wherein this question was considered. I would therefore request 
that section 99 should be open for consideration later. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That may be considered. 

Mr. Speaker: That means this clause may be put as it is. 

Pandit Kunzru: I strongly appose the amendment put 
forward by Dr. Ambedkar. You will see from the amendment 
9-00 p m that proposes is not that a party would carry on 
general propaganda in favour of its candidate. 
But that a party should be free to do what it can in support 
of particular candidates. That a party should in a general 
way, support its own candidates is recognised everywhere 
but that it should support particular candidates and that 
the expenditure incurred by it not on carrying on general 
election propaganda but in support of a particular candidate 
should not be shown in the return of the election expenses 
of that candidate raises a very important issue. In England 
too the rights of the various parties to incur expenses in 
connection with their propaganda is recognised. But the 
expenditure incurred in support of any particular candidate 
is according to the exposition of Dr. Ambedkar, to be shown 
in the return of the election expenses of that candidate. Is 
there any reason why we should follow a separate practice 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


698 


698 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

here ? It is obvious that it will give rise to graft and that it 
affects vitally many provisions of this Bill. That is why I ask, 
Sir, that the debate on this clause should be postponed so 
that we should be given more time to examine it and to put 
forward any amendments that we might think would secure 
the desired result without leading to a highly undesirable 
situation. 

Mr. Speaker: Does the Hon. Minister want to say 
anything ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have nothing to add to what I have said. 

Mr. Speaker: Then I will put the amendments to vote. 
I will first put Mr. Kamath’s amendment. The question is: 

In part (2) of clause 124, omit the words “of any building”. 
The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Speaker: Then there is an amendment of Mr. R. K. 
Chaudhuri for deletion of paragraph 3. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: I think that is accepted ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, no. I do not accept it. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: Then I want leave of the House 
to withdraw it. 

Mr. Speaker: I have not placed it before the House, so 
it falls through. Then I have to put to vote Dr. Ambedkar’s 
amendment. The question is : (as shown on page 618-19). 

To sub-clause (1) of clause 124, add the following: 

“ Explanation . — Any such expenses as aforesaid incurred or 
authorised by any institution or organisation for the furtherance 
of the prospects of the election of a candidate supported by such 
institution or organisation shall not be deemed to be expenses 
incurrd or authorised within the meaning of this clause. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That clause 124, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 124, as amended, was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


699 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 699 

Clauses 132, 139 and 150 

Mr. Speaker: Then there are clauses 132, 139 and 150. 
There are no amendments to these, so I will put them together. 

The question is: 

“That clauses 132, 139 and 150 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 132, 139 and 150 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 167. — (Power to make rules ) 

Mr. Speaker: Now there is the amendment of Dr. 
Ambedkar to clause 167. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have moved it already. There was no 
criticism about it and I should like briefly to explain my 
position with regard to that With regard to this clause two or 
three questions were raised. One was with regard to an officer 
who has been transferred from the constituency in which his 
name had appeared in the register to some other place. The 
question was: what provision was going to be made for his 
voting ? The second question was with regard to a candidate 
who goes from one State to another State for the purpose of 
seeking election. There also, the same question was raised. 
Finally, there was the question with regard to a candidate 
who is moving in his own constituency for the purpose of 
canvassing and who is not present or who is not likely to 
be present at the polling booth where he is entitled to vote. 

I asked the draftsman; the draftsman thinks that it is 
unnecessary to make a provision in this particular clause in 
my amendment because there is ample room in the general 
provision contained in clause 167 for making rules to cover 
all these cases. Therefore, it will be possible for the Election 
Commissioner under the rules to deal with these cases by 
rules and it is unnecessary to make any amendment here. 

Shri Ethirajulu Naidu: I would like to mention clause 
59 which deals with this particular matter. Would the Law 
Minister consider the advisability of making an amendment 
to clause 59 ? That clause refers to, “Special Procedure for 
voting by certain classes of persons.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


700 


700 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, that is a separate clause altogether 
pertaining to those who are outside the country. 

Shri Kamath: A reply is due to the amendment moved 
by me regarding the rules to be laid before Parliament. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to that the position is this. 
As everybody in the House knows, we are trying to do our 
level best to have the elections in November-December. Now, 
if the procedure suggested by my hon. friend Mr. Kamath, 
that the rules shall be placed on the table of Parliament and 
that they shall not have operative force and until Parliament 
has approved them, is adopted, it is quite clear that we may 
not be able to achieve the purpose we have in view, namely 
that the elections should take place in November-December. 
On that ground alone it seems to me rather difficult to accept 
the amendment that he has moved. But if he would be content 
with the assurance that Government will place the rules 
before Parliament, I am prepared to give that undertaking. 

Shri Kamath: After they are placed before Parliament, 
will Parliament be competent to modify them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot give a categorical answer to that 
also — I feel some difficulty. It is this. Supposing, for instance, 
Government does take action under any rules that are framed 
and subsequently Parliament alters it. Then, what would 
happen to action already taken under the rules as framed ? 
Therefore it would be very difficult to tie down the hands of 
Government by any such condition as Mr. Kamath proposes. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: May I move an amendment to clause 
167. I beg to move: 

After part (g) of sub-clause (2) of clause 187, insert the 

following new part (gg): 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. What is the No. of the 
amendment. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I gave notice of it some time back. 

Mr. Speaker: I am not waiving any further notice. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: I am inclined to think that this may 
perhaps be accepted by the Hon. Minister. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


701 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 701 

Dr. Ambedkar: If it relates to contract, it has already 
been defined in the Contract Act. 

Mr. Speaker: Is Government prepared to accept the 
amendment ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot accept any amendment now. 

Shri Kamath : If my amendment is negatived will it mean 
that Government will not place the rules before the House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have already said that Government will 
always be prepared to place it before the House. 

Shri Kamath: If that assurance is given, I will not press 
my amendment. 

Mr. Speaker: Mr. Kamath wishes to have leave of the 
House to withdraw his amendment. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Speaker: Now I will put Dr. Ambedkar’s amendment. 
The question is: 

After part (c) of sub-clause (2) of clause 167, insert the 
following: 

“(cc) the manner in which votes are to be given by a presiding 
officer, polling officer, polling agent or any other person, who 
being an elector for a constituency is authorised or appointed for 
duty at a polling station at which he is not entitled to vote 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That clause 167, as amended, stand part of the Bill. The 
motion was adopted. 

Clause 167, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

New Clause 34A 

*Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I beg to move : 

After clause 34, insert the following new clause: 

“34A. (1) Any candidate aggrieved by an order accepting or 
rejecting the nomination paper of the candidate shall be entitled to file 
an appeal to the District Judge of the District in whose jurisdiction 


*P. D., Vol. 12, Part II, 19th May 1951, pp. 9607-10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


702 


702 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


the scrutiny of the nomination papers took place within four 
days of the passing of the order. The copy of the order shall 
accompany the petition of appeal if obtained or may be filed 
before the appeal is heard. 

(2) The District Judge shall follow the procedure prescribed 
for hearing the appeals in the Code of Civil Procedure Act of 
1908 and pass his final orders within fifteen days of the date of 
order cither accepting or rejecting the nomination paper. 

(3) The District Judge shall forthwith send a copy of his 
order to the Returning Officer who shall immediately publish 
the same as prescribed under section 36. 

(4) The decision of the District Judge shall be final and 
shall not be questioned subsequently by any election petition 
or otherwise.” 

In the original Bill this was the proposal of Dr. Ambedkar 
himself that so far as nomination is concerned it ought to 
be finalised and no election to petition should be allowed on 
the basis that at the time of nomination no proper order of 
acceptance or rejection was made. This is in keeping with the 
general sense of the House also. All the Members perhaps 
without exception want this, so that after the polling takes 
place and a person goes through the election no question 
may arise when the nomination may again be questioned. 
Before so many expenses are incurred and everything is gone 
through we should see that the nomination is finalised. I have 
therefore given a set of rules under clause 34A whereby the 
nomination may be finalised and there may be no election 
petition in regard to the proper acceptance or rejection of a 
nomination. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am very sorry that I have to oppose 
this amendment. As my friend, Pandit Bhargava said, it was 
I who first set in motion the idea of dividing the election 
into two parts, one relating to nomination and the other 
relating to actual poll. The Select Committee, however, 
without considering the matter came to the conclusion that 
that procedure should not be adopted. They found that there 
may not be sufficient time for a candidate whose nomination 
has been challenged on the ground that he is disqualified to 
produce evidence within the stated time in order to get a 
decision in his favour. At this very meeting, I think, Members 
will remember that the Chief Election Commissioner was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


703 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 703 

present; he was specially called to discuss this matter and he 
expressed himself opposed to this idea of having the nomination 
finalized before the election started. Thereafter I have also 
consulted him and he is absolutely of the opinion that elections 
would be delayed considerably if this procedure was adopted. 
Now, we are all agreed that the elections should take place 
in November-December, no matter what happens, and as the 
responsibility is cast upon the Election Commission to carry 
through this programme, it is rather very difficult for me to 
override the view that the Chief Election Commissioner has 
taken on that ground. I am sorry to say that I cannot accept 
the amendment, but I should like to say one thing to the 
House, namely that this law which we are making is not a 
law to be for ever. If we are not able to adopt this particular 
amendment for the present election, there is nothing to prevent 
us from having it introduced in this Act at a later stage, so 
that the new procedure may be followed in the next election. 
This law can be amended, added and substracted from. For 
the moment in view of the fact that we are all determined 
to have the elections in November-December, it seems quite 
impossible to introduce any such measure which may produce 
a dilatory effect. 

Mr. Speaker : Do I put the amendment to the House then ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: My amendment may be 
put to the House. 


Mr. Speaker: Amendment moved. 

The motion was negatived. 

Clause 1 . — ( Short Title) 

Prof. K. T. Shah: I beg to move: 

Re-number clause 1 as sub-clause (1) of that clause and add 
the following sub-clause as sub-clause (2): 

“(2) This Act shall be translated into the principal languages 
of India as prescribed by the Constitution, and shall be published 
in every State of the Union in its regional language or languages 
as well as in the national language of the Union and English, 
within six weeks of its enactment into law: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


704 


704 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Provided that all technical terms as defined or used in this 
Act shall be in Hindi with English equivalents in brackets in each 
case and that they shall be the same in all regional languages 
with their equivalents wherever available in brackets in each 
regional language. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have great sympathy with this 
amendment and I have no doubt that the various State 
Governments will take into consideration the suggestion 
contained in this amendment. But, I cannot see how I can 
agree to put it in the statute itself. Therefore, I must oppose it. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is “That clause 1 stand part 
of the Bill”. 

The motion was adopted 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. The title and enacting 
formula were added to the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker: Now the House will have to adjourn. The 
House them adjourned till half past 9-00 of the clock on 
Tuesday, the 29th May 1951. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


7-9-2013 


705 


704A without 
number 



Dr. Ambedkar on the lawns of Parliament 


COURTESY: Shant Swaroop Shant, Delhi 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


11-10-2013>YS>28-11-2013 


706 


704B without 
number 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


705 


SECTION VI 

7th August 1951 

TO 

12th October 1951 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


706 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK SJ+YS 8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


SECTION VI 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

35. Parliament — Prevention of Disqualification Bill 

36. Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Bill 

37. Notaries Bill 

38. Resolution regarding necessity for an All 

India Bar 

39. Conduct of a Member of Parliament 

40. Select Committee Meetings 

41. Motions regarding delimitations of Constituencies 

of Order 

42. Business of the House 

43. Dr. Ambedkar’s letter of Resignation 


Pages 

709-740 

741-760 

761-767 

768-772 

773-785 

786-789 

790-814 

815-820 

821-830 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


708 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


709 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


709 


( 35 ) 

PARLIAMENT— PREVENTION OF 
DISQUALIFICATION BILL 

* The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That the Bill to declare certain offices of profit not to 
dsqualify their holders for being members of Parliament, be 
taken into consideration.’’ 

Sir, this Bill is really an Act of indemnity for certain 
persons who, if the Bill was not brought into operation, would 
become disqualified for being Members of Parliament under 
the provisions of Article 102 of the Constitution, which says 
that if any person were to hold an office of profit, he would be 
disqualified for being a Member of Parliament. Unfortunately 
it so happened that there are Members of Parliament, who 
for reasons which I will very briefly refer to did come under 
the provisions of Article 102. For the reasons which I am 
going to submit to the House, Government feels that it is 
only right that the disqualification should be removed by a 
law made by Parliament. 

With regard to the question of the office of profit it is 
necessary for the House to remember that this provision is 
a very ancient one and has been imcorporated in the various 
Acts of the Government of India that have laid down the 
Constitution of this country. To begin only with the Act of 1935, 
there existed section 26 which related to matters regarding 
holders of office of profit under the Government. Since the 
federal part of the Act of 1935 did not come into operation 
that section did not apply to the Central Legislature as was 
then existing, but section 69 which was the corresponding 
provision in the Provincial part did apply to the Provincial 
Legislatures. 

As the House knows, in 1946 a Constituent Assembly was 
convened for the purpose of drafting the Constitution. In that 


* P.D., Vol. 14, Part II, 7th August 1951, pp. 34-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


710 


710 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Constituent Assembly it was necessary to bring together, for 
the purpose of seeking the best advice possible on the matter 
of making the Constitution, persons who were qualified to 
give their advice on such an important matter, and it was 
felt not desirable to have this limitation being imposed on the 
membership of the Constituent Assembly, and what happened 
was that consequently the Government of India Act had to 
be adapted to make it suitable to the new circumstances, and 
this provision was dropped from the adapted Government of 
India Act, 1935. Consequently it was open for any Member 
to become a Member of the Constituent Assembly and, as the 
House also knows, as the Constituent Assembly also operated 
and functioned as the Dominion Legislature it became open 
for persons, even though they were holding an office of profit, 
to continue as Members of Parliament. 

That being the position what happened was this, that 
certain Members who were Members of the Constituent 
Assembly and who on account of the fact that they were 
Members of the Constituent Assembly were also Members of 
the Dominition Legislature continued to hold offices of profit 
without any kind of Constitutional ban being imposed upon 
them, and once they were holders of offices of profit under 
the adapted Government of India Act, 1935, they continued 
to hold those offices even after the Constitution has come 
into operation on the 26th January 1950. Of course it was 
possible for Government to inform those Members that now 
that the law is changed and an office of profit has become 
a disqualification, it was in their interest to relinquish 
those offices which put them under this ban. But, obviously, 
Members of Parliament would realise that that would have 
created a great deal of administrative difficulty. Members 
had already taken upon themselves certain responsibilities as 
members of commissions and members of committees, and to 
‘ be told in the midst of their work that they must now quit 
and the committee or commissions must be so reconstituted 
that every member of those bodies was free from this ban, 
would have created a great deal of difficulty from the point 
of view of administration. Consequently they were permitted 
to continue to function in their offices notwithstanding the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


711 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 711 

fact that the ban contained in Article 102 had come into 
operation. That is one justification why this Bill has been 
brought in : that if many of those members of committees and 
commissions had been asked to quit it would have created great 
administrative difficulty. In view of the fact, therefore, that it 
was in the interest of the Government to permit these Members 
to continue in their offices and discharge their functions, it is 
undoubtedly the obligation of the Government to remove the 
disqualification which they were in effect induced to incur. 
That is one reason why this Bill has been brought in. 

12 Noon 

A second reason why this Bill has been brought in is 
because many members who look offices after the 26th January 
1950 (when the Constitution came into operation), according 
to the submissions that they have made were unaware, or 
rather unconscious that the Constitution did contain such a 
provision. According to the submissions that they have made 
it was a case of misunderstanding : they did not realise what 
exactly was happening. And it seems to me that although 
there is a general rule of law that ignorance of law is no 
excuse, in a matter of this kind we must accept the bona 
fides of Members who have submitted that they did not, in 
fact, know that they were incurring a disability of this sort. 
If hon. Members were to analyse the categories of persons 
and offices which have been mentioned in the Bill, they will 
realise that the Members who are given this indemnity fall 
in either of the two cateories : one category is of those who 
were holding the offices long before the Constitution came 
into existence ; the second category is of those people who 
believed in a bona fide manner that they were not incurring 
any disqualification under Article 102. That is the basis on 
which the Bill has been constructed. 

I might also inform the House as to the principles on which 
the Government is acting so far as this Bill is concerned and 
so far as the general principle of disqualification arising out 
of an office of profit is concerned. The Government takes the 
view that it is not desirable to apply the teachnical rule of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


712 


712 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

English law, namely that if the law has declared that the 
office is an office of profit, then, irrespective of the question 
whether the Member draws the salary attached to that 
office, he should be disqualified. That is the rule under the 
English Constitution ; certain offices have been declared by 
law to be offices of profit. There may be a certain Member 
of Parliament who may accept that particular office and at 
the same time refuse the profits of that office, but the fact 
that he has refused the profits of the office does not save 
him from the rule of office of profit. Government thinks that 
that is quite an undesirable thing; being purely technical 
we need not adopt it. What the Government has done with 
regard to defining what is an office of profit is a very simple 
thing; they have decided the basis for determining whether 
any particular office is an office of profit or not. Recently the 
Finance Department has made rules for the payment to non- 
Members (that is, persons who are not Members of parliament) 
for work done on various committees. I do not know whether 
the hon. Members are aware of, or have seen the notification 
issued by the Finance Department. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): We are not aware. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab): It has not been circulated. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, I think they could get that. Anyhow 
it is a very simple thing. The allowances which are payable 
under the Notification (or office Memorandum as they call 
it) of the Finance Department for members who are working 
on committees and in other offices and are not Members of 
Parliament, are these : 

Travelling allowance is paid at the rate of 1% rail fare if 
he is travelling by rail and 114 fare if he is travelling by air. 

Then a daily allowance which is paid at the rate of Rs. 12-8-0 
per day in Delhi, Rs. 15 in Calcutta and Bombay, the maximum 
rate being Rs. 20. 

Now if there is any Member of Parliament who is appointed 
to a committee, and if he is not paid more than what is 
prescribed in the Office Memorandum a summary of which 
I have just now given to the House, then he will not be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


713 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 713 

regarded as a member holding an office of profit. There will 
be no disqualification because he is treated on the same 
footing as a person who is not a Member of Parliament. But 
if any person who is a Member of Parliament and who is 
appointed to any particular committee by the Government, 
receives something more than what is stated in the Finance 
Department Memorandum then the question will arise whether 
that person is holding an office of profit or not. 

Shri Sondhi : Supposing he is entitled to more but he 
does not draw more ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a case I am not able to imagine. 
As I said, the position is this. If a Member of Parliament who 
is appointed to any committee is paid nothing in excess of what 
the Finance Ministry has ruled as the rates of payment to 
non-Members, then there is no case at all for disqualification. 
Every Member is free to be appointed to any committee that 
the Government thinks fit. But if anything more is paid, then 
the question will arise as to whether such a Member is holding 
an office of profit or not. With regard to such exceptional cases 
the position which the Government has taken is this, that 
they will not lay down any general rule but they will consider 
each case separately as and when it arises. Government may, 
at the time of making the nomination, state then and there 
that notwithstanding the fact that the allowances payable 
are in excess of the rates settled by the Finance Ministry, 
the Member shall not incur any disability. Or, after several 
cases have occurred they may generally examine the cases and 
bring in a Bill of the kind that I have brought in, namely, 
to exempt certain offices which may under the rules lead to 
disability. 

I think, Sir, that I have given the House all the information 
that is necessary in order to enable it to appreciate the 
reasons why Government have thought it fit to bring in this 
Bill. I think I have also given the basic principles which 
Government have had in mind in dealing with matters arising 
out of Article 102. 

Mr. Deputy Spaker: Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to declare certain offices of profit not to 
disqualify their holders for being Members of Parliament, be 
taken into consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


714 


714 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sidhva: Sir, from the speech of the Hon. Minister 
in moving this Bill the doubts in the minds of hon. Members 
have not been removed. Rather, they have increased after the 
latter portion of his speech. He said that if a Member has 
drawn more than what the Finance Ministry has settled, it 
is a case for disqualification. The question may not be serious 
for Dr. Ambedkar. He is a Minister and has not served on 
any committe. But nearly 50 per cent, of the Members of 
this House have been serving on several committees. They 
were not “induced” to serve on them as he stated. They were 
requested to serve on them. They were obliged to serve on 
. them. They never knew that this would subject them to 
any disqualification. Therefore, this matter requires serious 
consideration and I would say more sympathetic consideration 
at the hands of Government. I have given notice of an 
amendment which leaves no doubt about this matter. I want 
that all the committees on which the Members were asked to 
serve should be incorporated in this Bill. Dr. Ambedkar has 
expounded his own viewpoint that those who drew fees as 
settled by the Finance Ministry will not be disqualified. But 
we do not know what will be the interpretation of the High 
Courts and the Supreme Court. No doubt, Dr. Ambedkar is one 
of the legal luminaries. He was the Chairman of the Drafting 
Committee of the Constitution and yet the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts have interpreted the various Articles of 
the Constitution differently from what he had told us in the 
Constituent Assembly. Therefore, I am not going to accept 
his interpretation. His interpretation is of no value to us. He 
must not give us his conjectures. If he wants the Members 
to remain in this House, if he wants them to contest the 
elections, let him be honest about it and say that serving on 
these committees will not disqualify them. According to his own 
statement, those who receive more than the prescribed rates 
of payment should make some statement in the nomination 
paper and then Government will consider his case. Was that 
the idea when these Members were requested — I repeat, they 
were requested not induced — to serve on these committees ? 
Had they known that they would incur any disqualification 
by serving on these committees, they would not have served 
on them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


715 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 715 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The courts do not seem to have 
any jurisdiction in this matter. Under the Constitution, the 
matter has to be referred to the President, who will decide 
it in consultation with the Election Commissioner. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I enlighten my hon. friend and 
tell him how exactly the question arose ? Some Members of 
Parliament reported certain cases to the Speaker. They said 
that in their opinion certain Members were holding offices 
of profit. It is the Speaker who referred the matter to the 
President and it is the President who asked us to regularise 
this matter. We have not taken the initiative ourselves. 

Shri Sidhva : I know that. But my argument was different. 
I was referring to the fact that only four categories have been 
mentioned by the Hon. Minister while there are a number of 
other Members who have been serving on various committes. 
According to the Hon. Minister, these persons may not be 
disqualified but according to the Supreme Court they may 
be disqualified. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How does the Supreme Court 
come in here ? 

Shri Sidhva: Well, it is the President. Even if it is a 
matter to be decided by the President, I do not want any 
ambiguity to prevail. Supposing the President interprets the 
case differently and says, “Yes, you are disqualified” ? What 
then ? The Hon. Minister was right enough when he said that 
it would have dislocated the administration if these Members 
have been asked to resign. He also stated that these Members 
never knew that they would be disqualified under the new 
Constitution. These were honest intentions, I believe. So, why 
not embody them in this legislation ? I have mentioned nearly 
twenty-five committes and I hope all the other hon. Members 
would press for their inclusion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sure you have omitted to mention 
some. 

Shri Sidhva: You add them, I will be only too glad. You 
should come to our rescue rather than do otherwise. Why 
should 50 per cent, of the Members of this House run the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


716 


716 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

risk of disqualification ? I want that Government should 
reconsider this matter. They should include a clause whereby 
all members who have served on all or any of the committees 
appointed by the Ministeries will not be considered disqualified. 
Or, they should include all the names of the committees. I 
have given two alternatives. I see no reason why the Hon. 
Minister should not accept one of them. Why should he leave 
it to somebody else, even if it be the Prsident ? He considers 
the receipt of fees as equivalent to holding an office of profit. I 
may tell him that in the Industrial Finance Corporation there 
are Members of Parliament who under the rules prescribed 
by the Finance Ministry draw Rs. 50. In some cases they 
drew Rs. 75. Subsequently, they agreed to Rs. 40. This is a 
glaring instance. They are and have been drawing Rs. 40. Will 
they be disqualified ? Is it fair if they are disqualified ? They 
were asked in writing, they were requested by the Ministry 
concerned to serve on this Corporation and they accepted. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): They refunded 
some of the fees and those fees have been returned to them 
again. 

Shri Sidhva: Therefore, this matter should not be treated 
lightly. I am very glad that Government have brought forward 
this Bill. It was before this House during the last Session. In 
fact, we wanted it to be considered along with the Bill dealing 
with Deputy Ministers and Ministers of State. When the new 
Constitution came into force we were given an assurance that 
the Ministers’ question would be taken up first and that the 
Members’ case would be considered sympathetically separately. 
Now this Bill should have been passed during the last Session — 
nearly five months back. I am very glad that it has found the 
first place at least now. It is not so simple a measure as Dr. 
Ambedkar has represented it to be. I would submit to him that 
the intention of Government is very clear. They do not desire 
that anybody should court displeasure or disqualification for no 
fault of theirs. If that is so, let it be made quite clear in the 
Bill itself. From Dr. Ambedkar’s own statement it is quite clear 
that some of the Members will automatically be considered for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


717 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 717 

disqualification if anybody were to take the matter to the 
President, who will, of course interpret the law at the instance 
of the Law Ministry. The President will naturally consult 
Dr. Ambedkar and I am sure he will not give a different 
interpretation to the one that he has given now. 

In the course of his speech Dr. Ambedkar did not refer to 
my amendment — probably he has not seen it. You will see 
that I have given in my amendment the names of twenty-nine 
committee on which Members have served. I do not know 
whether some may have received fees higher than the ones 
announced by the Finance Ministry. At any rate, I am not 
prepared to accept Dr. Ambedkar’s interpretation, when there 
are higher authorities to interpret the Constitution. 


*Shri Karunakara Menon (Madras): There are certain 
committees not formed by the Ministers as such but by the 
Government: for instance, the Central Arecanut Committee 
which is a committee constituted by the Government. The 
members of that Committee, among whom are Members of 
Parliament also, are nominated. What is to be done with 
respect to that Committeee ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I was myself on a 
similar Committe : the Indian Central Cotton Committee. But 
here the wording is “who holds any office of profit under the 
Government of India or in a State Government”. All these 
fall under the interpretation of Dr. Ambedkar of what an 
office of profit is. Even if you don’t agree, then as stated in 
the statement of objects and reasons it is a doubtful point. I 
cannot say definitely that such a membership is not an office 
of profit, and therefore it is certainly doubtful. Now what 
would happen to our new Parliamentary Secretaries ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why do you want to raise problems which 
are not there ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: In clause 2 I find only 
Ministers can hold offices of profit. What about the Deputy 
Ministers ? 


* P.D., Vol. 14, Part II, 7th August 1951, pp. 57-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


718 


718 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: They are included. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: By a stretch of the 
language you may include Deputy Ministers but what will 
happen to Parliamentary Secretaries ? 

An Hon. Member: They are honorary. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I was an honorary 
Adviser; just as in my case one rupee a year appeared, in their 
case also it will happen. What I say is that if you want to take 
full advantage of knowledge or experience you should include 
a list of those offices holding of which does not disqualify a 
Member of Parliament. Supposing a Member having a special 
knowledge of some subject is appointed on a committee but 
if that office is not declared under this Bill then he will not 
be justified in accepting it. As between him and his services 
on the one side and this disqualification on the other, the 
country will be deprived of his services. Therefore we will be 
well advised in holding up this Bill, or at least in accepting 
some amendments grounded on these reasons which I am 
submitting. Otherwise it will mean that these five categories 
are exempted and the rest of us will again have to go to 
Dr. Ambedkar 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no ill-will. 

Shri Sidhva: He is generous. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I know it is not the Law 
Ministry which has initiated this measure, but I congratulate 
them for the manner in which they discharge their duties 
because they agree that so far as these persons are concerned 
they should be helped. But does Dr. Ambedkar mean to say 
that every time there is a case like this we should go to them 
and ask them for a favour ? So, while congratulating him for 
his Bill, I want him to include a further provision in the Bill 
that if such-and-such a principle is applied the disqualification 
will not apply. I would therefore respctfully request him, 
so far as Article 102 is concerned, to bring forward a good 
measure in which the various offices of profit are defined, 
at least to the extent that such-and-such offices will not 
disqualify the holder, and also saying that if the emoluments 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


719 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 719 

do not exceed those of a Member of Parliament for attending 
the session it will not be taken as an office of profit. If we 
specify the names of the various committees and commissions I 
know a very large number of them will be covered but all the 
same the kind of a committee referred to by Mr. Kamath will 
not come in. I am a very great criminal in this respect. I was 
also a member of the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation. First 
of all they gave us fees. We told them that in the matter of 
rehabilitation work we did not want any fees, they said, ‘No, 
you are entitled’. They gave us Rs. 50 per meeting whereas 
Members of Parliament are entitled to only Rs. 40 per day. 
(Now the fees has been made into Rs. 40.) So, they asked us 
to refund the amount paid to us for meetings for which we 
had drawn from Parliament. We said, ‘All right’. After the 
refund was made, they came to the conclusion that we were 
entitled to the money which was refunded back to us. We 
never asked for it, but when it came we accepted it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That shows the generosity of Government. 

The Minister of Education (Maulana Azad): I suppose 
they did not ask again for the money to be refunded ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The difficulty now is 
this. Even if we did not accept this money and gave it back, 
we would have come within the mischief of this rule if the 
office is regarded as an office of profit, because it is not the 
getting of the mony that matters but it is the office carrying 
that emolument. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it not an autonomous body 
created by a statute ? Therefore, is it an office of profit under 
the Government ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: It is an autonomous body. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Therefore, the amount was refunded 
to you. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If you will kindly allow me to explain, I 
think it will cut short the discussion. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: But you must explain 
the following three points: (1) Rehabilitation Adviser; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


720 


720 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) Rehabilitation Finance Corporation; (3) General Committees. 
Then there are other committees of which some members 
have told me just now. For instance, some Members have 
been serving as members of Committees appointed by the 
Manager of a railway system, or as Presidents of Chambers 
of Commerce. They are to that extent holding offices of profit 
under the Government. Will they all come in ? I want that this 
question should be beyond any doubt. If only five categories 
are mentioned, we shall have only two courses open : either 
to see that these persons are not exempted and they remain 
like us ; or that we are also exempted like them. I humbly 
submit that this House will not be justified in passing this 
Bill as it is. Either accept Mr. Sidhva’s amendment that on a 
certain principle all those Members should be exempted and 
include the Rehabilitation Advisor also in this category. Or lay 
down a principle which may be of general application and the 
holders of those posts may be regarded as not coming within 
the mischief of this rule. What Dr. Ambedkar has done is 
according to the exigencies of the situation as he understood 
them then. But now, so many new things have been brought to 
his notice and he will not be justified in getting this measure 
passed without including the other committees. 

So far as the question of disqualification is concerned, . 
I submit that none of these persons has really incurred the 
disqualification, because none of these persons understood 
nor they had the full knowledge that as a matter of fact they 
were incurring a disqualification by accepting that post. When 
this is the position, they ought not to be taken as having 
incurred the disqualification. In regard to past things, it 
should be stated that those offices were offices in regard to 
which no disqualification was attached. Unless this is done, 
this indemnity Bill will not be an indemnity Bill, because you 
are not indemnifying persons, you are indemnifying offices. If 
you make the individuals also immune, then you would have 
done the right thing. That is my submssion. 

Dr. Ambedkar: From the point of view of members of 
Parliament this Bill is certainly a very delicate Bill and I 
would begin by reminding hon. Members that they should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


721 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 721 

be very careful about becoming over-enthusiastic in the matter 
of attending the provisions of this Bill. My hon. friend Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava was the only member who touched 
upon this aspect of the matter, though very briefly. That 
was a point that ought to have been greately emphasized. 
The reason why the Constitution incorporated this provision 
in Article 102 was a very substantial one. It was intended 
to protect the independence of Parliament and consequently 
Members of Parliament should be very jealous in extending 
the provisions of Article 192, so that the public outside may 
not criticise them for engaging in a certain kind of — I hope 
Members will forgive me — jobbery. We have got to look at 
it from that point of view. It is quite true that whenever a 
Member is appointed to a committee he is doing a certain 
service to the country. 

An Hon. Member: Is it jobbery ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It has all aspects about it. From the 
point of view of the Member, it is no doubt a service that he 
renders. From the point of view of the opposition, if there is 
one, it might have another aspect. The opposition might very 
legitimately contend that the Government is extending the 
provisions of the office of profit rule in order to collect a lot of 
people to support it whenever support is wanted. Therefore, as 
I said, while there are difficulties in the provision contained in 
Article 102 and they should be solved in order that no serious 
handicap will be placed in the way of Government having 
the advice of members on committees whenever Members of 
Parliament are appointed to such committees and also in order 
that Members of Parliament may not be debarred from offering 
service to Government through committees, — while we have 
to do this, we have to be careful to see that the provisions 
are not made a temple, the doors of which are very wide and 
where anybody can enter. I must, I think, utter this caution 
in the interest of the House. 

Subject to that, I think there is a certain amount of 
misunderstanding about what the Bill does and also the basis 
of the Bill. I am very sorry to say that I did not present 
my case clearly, because Members of Parliament have not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


722 


722 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

followed me or understood me. It must have been my fault 
that I was not as clear as I should have been. I shall therefore 
explain the position succinctly once again. With regard to office 
of profit, we have to determine what is an office of profit and 
what is not an office of profit. As I told the House earlier, 
Government does not propose to take a purely technical view 
of office of profit as they do in England where the law says 
that such and such is an office of profit, and whether that is 
any office of profit or not or whether any particular individual 
who is holding that office of profit draws any money or not, 
it is for the purpose of the law an office of profit the holder 
of which is disqualified. It is the intention of the Government 
not to import that rule in our Constitution and unnecessarily 
disqualify Members of Parliament under a technical view 
of what is called an office of profit. I think the House will 
remember that. We are going, as I said, to take a realistic 
view of what is an office of profit. In coming to the conclusion 
as to whether any particular office is an office of profit or 
not, we have to divide the payment made to the Member into 
two separate categories. One is payment to a Member which 
includes nothing more than what may be called actual out of 
pocket expenses : travelling, living and so on. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar pradesh): What else ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am coming to it. I am giving an 
illustration. I do not know whether you are familiar with it, 

0 rir . but I think it is an illustration which is well known 

d-UU P.M. 

to many who attended the Round Table Conference. 
The second category would include what I would call actual 
expenses incurred by the member in order to be present at 
the committee to discharge his functions and something in 
addition as a recompense for the loss that he incurs by giving 
up some other business in order to attend to this business. 

1 do not know whether my hon. friend was a Member of the 
Round Table Conference, but it is a fact and I happen to 
know it because I was a Member ; the allowances paid to 
Members were divided into two categories. One category was 
called subistence allowance which meant 22s. or 21s. per day. 
The other category was called merely ‘allowance’ which was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


723 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 723 

intended to cover the loss which professional or businessmen 
incurred by giving up their business in this country and going 
to London to attend the Conference. 

Shri Sidhva: How much was that? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I forget the amount now — I think it 
was £ 100 a month. It is a long story, but I remember the 
distinction very well. But this distinction to my mind, is a very 
clear distinction. It is a distinction which can be justified on 
facts and which has a lot of precedents behind it. Therefore, 
the conclusion that was reached by Government in assessing 
whether any particular office was an office of profit or not was 
this distinction — whether the allowance or payment made to 
the member was nothing more than the bare expense which 
he may be supposed in normal times to incur, or whether in 
addition to this he was paid something more. We have taken 
the basis for actual expenses what has been decided by the 
Finance Minstry — in fact. I should have said what has been 
accepted by Government — not merely decided by the Finance 
Ministry, but accepted by Government before this conclusion 
was reached. 

As I said, the matter was brought before Government 
through the Speaker and through the President. There were 
only one or two cases that were referred to Government for 
consideration, but Government felt that it was desirable to find 
out whether there were any more cases of this sort to which 
the attention of the Speaker was not drawn and we, therefore, 
circularised the various Ministries. We circularised various 
offices to let us know whether there were any such cases 
which required to be considered, so that one comprehensive 
measure may be brought into cover all such cases that had 
happened since the inauguration of the Constitution. After 
the cases were received we applied this test to which I have 
just now referred — what was the amount of compensation 
that was paid : was it only the bare expenses, or was it 
something more than that. If it was something more than 
that, then we decided that it should be deemed to be an 
office of profit. If it was just what was decided upon by 
the Finance Ministry, we treated that it was not an office 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


724 


724 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of profit, irrespective of the question whether it was held by a 
Member of Parliament or not. We were very careful — I must 
again repeat — in finding a true basis for our decision, because 
if we treated each case ad hoc, on its own, it might have 
been argued that we applied one criterion to one particular 
case and another criterion for another case. We did not want 
that sort of accusation to be levelled against Government 
and therefore we were very keen in finding out a general 
fundamental principle which would be applied to all the 
cases. It was on that basis that we came to this conclusion 
that there were certain cases which exceeded the principle, 
namely, that the allowances were beyond what might be called 
merely compensation for actual expenses incurred. 

Pandit Kunzru: But there were other committees. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am just coming to them. Now, with regard 
to the question that has been raised namely Rehabilitation 
Finance Corporation, it is obvious that the Article speaks of offce 
“of profit under the Government of India or the Government 
of any State”. An office of profit under a Corporation may be 
an office of profit. It is certainly not an office of profit under 
Government, and, therefore, the person is not disqualified. 

Shri Sidhva: It is under the Government of India. 

Dr. Ambedkar: What I give is the judicial interpretation 
and I am sure my hon. friend Mr. Sidhva, who I do not think 
would claim that he is a great constitutional lawyer, would 
not contest that position. 

Shri Sidhva: What about the Supreme Court decision ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The Supreme Court has nothing to do 
with it. I was going to say that many Members are under 
the impression that this a matter which can be taken to 
the Supreme Court. This matter cannot be taken to the 
Supreme Court. If the House will allow me to say so, it is 
out of deference to the House that we have brought this 
measure. The President has absolute power to say whether any 
particular office is an office of profit or not. But we thought 
that it was not right to let the President decide it. We thought 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


725 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 725 

it would be better if the matter was brought before Parliament 
and sanction of Parliament was obtained and that is the 
reason why the Bill has been brought forward. 

Now, with regard to the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 
there can be no manner of doubt that this thing applies only 
to office of profit under the Government whether it is the 
Central Government or the State Government. It does not 
apply in office of profit under say, for instance the Sindri 
Corporation, or the Damodar Valley Corporation, or various 
other Corporations which have been created by Government. 

Shri Sondhi: Sindri is not a Corporation. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I was only quoting it by way of illustration. 
I am only making a general proposition that so far as office 
of profit under a corporation is concerned, a person is not 
affected by anything that is said or done under Article 102 
of the Constitution. Consequently it was unnecessary to make 
any reference or provision in this Bill with regard to those 
Members of Parliament who may be holding office of profit 
under Rehabilitation Finance or various other corporations to 
which reference has been made. 

My hon. friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava said that the 
Government of India has been acting in a somewhat erratic, 
if not ridiculous, manner — asking members to return the 
money and then again requesting them to receive it back. 
Well, I suppose whoever the officer was who was responsible 
for this kind of thing was undoubtedly under the impression 
that the office of profit was an office of profit, whether it 
was under the Government of India or under a Corporation. 
That mistake was discovered and I think rectification was 
made and I am sure about it that such a mistake would not 
be repeated hereafter. That is the reason why no reference 
has been made in the Bill with regard to the Rehabilitation 
Finance or other Corporations. 

With regard to the long list which my hon. friend. 
Mr. Sidhva has given in his amendment, I should like to say 
that there again the same thing applies. The advice which 
the Law Ministry received was that the allowances paid to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


726 


726 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

these members were not such as to include profit or something 
more than actual expenses. On the view that we have taken 
that they are not office of profit, we do not think it desirable 
to enlarge the list by including in that category persons or 
officers to whom Mr. Sidhva refers in the amendment that 
he has given. 

Pandit Kunzru: May I point out one thing — that is that 
the allowances which these members received exceeded the 
limit which I understand has now been fixed by the Finance 
Ministery. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It might be so. But when the Bill says that 
according to it members of certain committees have incurred 
a disability and that disability shall be removed, the proper 
construction to put upon that clause would be that no other 
member of the Committee was disqualified and therefore, the 
Bill made no reference to it. 

Then with regard to the general proposition which 
my friend Mr. Sidhva was enunciated in his second 
amendment 

Pandit Kunzru : Will my hon. Friend kindly explain 
what are the special reasons that made the members of the 
committees referred to in the Bill liable to disqualification ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because there is an element of profit in 
the payment that was made to them. 

Pandit Kunzru: That is the allowance they received 
exceeded Rs. 20 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: We thought that there was a certain 
amount of doubt in their case and the Bill seeks to remove 
that doubt. 

With regard to the general proposition which my friend 
Mr. Sidhva has enunciated, in amendment No. 2, that we 
should have a general rule and let the general rule apply so 
that there may be no more necessity for Bills of this kind. I 
think it is too tall an order for me to accept, for the simple 
reason that although for the monent and for the purposes of 
this Bill we have accepted a certain basis of remuneration — 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


727 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 727 

and it is on that basis of remuneration we have come to 
the conclusion as to which particular committee requires 
exemption, which does not require exemption — it is perfectly 
possible for Parliament or for Government to change the basis 
of that remuneration. And if they change the basis of the 
remuneration the general proposition would create so many 
difficulties for us, because the general proposition would be 
at variance with the actualities of the case. It is therefore 
proper, as I have always stated, for Parliament to retain this 
power in its hands. After all, the Government cannot declare 
that so and so is disqualified. Nobody has a right to go to the 
Supreme Court to say that a certain Member is disqualified. 
The whole matter, ultimately, is in the hands of Parliament, 
and we want to leave the matter in the hands of Parliament, 
so that whenever a case arises Parliament may decide, whether 
this is a case which comes under disqualification or this is a 
case which, if it does come under disqualification, should be 
indemnified. I think it is much better that the matter should 
be left in the way in which I wish to leave it, rather than to 
tighten it up so that nobody at an opportune moment may 
loosen the knot. 

Shri Kamath : Is it not ultimately a question of privilege 
of the House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not want to come to that, whether 
it is a privilege or not. But it is certainly a Constitutional 
provision which Parliament is required to obey, and Parliament 
will be doing a great deal of wrong to the Constitution if it 
does not follow the provisions of Article 102 when ultimately, 
as I say, the Government, and the Bill, is prepared and wants 
as a matter of fact to leave the whole matter in the hands 
of Parliament to decide each particular case. Mr. Sidhva had 
some amendment. But can anybody in this House tell me 
right now what are the likely offices or committees which the 
Government might hereafter create ? I cannot imagine such 
a thing right now if somebody were to ask me a question 
“Tell me what are the committees”. If you want to enter all 
these in the Bill, you must know and define them. Nobody 
can anticipate what committees are likely to be appointed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


728 


728 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Therefore, when Parliament appoints a committee, or when 
Government proposes that a certain Member of Parliament be 
appointed to a certain committee, it is then that the Member 
concerned may rise and ask the Prime Minister or the Minister 
in charge of the Ministry who is appointing the Committee 
to let him know right then what is going to be his position, 
whether he will be disqualified or not, and he can demand 
from the Minister an assurance or a contemporary resolution 
to be accepted by Parliament that “in this particular case any 
Member appointed to the committee shall not be deemed to 
be disqualified”. 

Shri Sondhi: If it is a Government committee ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Even then Members of Parliament must 
protect themselves and a Member of Parliament can protect 
himself by asking for an assurance from the Government that 
whatever be the other matters he shall not be deemed to 
be disqualified. When such an assurance is given, obviously 
Government cannot go behind such an assurance. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Only under Article 102 
a law must be passed by Parliament declaring that office to 
be not one of profit. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We are dealing with specific case. As 
regards Parliament passing a general law, I do not know 
what that general law can do. It can, so far as I can imagine, 
say that whenever a Member of Parliament is appointed to a 
committee the members whereof receive an allowance which 
may be described as profit — in that very case Parliament can 
state as they do in England — that the appointment of the 
Member shall not be deemed to be an office of profit. 

Shri Kamath : Can we not lay down a uniform procedure ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot, for the simple reason that the 
basic allowance may change. 

Shri Kamath : Still we can lay down a uniform procedure. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is possible for Parliament to do so. I 
do not know what time we have. But the next Parliament 
can pass a small Act saying that whenever any Member of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


729 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 729 

Parliament is appointed to any committee where the allowances 
may be more than mere remuneration and the appointment 
may be regarded as an office of profit, then in the case of 
each appointment the Act of Parliament shall say that “this 
shall not be regarded as an office of profit”. That may be 
done in a general way. 

Shri Sidhva: What about the committees in which 
Members are now drawing more than Rs. 20 ? There are 
certain committees. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no idea. 

Shri Sidhva: That is the point to be clarified. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If you bring such cases to our notices we 
will examine them. So far as our Department is concerned 
we had collected all the information from all the Ministers. 
We examined them and found that these are the cases where 
the allowance exceeded the standard that we had fixed and 
therefore an indemnity was necessary. In other cases we found 
that the allowances did not offend against the basic rule and 
consequently no such indemnity was necessary. 

Shri Sidhva: What is your information ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: You must accept our information. Let the 
Member who is affected make a representation that “I am 
drawing more but I am not exempted”. 

Shri Sidhva: Why not do it here ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot off-hand accept your suggestion. 
You may accept that your facts are not correct as mine may 
be. Yours are the labours of a single individual. Here hundreds 
have examined and surely their information may be taken to 
be more reliable. 

My friend Mr. Kamath asked me something about the 
Assam Government Pleader. Well, I do not know but I should 
like to say this. Whether a Government Pleader in a Province 
is the holder of an office of profit or not is a matter which 
has been decided long long ago. So far as I remember when 
the Government of India Act came into operation in the 
Province in 1937, a ruling was given, I believe in some of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


730 


730 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

provinces by their Advocates -General that this was an office of 
profit. In fact I have a case in mind where a certain Government 
Pleader had to resign on this account I do not know whether 
any such case had arisen in Assam. May be it had arisen ; 
may be it had not arisen. An uncharitable interpretation might 
suggest that a lawyer who is a Government Pleader ought to 
have been aware of the position. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I was informed that the hon. 
Mr. Wajed Ali himself was the Member and he wanted an 
opportunity to speak. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If he speaks then I won’t speak. But he 
one day came to me — I forget the day — and asked me whether 
he was disqualified. I think he will agree with me that I told 
him he was disqualified, that that was my view, and that any 
Member of Parliament who is a Government Advocate in a 
Province was disqualified. I told him that. He said that he 
was very sorry and that he did not know that. Thereupon I 
said that there may be provision for condonation and so on 
and so on and told him “You better make a representation 
to the proper quarters”. I think he represented the matter 
to the Speaker, if I remember correctly, and the Speaker 
referred the matter to me that in view of the fact that the 
Member has stated definitely that he was not aware of this 
ruling and had continued to hold that office the Government 
might consider his case also for indemnity. 

On that basis we did include his case. That is all I have 
to say. 

Shri Kamath: The Coal Inquiry Committee was constituted 
after March, 1950, after the Constitution came into force. Why 
was this aspect of disqualification not considered at the time 
the Committee was constituted ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Mr. Kamath, these are all very good 
and very nice points but as I feel Government was not very 
particular or very meticulous in applying Article 102 because 
we were working on an ad hoc basis. The whole trouble was 
created by the fact that so far as the Constituent Assembly 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


731 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 731 

was concerned, we had abrogated this rule and we had allowed 
the Constituent Assembly to function also as a Legislature. 
There was a certain amount of mix up and confusion and 
consequently the Government’s attention was so to say not 
attracted towards this particular proposition but when the 
matter was brought to their notice they thought that this was 
the best thing that they could do in the circumstances and I 
hope the House will accord its support to this Bill. 

Dr. Pattabhi (Madras): May I invite the attention of the 
House to a somewhat interesting view taken by the Madras 
Government in regard to the question as to whether a Public 
Prosecutor or Government Pleader is or is not a Government 
servant for purpose of legislative elections. Mr. Yahia Ali, 
Public Prosecutor of Nellore was considered a public servant 
so far as election to the Legislature was concerned and the 
method adopted was this. He was to resign his office of Public 
Prosecutor so as to contest the legislative election, become a 
Member of the Assembly and then he was appointed by the 
Government to the public prosecutorship. He has done this 
three or four times and ultimately his troubles were put an 
end to by being transferred to the High Court Bench. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Sir, may I have one 
information ? In part (d) you have included the office of 
Members of the Railway Local Advisory Committees up to 

1951. Perhaps you will propose an amendment to make it 

1952. My difficulty is will you bring such motions year after 
year in order to include annually 1952, 1953 and 1954 or you 
will lay down that membership of Railway Local Advisory 
Committees will not act as a disqualification. 

The other point is having now had all these different 
committees definitely laid down in this Bill does it not really 
place the President in an embarrassing position. He will now 
feel difficulty as the Parliament has only made mention of 
certain committees which will not be construed as offices of 
profit. If any matter is referred to him he may have a difficulty 
and he may have to call the Parliament even if the case is 
justifiable and within his competence to decide. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


732 


732 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think my hon. friend need 
worry about the President. We make use of him for a 
variety of things and we have Article 392 whereby he can 
issue an order and we do not propose to take advantage 
of that in spite of the transitory situation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We are starting another 
discussion after the discussion is over. I will put the motion 
to the House. There are other clauses and hon. Members 
have got ample opportunity. 

The question is : 

“That the Bill to declare certain offices of profit not to 
disqualify their holders for being Members of Parliament, be 
taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 . — (. Prevention of disqualification etc.) 
Amendment made : 

In page 1, (i) in line 23, omit “and”; and 
(ii) after line 2, add: 

“(f) the office of members of the Enquiry Commission 
appointed by the Government of Assam or by the Government 
of West Bengal in pursuance of the Agreement made between 
India and Pakistan on the 8th April 1950, for any period not 
extending beyond the 31st day of December, 1950 ; and 

( g ) the office of member of the Bombay Revenue Tribunal 
for any period not extending beyond the 1st day of April 1951.” 

— Dr. Ambedkar 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We shall go to the other 
amendments. 

Shri Kamath: As the Minister has explained the 
position, I am not moving 2 and 3, but No. 1 will come 
later on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: In view of the 
statement made by Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, I do not think 
my amendment is necessary. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


733 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 733 

*Dr. Ambedkar: I may explain, with your permission, 
the point raised by hon. friend. Actually, when the Resolution 
was issued by the particular department concerned when they 
formed the Foodgrains Investigation Committee, the allowance 
mentioned was Rs. 20, and possibly the information supplied 
to the Law Ministry for the purpose of clarifying this position 
was that Resolution. We have acted on that Resolution. But I 
do now hear that the Food Ministry have changed that rule 
and have allowed the members to draw something more. But, 
the basis of our action is the Resolution. 

Shri Sidhva: What will happen to that member ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: My friend Mr. Sidhva does not seem to 
understand the point. Unless the President issues an order 
that a member is disqualified, the Member can sit in the 
House and function. 

Shri Sidhva: I know that. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Therefore, as I said, we have been 
supplied with the various Resolutions passed by the Ministries 
constituting the committees and we have found on the basis 
of the Resolutions that those committees did not offend the 
basic rule. If further information is supplied showing that 
there were such cases where Members in fact drew more, it 
would be perfectly possible to regularise the position. Where 
is the difficulty ? I do not understand. 

Shri Himatsingka: Why not do it in a general form ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot do it. I must make further 
enquiries as to what exactly is the position. Nothing is going 
to be lost if this Bill is passed and another Bill brought into 
cover cases which actually are necessary to be covered. 

Shri Sidhva: How can that be ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why? I do not understand. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This can be definitely looked into. 
It does not matter if this stands over till tomorrow. 

Some Hon. Members: Yes, Sir. 


*E. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 7th August 1951, pp. 73-79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


734 


734 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But, if before tomorrow these 
matters cannot be settled, then, we can proceed with the 
Bill immediately. The President must, first of all say that a 
Member is disqualified. That is clear. Clause (1) (a) of Article 
102 says: “if he holds any office of profit under the Government 
of India other than an office declared by Parliament by law 
not to disqualify its holder.” Independently of the procedure 
under Article 103, without a question arising and the matter 
being referred to the President, Parliament can say that an 
office shall not be deemed to be an office of profit where it 
is clear that the remuneration is what is thought to be a 
fair compensation. Without bringing another Bill, if it can be 
disposed of by a suitable amendment herein, the Hon. Law 
Minister may consider that matter. There is a list of all these 
committees, and Mr. Sidhva’s amendment will stand over. I 
will put the other amendment to the House which seems to 
be not opposed. That stands in the name of Shri Sri Narayan 
Mahtha. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That I am accepting. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall put it to the House. Barring 
that, the other things given notice of by Mr. Sidhva may be 
looked into next day. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He can give me the actual resolutions ; 
I can verify. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This will be the first matter 

tomorrow. He need not bring any amendment. This will 
stand over so far as Mr. Sidhva’s amendments are concerned. 

Shri Himatsingka: May I suggest this for the consideration 
of the Hon. Law Minister? If he puts the proposition in a 
general form that membership of any committee where the 
payment does not exceed a certain amount, in the past, will 
not be regarded as an office of profit, that would cover. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Law Minister has already 
said that such a general proposition... 

Shri Himatsingka: That is only with respect to the past. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


735 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 735 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: With respect to the past, there 
have been varying amounts paid: Rs. 40, 50, etc. 

Shri Sondhi: Forty rupees is the maximum. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If the hon. Member brings these 
matters to the notice of the Law Minister, he will go into 
them instead of throwing open the floodgates and making it 
appear that we are trying to bring in the immunity to a vast 
number of members. Let us not lay ourselves open to that 
kind of accusation. 

An Hon. Member: That is only for the past. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If any particular categories are 
there, they may be brought to the notice of the Law Minister 
and he will look into them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: In this case, the resolution mentioned 
Rs. 20. 

Pandit Kunzru: Before the discussion is adjourned till 
tomorrow, I might make a suggestion. The whole trouble has 
arisen because the Finance Ministry has decided that if any 
member receives a daily allowance of more than Rs. 20 for 
serving on a committee, he shall be regarded as holding an 
office of profit. If the Ministry decides that the limit should be 
increased from Rs. 20 to Rs. 40 which is the daily allowance 
drawn by a Member of Parliament for attending the meetings 
of Parliament, these troubles will disappear. I suppose that 
if this view had been accepted by the Finance Ministry, the 
Bill now brought forward by Dr. Ambedkar would not have 
been necessary. This Bill has been made necessary by the low 
limit fixed by the Finance Ministry. The Finance Ministry 
can do away with all this trouble and set the minds of hon. 
Members at ease by simply announcing that if a member 
receives an allowance not exceeding the daily allowance to 
which a Member of Parliament is entitled for attending the 
meetings of Parliament, he will not be regarded as holding 
an office of profit. No doubts will arise and no Bill will be 
necessary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would just like to say one word of 
correction to what my hon. friend has said. What the Finance 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


736 


736 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Ministry — I should not bring in the Finance Ministry — what 
the Government now says is this. For non-official members 
of a committee, certain allowances have been fixed, as I 
said, so much for travelling by air, so much for travelling 
by train, so much for living allowances, Rs. 15 for Calcutta 
and Bombay and Rs. 12-8-0 elsewhere. That is the standard 
which the Government accepts as the standard of payment in 
which no profit element is involved. I believe my hon. friend 
has omitted to take that into account. If we are to have a 
mixed committee consisting partly of Members of Parliament 
and partly of members who are not Members of Parliament, 
obviously, we cannot prescribe d iff erent standards of payment. 
The standard of payment that we must adopt for a mixed 
committee of this kind is the standard which has been laid 
down for payment for members who are not Members of 
Parliament and consequently that standard becomes the 
ruling standard. 

Shri Sondhi: I would like to make one submission, Sir. 
There is a Committee from the Agriculture Department, 
the Central Arecanut committee. The daily allowance is 
Rs. 12-8-0 and not Rs. 12. Are we disqualified ? There are 
four members here. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I have heard Dr. Ambedkar 
with great attention and respect, but I must very humbly 
point out that he is an entirely wrong way of looking at 
the question. Article 102 of the Constitution makes it quite 
clear that the President is the final authority, that he has 
the final power of deciding about a particular case. And, in 
the alternative it is Parliament which can decide whether 
certain offices, if held would not amount to disqualification. 
The Finance Ministry or the Government as such has 
absolutely no power whatsoever in this connection. They 
cannot fix any standard whatsoever. Suppose there is a 
committee the membership of which carries an allowance 
of only Rs. 10 or even Rs. 5 but still the committee may be 
of such importance that its membership may be considered 
an honur and many would like to serve on the committee, 
in which case it will be perfectly open to Government to 
exercise its patronage in appointing the members to such a 
committee, exactly the thing which Dr. Ambedkar and we all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


737 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 737 

want to avoid. Therefore I say, it is no business of the 
Government to decide whether an office held is an office 
of profit or not. That is something for the President or for 
Parliament to decide. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is why the Bill has been brought 
before Parliament. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: For Government to 
arrogate this power to themselves is certainly wrong. If they 
say that they have got the President in the hollow of their 
hand and they can fix a standard of profit I do say thay are 
wrong. In certain cases it is the President in consultation with 
Election Commission who has to decide whether an office is an 
office of profit or not and in other cases Parliament decides. 
I do not think that the Finance Ministry or the Government 
can decide this matter at all. 

Shri Sidhva : Shall we not agree that whatever allowance 
is drawn up to the limit of the allowance of a Member of 
Parliament shall not be considered a disqualification ? House 
should decide this matter and not Dr. Ambedkar. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Having heard the discussion, I 
can only say at this stage that there is nothing to prevent 
us from adding a clause here to the Bill itself to say that 
notwithstanding anything contained so far, if a Member 
of Parliament is on any committee and does not draw an 
allowance more than that drawn by him as a Member of 
Parliament, he shall not be deemed to be disqualified. That 
is just a suggestion. In that case it would not be open to 
the objection that Government is placing allurements before 
Members, because nothing more than Rs. 40 will be paid. 
But there is this difficulty that if an official is appointed 
on a committee he will continue to draw a different rate of 
allowance, probably according to the salary he draws. But 
this matter may be considered. I would therefore allow this to 
stand over till to-morrow and get through with Mr. Narayan 
Mahtha’s amendment. 

Shri Kamath: Sir, last year this House decided that the 
offices of the Minister of State and the Deputy Minister would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


738 


738 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not amount to disqualification under this Article. Therefore the 
present Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers do not incur 
any disability. But what about the newly born Parliamentary 
Secretaries ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They are also included in the Act. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, with reference to the suggestion made 
by you that this may be taken up to-morrow may I point out 
that it may not be possible for me to undertake that this matter 
will be taken up to-morrow. This is a matter which I have to 
refer back to the Ministries and that may take time. “ So if 
it is kept over, it may be taken up on any convenient date. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it the wish of the Hon. Law 
Minister that we may get through the other amendments ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The amendments may be moved. I accept 
Shri Narayan Mahtha’s amendment. 

Shri S. N. Mahtha (Bihar): Sir, I beg to move: 

In page 1, line 23, after “March 1951” insert: 

“or for the year ending on the 31st day of March 1952”. 

Shri Sidhva : But, Sir, we have not received notice of 
this amendment at all. It has not been circulated among us. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is just a small amendment. 

Shri Sidhva: It may be small according to the Law 
Minister, but it may be a very important one. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Then does the hon. Member want 
this also to stand over ? It is just a small amendment extending 
the period from March, 1951 to March, 1952. 

Shri Sondhi: Let this also be considered along with the 
whole Bill later on. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is a simple amendment extending 
the period up to March, 1952. There need not be any speeches 
on it and I shall place it before the House. 

Amendment moved: 

In page 1, line 23, after “March, 1951” insert : 

“or for the year ending on the 31st day of March 1952”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


739 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 739 

Shri Sidhva: Sir, these local advisory committees are 
permanent committees elected by the Railway Standing 
Committee. Therefore, I would like to know whether every year 
amendments like this will have to be brought into remove the 
disqualification ? Will it not be better to consider this matter 
in greater detail and devise some proposition under which 
this annual performance may not be necessary ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : As the hon. Member will see, 
this relates to the sitting Members. The year 1951-1952 has 
already started and to remove the disqualification from the 
whole period, the date has to be extended to 31st March 1952. 

Dr. Pattabhi: But we are sitting in April, 1952 also. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If it is not extended, Members who 
have agreed to serve on committees would be obliged to resign 
straightaway. Therefore the period is being extended to 31st 
of March 1952. We are in the middle of the year 1951-52 and 
therefore, this amendment is necessary. As to whether this 
amendment should be effected now or hereafter, it is for the 
Law Minister and the House to consider and decide. We are 
not bringing in a legislation to remove disqualifications under 
various categories. 

Shri Sidhva : Sir, what you state is perfectly correct. 
But these Advisory Committees are very important bodies. 
My point is — and I may add that I am not a member of an 
Advisory Committee — my point is, as Members of Parliament 
we are interested in the carriage of passengers and goods by 
the railways and just because as a member of the committee 
a person draws an allowance of Rs. 30 or so, he should not be 
debarred from being a Member of Parliament. In this matter 
the Railway Finance Committee and the Advisory Committee 
have to be consulted. So this question of changing the date 
from March, 1951 to March, 1952 may also be postponed and 
considered along with the other provisions of the Bill when 
the Bill comes next to us. 

Dr. Pattabhi: Why not say “during the tenure of the 
present Parliament.” ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


740 


740 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I thought that the amendment was a 
very simple one. The reason why the Bill originally did not 
mention the words that are now sought to be introduced by the 
amendment was because the Bill was expected to be passed 
much earlier. That did not happen. Members have continued 
to sit. If you want to completely exonerate them from the 
application of this office of profit rule it is necessary to continue 
the period. With regard to the future I understand that the 
allowances have been reduced, so that no disqualification 
should be incurred. 

An Hon. Member : By how much ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The same Rs. 20. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways 
(Shri Santhanam): I shall give the information on the next 
day. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It has been so reduced as not to 
impose this disqualification. This only applies to existing 
members. 

The question is : 

In page 1, line 23, after “March, 1951” insert: 

“or for the year ending on the 31st day of March 1952”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The rest of the Bill will stand 
over to such other day as the Hon. Law Minister may find 
convenient to bring it before the House. 

Pandit Kunzru: As the Hon. Law Minister has been 
given time to think over the matter I hope he will arrive at 
a correct decision. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I should like to say that I would be very 
much dependent upon the advice of my hon. friend. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


741 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


741 


( 36 ) 

* ASSAM (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES) BILL 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will now proceed with 
the further consideration of the motion that the Bill to alter 
the boundaries of the State of Assam consequent on the 
cession of a strip of territory comprised in that State to the 
Government of Bhutan, be taken into consideration. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I am sorry 
I was not present in the House when a certain point was 
raised by certain Members that Parliament had no power 
to pass this Bill, in view of the fact that the Bill proposed, 
although indirectly, to cede certain portions of territory which 
belonged to the Indian Union, to Bhutan. I heard that my 
hon. Friend Mr. Sri Prakasa also made certain submissions 
to the House on this point in justification of the stand taken 
by the Government. But, I was told that the House expects 
me to say something on the point. 

The point seems to be very easy. I think, in order to under 
stand the matter fairly, it is better to begin by a reference to 
List I contained in the Seventh Schedule, which defines the 
legislative powers of this Parliament. I would refer to List-I, 
Entry No. 14 and Entry No. 15. Entry No. 14 relates to the 
making of treaties and entry No. 15 refers to war and peace. 
The question that has been raised very largely hinges upon 
the interpretation of the words ‘treaty making’ and ‘war and 
peace’ What do these items include ? This matter was debated 
at great length in the United States when the question arose 
for the first time for interpretation. In order to cut short the 
matter, I should like to state that in the United States it has 
been accepted that treaty making does include the power to 
cede territory. 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 8th August 1951, pp. 103-118. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


742 


742 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): Is there any prohibition 
there ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I shall quote the authorities if my friend 
wants. I have got plenty of them. I do not want to weary 
the House : I am only going to give the gist. 

Treaty making does include cession of territory. In the 
same way, apart from that particular Entry, the Entry 
relating to war and peace must necessarily include cession of 
territory because it cannot be denied that it may sometimes 
become necessary for a State which is at war with another 
foreign State, in order to establish peace, to cede a part 
of its territory as one of the terms and conditions of a 
treaty of peace. Nobody, I am sure, can challenge or deny 
that interpretation of the Entry relating to war and peace. 
Now, if in certain circumstances the Entry relating to war 
and peace and the Entry relating to treaty making must 
necessarily include cession of territory, it is quite obvious 
that the content of these Entries must be deemed to include 
cession of territory. Therefore, as against the mere fact 
that in the rest of the body of the Constitution, there is no 
specific Article conferring specific powers on Parliament to 
cede territory my contention is that Entries 14 and 15 are 
quite sufficient.... 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): No, no. 

Dr. Ambedkar: to endow Parliament with the 

power to cede territory. My hon. friends, some of them, are 
shaking their heads saying that that is not correct. But, still, 
I hold to my view 

Shri Kamath: We also will hold to ours. 

Dr. Ambedkar: that what I am submitting is a point 

which has been accepted by all great constitutional lawyers, 
and by the Supreme Court of the United States where also 
a similar power exists. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): What about our Supreme 
Court? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


743 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 743 

Dr. Ambedkar: Therefore, the first point that I want to 
submit to the House is that so far as Entries 14 and 15 in 
List-I are concerned, there is the greatest amplitude of power 
conferred upon Parliament for the purpose of ceding territory. 

In view of the fact that certain Members of Parliament 
seem to be rather unconvinced or not prepared to accept 
the submission that I am making. I would like to elaborate 
the point a little further. Hon. Members will remember that 
the Constitution of the United States is, in a sense a very 
difficult Constitution, for the simple reason that the States in 
the United States are much more independent and sovereign 
than the States which are constituent elements of the Indian 
Union, in the sense that the powers of the Congress are derived 
from such powers as have been delegated to it by the States 
composing the United States. It is a Government of what are 
called not merely delegated powers, but enumerated powers. 
There is no such thing as residuary power in the Central 
Government of the United States such as we have in our 
Constitution. Taking advantage of this position, namely, that 
the States in the United States are masters of their territory 
and the United States Central Government has no authority 
so far as the territory of the States is concerned, except 
with regard to certain limited matters handed over to the 
Central Government, there was a stage in the interpretation 
of this particular document under which it was contended 
that although the treaty-making power of the United States 
Government may include within it the power to cede territory, 
it could not include the power to cede territory which belonged 
to the State. In other words, the treaty- making power of the 
United States was subject to what was called the doctrine of 
the inherent rights of the States. It may transfer such other 
territory which it may have, which it may have conquered 
which are regarded in the United States as territories of the 
United States, but not as constituent parts of the United 
States. That doctrine, as I said, was urged for a long number 
of years in the United States. But ultimately the position 
taken by the Supreme Court of the United States was that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


744 


744 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the treaty-making power was so unlimted that even a whole 
State may be transferred and ceded by the United States, 
if it felt necessary, under the war and peace entry or under 
the treaty-making power. 

Shri Kamath: Which particular State was ceded like that ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot give you that but I can give 
the whole volume and the reference too. It is in Willoughby 
on the Constitution of the United States from page 572 to 
the end of the volume, I think — it is not very much. It is 
in Chapter XXXV of the volume, and there you will find all 
these points discussed. And there is a valuable opinion of 
Mr. Justice Storey — I think most Members who are interested 
in constitutional law must be familiar with his name, being 
one of the greatest authorities on Constitutional law. The 
chapter begins on page 561, but the particular entries are 
in paragraphs 311, 312 and the other paragraphs up to 
paragraph 317. 

Therefore, my first submission is this that so far as the 
point raised yesterday is concerned, that Parliament has no 
authority, I submit that that point has no foundation in law 
at all, and that this Parliament has ample power to cede 
territory and as a consequence of the cession of the territory 
make adjustments within the boundaries of the States of the 
Union. 

Now, the question that arises for further consideration is 
whether it is necessary for the President to have brought this 
matter before Parliament or whether he could dispose it off 
purely in his executive capacity. Now, on that point, I might 
also mention incidently, that the same doctrine prevails in 
England, that the King can cede territory. In fact, it is the 
prerogative of the King to do so. 

Shri Kamath: An un-written one perhaps. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Whatever it is, the doctrine is there. 

Shri Kamath: England’s Constitution is un-written, that 
is the difficulty. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


745 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 745 

Dr. Ambedkar: That does not matter at all. I know my 
hon. friends are relying upon Article 3 of the Constitution. 

12 Noon 

Shri Kamath: Articles 2 and 3. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not touching them at all. 

Shri Kamath : Evading them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I go on a different plane because I am 
prepared to say that these Articles have no reference to 
the cession of territory. They do not prohibit, but they have 
nothing to do with cession. I am prepared to say that in 
view of the fact that I was concerned with the making of 
the Constitution, and most Members probably do not know 
what the intention... 

Shri Kamath: All of us were so concerned. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They do not probably know what the 
underlying intention of this Article was. I know it better and 
I am prepared to say that though it does not prohibit cession, 
as pointed out by my friend Shri Santhanam, its primary 
intention was for dealing with the linguistic distribution of 
the Provinces. That is why I do not refer to the Article of 
the Constitution, because the Government’s case might be 
considered to be very weak if I relied on Article 3. So I am 
relying on something much more fundamental and which 
no Member can deny namely, the power to make under 
Article 3 

Shri Kamath : The acquisition of new territories is under 
Article 2 which does not mention cession. 

Dr. Ambedkar: But that does not matter now. The rule 
that if one thing is expressed and the others are not expressed, 
then they are excluded, does not apply universally. 

I was trying to point that this position, namely, that the 
State is entitled to cede territory is also the law in England. 
It is a matter of prerogative for the king to do so and he 
can do so. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


746 


746 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now I would turn to the second part of the question, 
namely, whether Parliament need be consulted in a matter 
of this sort. As you know, in England, the position has varied 
from time to time. At one time the view that was taken was 
this, that was a matter which related to the prerogative of the 
king. And prerogative means what ? Let me define it briefly. 
Prerogative means the power of the king to do something 
for which Parliamentary sanction is not necessary. This is 
the gist of what is called the prerogative right of the king. 
Therefore the old view was that since cession of territory was 
the result of the prerogative of the king, it was not necessary 
to bring the matter before Parliament because the king was 
supreme, unless Parliament, by specific law took away the 
prerogative of the king to make treaty and to cede territory. 
And as Parliament has not done that, the king has got the 
power. All the same, treaties ceding territory have come before 
Parliament in England and I will briefly explain the reason 
why they have come before Parliament. In the first place, the 
Government in England has felt that it is much better to obtain 
the sacntion of Parliament to the cession of territory because 
it was deducting so much territory belonging to sovereignty 
and over which Parliament exercised supremacy. Therefore, 
nothing ought to be done without the consent of Parliament. 
The second reason why it became necessary for the British 
Government to bring treaties of cession before Parliament 
was this. It was felt that the transfer of territority was after 
all, a transfer of the nationality of the people residing in that 
particular territory. The reason is that when you transfer 
territory, by virtue of that transfer you also practically transfer 
the nationality of the people. They became citizens of another 
State. It was felt that this was too much and it was necessary 
to consult Parliament whether such a step should be taken, 
because it was possible that Parliament may insist that the 
cession should not be in absolute terms but subject to certain 
conditions. For instance, Parliament may say that although 
the territory may be transferred, the nationality of the people 
should not be transferred by virtue of the transfer and that 
the people may be permitted to maintain their old nationality 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


747 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 747 

or some other provision might be introduced into the treaty, 
whereby voluntary transfer of nationality may be made a 
condition of cession. As it involved citizenship and nationality, 
the British Government always felt that it was desirable to 
place before Parliament any treaty though it was made by 
the prerogative of the king and by virtue of which did not 
require the sanction of Parliament. It was felt that Parliament 
should be given a voice in determining the nationality of the 
people in the territory which was being ceded. 

The third thing is that under the English law, while it was 
the prerogative of the king to transfer territory, the treaty 
by itself could not affect the right of the people. If for the 
performance of the treaty certain existing laws were abrogated 
or affected, then the treaty itself was not competent to do it. 
It required a separate sanction of Parliament to alter those 
laws which regulated the rights, obligations and liabilities 
of the people in order to bring them in conformity with the 
provisions of the treaty. 

These were the principal reasons why under the English 
law, although the right to transfer territory was a prerogative 
of the king, the British Government introduced the practice 
of placing all such treaties before Parliament for sanction. 
That is the reason why the Government in this case felt that 
it was desirable to bring this matter before Parliament and 
obtain its sanction, because in this very Bill I do not exclude 
the possibility of Parliament introducing certain changes with 
regard to the nationality of the people in the territory which 
is sought to be transferred to a foreign State like Bhutan. 

These are my submissions with regard to the various points 
raised. My first submission is that it is not necessary to rely 
on Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution, because they relate to 
a different matter. The purpose of this Bill and that of this 
treaty come under entries 14 and 15 in legislative List No. 
I of the Seventh Schedule. In my judgment, according to the 
interpretation put upon the content and the ambit of these 
two entries, it is sufficient to give authority to Parliament to 
sanction a measure of this sort. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


748 


748 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath: Before you proceed further, Sir, may I 
request you to summon the Attorney General to be present 
here during the course of the debate, as important matters 
are being raised in the House ? 

An hon. Member: He is in Australia. 

Shri Kamath: Is not his Deputy here ? 

Several Members : rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members who have already 
spoken need not rise. They have no right to speak just because 
the Law Minister has raised certain new points. 

Dr. Pattabhi (Madras): Several points which are neither 
in the Bill nor in the statement of Objects and Reasons 
have now been adduced by the Law Minister and the whole 
discussion assumes a de movo form, if you have followed it 
carefully. There was a reference in the Statement of Objects 
to part (c) under Article 3 of the Constitution. There is the 
statement of the Law Minister that the Bill has nothing to 
do with Article 3 of the Constitution. You must reconsider 
your decision, Sir, and allow a fresh discussion on the matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Article 3 comes in only incidentlly, because 
the cession of territory cannot be carried out unless until the 
boundaries of Assam are adjusted. To that extent Article 3 is 
relevant. Otherwise Article 3 has no relevance. 

Dr. Pattabhi: You were not present in the House yesterday 
when certain statements were made 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sorry I was not here. If somebody 
had told me I would have been here. (Interruption) . Article 
3 comes in only incidentally. The cession of the territory was 
the consequence of readjustment of the boundary of Assam. 
So far as there, there should be reference in Article 3 

Dr. Pattabhi : For which there is no provision in the 
Act — I mean for cession of territory. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is a difference in opinion. Entries 
14 and 15 contain, if you want, the basis of action for the 
union territory. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


749 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 749 

Dr. Pattabhi: Then do not quote Article 3. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Article 3 has been reported in an incidental 
manner because it has reference to the readjustment of the 
boundaries of Assam. 

Shri Kamath: Is it clear then, that the matter at issue 
is cession and not, as the Prime Minister said yesterday, the 
adjustment of a boundary dispute ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The cession of territory may have been 
the consequence of a boundary dispute. Where then is the 
difficulty ? 

Shri Kamath: Which is the cause and which is the 
effect? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That I do not know. The administrative 
department will tell you but I cannot see any difficulty there. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri (Assam): Would you request the 
Attorney General to be here, Sir ? We are entitled to hear 
his views. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Attorney General is in Australia. 
I do not think it is necessary to hear the Attorney General. 
The House has heard the Law Minister. ( Interruptions ). 
Order, order. Hon. Members have had ample opportunities to 
speak. Let others also have the opportunity to speak. Merely 
because an hon. Member who had the right to speak urged a 
particular point in favour of a particular proposition, another 
hon. Member who has already spoken cannot have additional 
time to speak again. That would be endless. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): May I ask one 
question by way of 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Not now. Dr. Mookerjee. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee (West Bengal): While rising to speak 
on this Bill I would like to state at the beginning that I do 
not wish to dwell at length on the merits of the Bill. Whether 
a small tract of territory should be given to Bhutan or not 
is a question which is not immediately before you. I know 
that what the Prime Minister said yesterday strengthens the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


750 


750 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

case of Government and perhaps there may be special 
reasons why the proposal which Government has made 
should be implemented. But I take the strongest objection 
to the extraordinary procedure which is being followed for 
implementing the wishes of the Government and it took my 
breath away when I heard the defence of the Law Minister. Of 
course he said that he was the author of the Constitution — not 
the sole author 

Dr. Ambedkar: I did not say I was the author but I was 
one 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: He had the largest part to play in 
the framing of the Constitution. That being so one would have 
expected that he should have been the first person to defend 
the sacredness or sanctity of the Constitution. I could have 
understood a speech like the Law Minister’s from any other 
Member, even the Home Minister. But so far as the Law 
Minister is concerned he should have explained very clearly 
what the implications of the proposal were. 

The Law Minister referred to certain judgments passed 
by the Supreme Court of America. After my experience last 
time while we were discussing the Constitution (Amendment) 

. Bill, I hesitate to accept the hasty recommendations of the 
Law Minister unless I can verify 

Dr. Ambedkar: I must protect against this kind of a 
thing. If my friend is going to challenge a statement that I 
made then I shall reserve to myself the right to challenge 
whatever he has stated. I must make it very clear. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: The Law Minister is protesting too 
much. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is not protesting too much, but I heard 
you said something the other day when I was not present. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: You were here, but when I was 
speaking you had run away. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You are not such a formidable man as 
to make me run away. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


751 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 751 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : So far as Shri Bhim Rao Ambedkar 
is concerned who can frighten him ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I dont’t like these reflections. You have 
made the statement. I know, I am not here to challenge it 
but I would 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Should the hon. Members exchange 
words like this ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, Sir, it is going too far. It is deliberately 
saying that I have misquoted and misrepresented. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: I have not said that. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have been eager enough to allow my 
friend, Mr. Kamath to have the reference to the book and 
the pages. I do not like these things. I am treating you with 
great respect — if you won’t do it then I shall descend to your 
own level. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : You have descended to your own 
level. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Both are highly respected Members 
of Parliament. It was not necessary for the hon. Member to 
say those things about the last version. The Law Minister 
may have given his opinion but the hon. member has always 
got the opportunity of reading the relevant judgment himself. 
All that I can say is that as far as possible, consistent with 
their own position in the House, and the position of the House 
itself, they should meet argument by argument. That is my 
appeal to hon. Members. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I had no desire to wound anybody’s 
feelings. I said I hesitate to accept the hasty recommendations 
of the Law Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are no recommendations. I said 
these are the judgments — I quoted the pages. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members are aware that from 
the same book different persons can interpret differently, and 
therefore, it was open to the hon. Member, Dr. Mookerjee to 
read it differently. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


752 


752 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: If he had the judgment before him and 
after reading it he refers to it, I would have respected it. But 
to say I have misquoted or misrepresented is going too far. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: I never said misquoted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not going to allow this kind of a 
thing. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : The point I was developing, Sir, was 
this. The hon. Minister referred to some case which was dealt 
with by the American Supreme Court — he did not read out 
the judgment. So far as the American judgment is concerned 
it is not relevant to the subject matter that we are discussing 
here now. The Law Minister referred to certain things which 
are done by the king in England; the King has prerogative 
powers by virtue of which he can cede certain territories. That 
also, I would submit, has no relevance to the topic that is 
under discussion today. All that we are discussing is this : can 
Parliament cede any portion of the territory of India without 
following some specific procedure which is laid down under the 
Constitution ? Is there any Article in the Constitution which 
makes a provision for the purpose of allowing Government to 
cede any portion of the territories within India ? That is the 
simple question that we have been called upon to consider. 
Here, Sir, If you look at Articles 2 and 3 you will see what 
the arrangement was when Part I of the Constitution was 
enacted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Are we to understand that the 
hon. Member feels that cession of territory is possible under 
the Constitution but only the procedure under Article 3 has 
not been followed ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: There is no specific provision in 
respect of cession of territory under the Constitution, but 
even there I am prepard to concede that if by reason of a 
treaty the position arises that a portion of Indian territory 
is to be ceded, naturally somebody has got to give the final 
sanction to such a decision and the matter has to come before 
Parliament. Here you are not only ceding the territory but 
you are automatically adjusting the boundaries of one of your 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


753 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 753 

existing States and in respect of this matter at any rate there 
is a specific procedure laid down under the Constitution which 
you are bound to follow. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is claimed it has been followed. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: No, Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With your permission, Sir, I would like to 
clear the point in a few sentences because I am very grateful 
he has put the point very clearly now. The question seems to 
be, what is the procedure 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: Well, let me finish. I won’t speak 
for long. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not speaking, I am only explaining. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: I thought, Sir, when the Law 
Minister spoke earlier also, he was explaining. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If the Hon. Minister feels he can 
explain a particular point he may do so. I think the procedure 
has been followed. The President has given his sanction, the 
resolution has been passed by the Assam Assembly. The 
recommendation of the President has been printed on the 
back page of the Bill. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: I have seen that. But so far as 
the provision for ceding out any portion of Indian territory is 
concerned, that is practically bound by the provisions of Articles 
1 and 2 and in such circumstances is it open to Parliament 
to pass a Bill ceding a portion of Indian territory ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is another matter. It is not 
one of procedure. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I was referring to both the matters. 
It is a question of functioning within the Constitution here. 
If you want to deal with such a case and if you find that 
your Constitution does not provide for such a contingency — it 
might have been a mistake ; you might have overlooked it — in 
whatever way it might have been done, the only thing which 
you can do is to amend the Constitution and Parliament 
should then take the necessary power to give effect to it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


754 


754 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As I said at the beginning, I am not worried so much about 
this particular case. Here it is a small portion of the territory 
which is proposed to be given to Bhutan. There may be special 
reasons why you should do so. There are historical reasons 
why such a step if approved by the Government of India and 
the people of this country might lead to the creation of better 
relationship between those people and ourselves. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It appeared from the earlier portion 
of the argument of the hon. Member that he was conceding 
the position that by virtue of entry 14 relating to treaties the 
power is there. It is only the question of procedure. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee: What I am prepared to concede is 
this. If there is war or if a treaty is entered into between two. 
countries, or if it is decided that a portion of our territory 
should be ceded or some other portion of territory which is 
outside India should be included in the Indian territory, there 
is certainly no bar to the Government of India entering into 
such a treaty. The whole question is how to implement it, 
and that is what we are discussing today. Of course, I am 
not speaking on the merits of the proposal. So far as the 
implementation goes, there is nothing in the Constitution 
as it stands today which empowers this Parliament to cede 
out any portion of the territory which is included within 
India that is Bharat. It is specific, clear and unambiguous. 
If it is thought necessary that this particular step should be 
taken, then what I would suggest is that this Bill should be 
withdrawn and a necessary amendment of the Constitution . 
should be made so that the thing may be done properly and 
constitutionally. In this instance, the territory involved is very 
small. It really does not matter much. But the question of 
principle involved is a highly important one and we should 
not allow even Parliament much less the executive, to be 
given the power to cede out this territory which is included 
within the framework of the Constitution unless there is some 
specific provision made in the Constitution in that behalf and 
that is strictly followed. So far as the powers of Parliament 
go, there is no residuary power vesting in Parliament outside 
the four corners of the Constitution. It is our Holy Book, 
Bible, Gita or whatever you may call it and you must remain 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


755 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 755 

confined within its four corners. If we find that there is a 
lacuna which has to be covered, we should not proceed in a 
manner which may give rise to any feeling of fear or distrust 
in the minds of any section of the people but we should first 
amend the Constitution, withdraw this Bill and bring it up 
again in proper form. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I clear the point ? It seems to me 
that Dr. Mookerjee’s observations have reduced the point 
to very narrow limits. He concedes, if I understand him 
correctly, that there is the power of ceding territory under 
the entries to which I have referred. I believe it is difficult 
to imagine a case where the cession of territory will not 
involve the readjustment of the boundary of some province. 
At least I cannot imagine a case like that. Therefore, the 
question is one of procedure. If a law has to be made under 
any of the entries in List I or II of the Seventh Schedule, 
the ordinary procedure is the procedure of the Bill. Is that 
not so ? You bring in a Bill, put it through the House in its 
three stages : the Bill is passed and the thing is complete. 
With regard to the provisions coming under Article 3, you 
have got to follow the necessary procedure that has been laid 
down there. My submission is this. In deciding whether the 
ordinary procedure as to Bills is applicable to this case or 
whether the procedure laid down in Article 3 is applicable, we 
have to make reference to one single point and that is this : 
what is the main purpose of the Bill ? Is the main purpose of 
the Bill to readjust the boundaries of Assam or is the main 
purpose of the Bill to cede territory to Bhutan and make the 
necessary consequantial adjustments in the boundary of Assam 
from which this territory is taken ? In a matter of this kind 
where both aspects are present (and must be present in any 
cession because cession must necessarily have the consequence 
of readjustment), my submission is that the procedure to be 
followed must be the procedure for carrying out the main 
purpose of the Bill and not the subsidiary or the incidental 
purpose. Although this Bill has been drafted in a way as 
to make readjustment of boundaries appear to be the main 
purpose, the real purpose is to cede the territory. That being 
so my submission is that the procedure which is prescribed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


756 


756 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by the Constitution to effect laws on any of the matters 
mentioned in the entries to the Seventh Schedule is the 
correct procedure, and Government has followed the most 
correct procedure laid down by the Constitution. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Even if it be an adjustment of 
boundaries has not the prescribed procedure been followed ? 

The Deputy Minister of External Affairs (Dr. Keskar): 

It has been done. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If that is so, then that point also does 
not stand. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The procedure has also been 
followed as laid down in Article 3. I therefore understand Dr. 
Syama Prasad Mookerjee to say that he does not concede the 
right of cession under entry 14 and that is why he says that 
a constitutional amendment is necessary. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bangal) : rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not propose allowing hon. 
Members who have already spoken when this matter was 
raised as a point of order yesterday to speak again. 


*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I have already 
made a motion that this Bill be taken into consideration. All 
that remains for me is to say a few words in order to explain 
the nature of this particular measure, and the necessity for 
bringing it forward. The Notary Public is an official who 
discharges certain functions relating to certain documents 
which arise out of what are called ‘mercantile’ transactions. 
The position with regard to the Notary Public in India is that 
under the Negotiable Instruments Act the Government of India 
has got the power to appoint Notaries public in order to deal 
with the documents which are negotiable instruments under 
that Act. But there are also other mercantile transactions 
which create certain other mercantile documents but which 
are outside the purview of the Notaries Public appointed 
under the Indian Negotiable Instruments Act. Those Notaries 


*P. D. Vol. XIV, 17 August 1951, pp. 832-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


757 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 757 

Public which are outside the Indian. Negotiable Instruments 
Act are appointed by authorities in Great Britain. 

The history of this institution is probably interesting. 
Originally, the appointment of the Notary Public all over 
England and perhaps even Europe was made by the Pope. It 
was an ecclesiastical office and the function of that officer was 
to deal with eccelesiastical matters, that is to say, if a dispute 
arose as to the seating arrangement in a particular Church, 
the dispute was decided by the Notary Public. If a question 
arose as to whether a person who had died was entitled to 
a public burial or whether he was to be doomed to what 
was called a private burial in some unrecognised part of the 
Church, that matter was also decided by the Notaries Public. 
Later on, certain commercial duties were also attached to the 
Notaries Public under which they performed the duties of 
noting, protesting, or preparing or noting honour or dishonour 
about these transactions. When the Protestant Revolution took 
place, the authority of the Pope so far as Great Britain was 
concerned ended, and it was assumed by the British King 
and the British King transferred the jurisdiction that he had 
acquired from the Pope in the matter of the appointment of 
the Notaries Public to the Archbishop of Canterbury who also 
became his officer, because under the Protestant Revolution, 
the State became supreme as against the Church and all the 
officers of the Church became the officers of the State. The 
Archbishop had attached to him what was called a Court 
of Faculty, an officer who dealt with the Church matters to 
which I have already made some reference and in England 
all the Notaries Public were appointed by what was called the 
Court of Faculty under the superintendence of the Archbishop 
of Centerbury. That body also continued to appoint Notaries 
Public in India. All that we did was that we cut out a little 
portion from the authority of the Court of Faculty in England 
which had acquird this legal jurisdiction to appoint Notaries 
so far as the Negotiable Instruments Act was concerned. 

The position today in India therefore is that a group of 
Notaries who deal with documents under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act are appointed by the Government of India 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


758 


758 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

while all other documents which do not come under the 
Negotiable Instruments Act are dealt with by Notaries who 
are appointed from England. Our constitution, namely, the 
India (Consequential Provisions) Act, 1949 and Article 372(1) 
of the Constitution permitted that any officer who was 
appointed before the Constitution may continue to exercise that 
authority, so that notwithstanding the fact that India became 
independent and notwithstanding the fact that the President 
got the authority to make appointments of Notaries, by virtue 
of these two provisions I have quoted, these people still 
continue to function as Notaries although they were appointed 
by an authority not subject to the Indian Constitution. It is 
felt very desirable that this anomaly should be ended and 
that the right of appointment which is now enjoyed by the 
Court of Faculty should be discontinued. That is the main 
purpose of this Bill and I do not think that any Member of 
Parliament can have any objection to it. On the other hand, I 
believe that many Members of Parliament might well ask as 
to why these officers were allowed to function even after the 
Constitution had come into existence. All I can say is that it 
is better to be late than never. That is the only justification. 

The main clauses of the Bill are these : Clause 3 empowers 
the Central Government to appoint Notaries with authority 
to practice as such any where in India. Each State also is 
empowered to appoint Notaries within its own territory to 
function within its jurisdiction. 

Clauses 4 and 5 say that the Notary will not be entitled 
to practice unless he gets his name registered and obtains 
a certificate of practice. He is required to pay a certain fee 
under the rules. These are prescribed under the authority of 
Clause 14(2). 

Clause 6 deals with the annual publication of the lists 
of Notaries. The Central Government as well as the State 
Governments are required to maintain a register of Notaries 
who have got their names registered. 

Clause 7 deals with the seal of the Notary. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


759 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 759 

Clause 8 deals with the functions of the Notary. They 
are the normal functions which a Notary is required to 
perform both under the English Law and practice. They have 
practically been taken from Halsbury’s Laws of England. 

Clause 9 prohibits any person from practising as a Notary 
without a certificate of practice. Persons who are already 
Notaries have been given one year’s time to get themselves 
registered under this Bill. 

Clause 10 is the usual clause dealing with the removal 
of names from the Register of Notaries, if the Notary has 
committed any act which is said to disqualify him from 
holding the post of Notary Public. 

Clause 11 provides that any reference to a Notary Public 
in any other law is purely interpretational and shall be 
construed as a reference to a Notary entitled to practice 
under this Act. 

Clauses 12 and 13 deal with penalty and congnizance of 
offences. 

Clause 13A is a new clause which has been inserted to 
validate on a reciprocal basis the Notary’s Act done in any 
foreign country. 

This is all that the Bill does and I hope that the House 
will see its way to grant its accord to my motion. 

Mr. Chairman : Motion moved. 

“That the Bill to regulate the profession of Notaries be 

taken into consideration.” 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): This is a very simple 
Bill. I am very glad that the Hon. the Law Minister has 
given us a very interesting history. I did not know that 
the Notaries who were appointed in India were appointed 
by the Archbishop of Canterbury. I thought it was done by 
the Government of India. This was really a place of news. I 
think, to several of us — at least I did not know that. 

I want to know the meaning of the word “duly qualified”. 
Does it mean duly qualified in law ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


760 


760 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: Not at all. 

Mr. Chairman: That will be governed by rules framed 
under clause 14, perhaps. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


761 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


761 


( 37 ) 

NOTARIES BILL 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move for 
leave to introduce a Bill to regulate the profession of notaries. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to regulate the 
profession of notaries.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkr: I introduce the Bill. 


**Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The amendment has 
not been supplied in today’s Order Paper, but with your 
permission. I beg to move: 

“That the Bill be referred to a Select Comittee consisting of 
Dr. Bakhshi Tek Chand, Dr. Panjabrao Shamrao Deshmukh, Shri 
Deshbhandu Gupta, Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt, Pandit 
Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava, Shri Prabhu Dayal Himatsingka, 
Shri Arun Chandra Guha, Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri, Shri 
Banarsi Prasad Jhunjhunwala, Shri R. K. Sidhva, Shri C. 
Subramaniam, and the Mover, with instructions to report before 
the 31st August, 1951.” 

Now, this is also a new institution. I do not know what 
obtains in the rest of the Provinces or in the States, but so 
far as I know there is not such an institution like Notaries 
Public in all other places except perhaps in big towns. I speak 
subject to correction. There also the work which is assigned 
to them is only under the Negotiable Instruments Act. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, all. Originally it was only under the 
Negotiable Instruments Act. 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 18th April 1951, p. 740. 

** P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 17th August 1951, pp. 836-838 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


762 


762 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Are there other powers 
given to them now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: They will be the Notaries Public who 
will be doing the work of the Notaries Public outside even 
the Negotiable Instruments Act. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Under this Bill. But at 
present they perform their duties only under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act. 

From a perusal of this Bill, I find that as a matter of fact 
a totally new institution is sought to be brought about in 
India now. The history of this institution is very interesting; 
it arose out of an ancient English statue — I did not know all 
this history... 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is I that gave that history. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There is a reference to 
the Archbishop and then the Master of Faculties in England 
but all this is Jargon to us and we do not understand it. 
What I understand is this. Today in the whole of India the 
lawyers execute instruments — a sale deed, a mortgage deed, 
a gift deed — and all this is done either by petition — writers 
or by lawyers. I can speak with authority so far as Punjab is 
concerned and there every lawyer is competent to write out a 
deed. Where petition-writers are there, they do this business 
and lawyers generally do not do it. By law they are authorized 
to do it. So far as the Oath Commissioners are concerned, 
they attest documents which are produced in courts. There 
are certain provisions in the Civil Procedure Code according 
to which affidavits have got to be attested and they are to be 
produced in courts. Besides this, there are many other things 
which have got to be attested by these Oath Commissioners 
and whenever a person wants to create an alibi in a criminal 
case, then also the certificates of these Oath Commissioners 
are utilized for the purpose of getting a document or two 
attested on a particular date. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I did not know that sort of thing happened 
in the Punjab. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


763 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 763 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : If my hon. friend made 
an inquiry about the rest of India, he will be disillusioned 
to find that Punjab is not an exception. I do not know what 
will be the fate of those legal practitioners who are appointed 
Notaries Public. Will they be allowed to practise also ? 

Shri Sidhva: They are now practising. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, they do. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: If the kind of work 
envisaged in the Bill is to be put on them I think the Notary 
Public should keep a regular office. 

Dr. Ambedkar: They have; each Notary Public has an 
office. 

*Mr. Chairman: May I suggest, if you look at sub-clause 
(2) of clause 8, it is provided that no act specified in sub- 
section (i) shall be deemed to be a notarial act except when 
it is done by a Notary under his signature and official seal. I 
think that would go a long way to see that this has evidentiary 
value of the highest order. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: It means that so far as his 
seal and signature are concerned, they give some evidentiary 
value to the documents prepared. But, if you look into this 
Bill, there is no prohibition in the matter of appointment of 
Notary Public by the Government. Twenty people may be 
appointed in one district. They can appoint any number. This 
is just like the honorary magistrates affair. 

Shri Sidhva: No ; not like that. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: You are speaking with 
experience ; I am speaking without experience. I really want 
to know. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You are expressing the fear of the 
unknown. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : That is perfectly right. 
I do not want that an institution like this which is sought 
to be established in the whole of India should be accepted 


*P. D. Vol. 14, Part II, 17th August 1951, pp. 840-41 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


764 


764 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by us without knowing what it is. I therefore humbly request 
Dr. Ambedkar to explain these things in the Select Committee. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I could explain these things in the House 
itself. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: He wants to bring in a 
new institution which is foreign to this land, which we had 
not got for all these years. 

Shri Sidhva: It is not a new thing; it is existing in the 
port towns. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: That is for negotiable 
instruments. Dr. Ambedkar says so and I accept his versions 
as better than yours. 

Shri Sidhva: Notary Public exists today. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I have myself submitted 
that in Madras, Bombay and Calcutta and in some other 
places they do exist. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Wherever there is the Negotiable 
Instruments Act in force, the Notary Public is there. The 
Negotiable Instruments Act applies throughout the whole of 
India, except, I suppose in some Part B States. In the Part A 
and Part C States, the Negotiable Instruments Act is in force. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: As regards the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, I have no quarrel. I know it applies to the 
whole of India. But, we do not know how this measure will 
affect the public. There was the system of honorary magistrates 
or some other persons who used to do some work all over the 
land. Here you want to do something covering the whole of the 
country, something which is quite new. So far as patronage 
is concerned, the appointing authority will be the State 
Governments and the Central Government, and so it is there. 
And then, some qualifications have been prescribed. But we 
do not know how these offices will work. They will execute 
documents. But will they keep copies of the documents ? Unless 
and until you make provisions for keeping copies, the fears 
which I have given expression to now will all arise. It is not 
as if I want to raise any bogey. The fear is quite real. And I 
am sure lawyers all over the land will not like this measure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


765 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 765 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why not ? This will afford them a 
supplementary occupation. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Now every lawyer is 
competent to execute documents and people go to them for 
executing these documents. But, if you make these Notaries 
execute the documents, then you take away that much of 
jurisdiction from the lawyers. This is not a small matter 
which should be looked at from only the lawyers point of 
view, what happens to the general public ? A person requiring 
a document to be executed will have to come to a big city 
and suppose the Notary charges a high fee, he will have 
to pay it. This here is a new tiling you are introducing. At 
least let us know the full implication of it. To bring in such 
a measure now and get it rushed through is not fair to us. 
If I understand it and am convinced that it is for the good 
of the people, then I will certainly support it. But till then, 
unless I am convinced, I will not touch it with a pair of tongs 
even. Let us first of all know whether it will be useful to the 
public or not. From the speech of the hon. Member I could 
not gather much. 

Mr. Chairman : Will the hon. Member kindly resume 
his seat ? It is now 6-45 pan. and further discussion on this 
motion will follow tomorrow. 


*Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now we proceed with the further 
consideration of the following motion moved by Dr. Ambedkar, 
on the 9th August, 1951: 

“That the Bill to regulate the profession of notaries, be taken 
into consideration.” 

Pandit Thakur Das Bargava (Punjab): I was submitting 
to the House yesterday various reasons why this Bill ought 
to be referred to a Select Committee. It is a well-known fact 
that in some courts and big cities 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): May I make a 
statement with a view to economise the time of the House ? 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 18th August 1951, pp. 853-55. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


766 


766 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

My Friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and I believe 
Dr. Deshmukh want to refer this Bill to a Select Committee. 
So far as what my friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava 
said yesterday is concerned. I was not inclined to accept his 
suggestion, because I did not think that he had advanced any 
grounds of any substance. But in so far as he pleaded that 
this is rather a strange measure so far as he is concerned 
and he might like to have more time to address himself to 
the examination of the provisions here, to understand the 
motives behind it, and so on. Out of pure compassion, I am 
prepared to accept his suggestion. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): Why not accept the 
motion for reference to the Select Committee ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I want to save the time of the House. I 
am quite prepared to explain the provisions of the Bill if that 
would satisfy him and he would withdraw his motion. But 
I think that would be waste of time, because he will persist. 
I am prepared to accept the motion for reference to the Select 
Committee. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Whatever the reasons be, the 
Hon. Minister is willing to accept the motion to the Select 
Committee. So I think not much of debate need go on now. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: So far as this qsuestion 
of compassion is concerned 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No question of compassion.. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Then is it passion ? I 
would only submit that the reasons advanced were so cogent 
that they moved even Dr. Ambedkar to accept the motion for 
reference to the Select Committee. I have as much regard 
for the value of the time of the House as anyone else; but 
I may point out that in this want of knowledge about this 
matter, I am not alone. There are many who want to get 
more knowledge about this subject. 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no catch in it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: There may be no catch; 
but at the same time, we must be satisfied that as a matter 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


767 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 767 

of fact there is need for the measure. I am grateful to 
Dr. Ambekar for having accepted this motion of mine, 
though for reasons which according to him are based on 
various other considerations. But according to me, it was 
accepted because the arguments are very convincing. 

Dr, Ambedkar: The only request I would make of the 
hon. Member is to change the date to some day after the 
5th of September, because I will be out of station for two 
or three days. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Any date suitable to 
the Hon. Minister, I am willing to accept. 

Dr, Deshmukh: Sir 

Dr, Ambedkar: Why make any speech now ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is a sort of technical 
subject and it is better it goes to the Select Committee 
straightaway. 

Dr. Deshmukh: But I gave notice of the motion and 
I will take not more than two minutes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Shall we keep the date as 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suggest the 7th of September. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment moved: 

“That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee consisting of 
Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand, Dr. Punjabrao Shamrao Deshmukh, Shri 
Deshbandhu Gupta, Shri Gokulbhai Daulatram Bhatt, Pandit 
Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava, Shri Prabhu Dayal Himatsingka, 
Shri Arun Chandraguha, Shri Rohini Kumar Chaudhuri, Shri 
Banarsi Prasad Jhunjhunwala, Shri R. K. Sidhva, Shri C. 
Subramaniam, and the Mover, with instructions to report before 
the 7th September 1951.” 

Dr. Deshmukh is a member of the Select Committee 
and following the previous rule, he will try to throw light 
on the Bill in the Select Committee and not speak here. 
Therefore I put the question straight to the House now. 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


768 


768 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 38 ) 

* RESOLUTION REGARDING NECESSITY FOR 
AN ALL INDIA BAR 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): May I make a 
submission. Sir ? The next Resolution stands in the name of 
Pandit M. B. Bhargava, but there is another motion in my 
name — I do not propose to take more than five minutes 

Some Hon. Members: No, no. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): and I think the 

Hon. Minister also is not likely to take more than five minutes. 
So we might take it first and dispose it of. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I can dispose of 
this motion in one minute which you cannot do. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is for the House to consider. 
The Hon. Minister wants to say that effect has been given 
to the substantive portion of the Resolution. The Resolution 
is already there next in priority. There is nothing more to be 
done about it than merely making a statement on either side. 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the other Resolution my 
position is the same. I have practically taken steps to appoint 
a Committee and I was going to tell my hon. Friend that it 
would be a waste of time for the House and for him to discuss 
that matter, if I am allowed to make a statement. I think he 
need not make a statement at all; he may just say, “I move”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, Pandit M. B. Bhargava may 
formally move his Resolution. 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 18th August 1951, pp. 1205-09. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


769 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 769 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): I beg to move: 

“This House is of opinion that an independent and 
autonomous Bar on an all India basis is necessary in the interest 
of the public and legal profession, and that Government should 
undertake legislation on the subject at an early date.” 

There is an amendment by Shri S. N. Das. 

Shri S. N. Das (Bihar): I would like to hear the statement 
of the hon. Minister before I move my amendment, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister will make 
a statement with respect both to the Resolution and the 
amendment. Therefore the amendment may be moved. 

Shri S. N. Das: I beg to move: 

For the original Resolution, substitute the following: 

“This House is of opinion that the time has now come when 
the Government of India should appoint a Committee to inquire 
into the working of laws pertaining to legal profession, in force 
in different States, with a view to ascertain the necessity, 
desirability and feasibility of an independent and autonomous 
Bar on an all India basis.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment moved : 

“This House is of opinion that the time has now come when 
the Government of India should appoint a Committee to inquire 
into the working of laws pertaining to legal profession, in force 
in different States, with a view to ascertain the necessity, 
desirability and feasibility of an independent and automomous 
Bar on an all India basis.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: It has been the desire of Members of 
Parliament who represent the legal profession to this House 
to have, as they call it an independent, autonomous and 
all India Bar. Personally I have not had a complete and an 
adequate idea of what exactly Members mean when they 
say that they want an independent and an autonomous 
Bar. But I do not think it is necessary at this moment to 
enter into any discussion as to what an independent and an 
autonomous Bar may be, and I am therefore of opinion that 
it is desirable, in order that this matter may be considered 
once and for all, to appoint a Committee to investigate into 
this matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


770 


770 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Having considered this matter, I have come to the 
conclusion that there are probably six questions that require 
to be considered so far as the Bar in India is concerned. One 
is the desirability and feasibility of a completely unified Bar 
for the whole of India, secondly, the continuance or abolition 
of the dual system of counsel and solicitor or agent which 
obtains in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts at 
Bombay and Calcutta; thirdly, the continuance or abolition 
of different classes of legal practitioners like advocates of the 
Supreme Court, advocates of the various High Courts, district 
court pleaders, mukhtars entitled to practice in criminal courts 
only, revenue agents, incom-tax practitioners etc.; fourthly, the 
desirability and feasibility of establishing a single Bar Council 
either for the whole of India or for each State separately; 
fifthly, the establishment of a separate Bar Council for the 
Supreme Court; and, last, the consolidation and revision of 
the various enactments, Central as well as State, relating to 
the legal practitioners. 

I believe I have exhausted all the questions that have 
to be considered in order to give effect to the purport of the 
motion which my friend, Mr. Mukut Beharilal has moved just 
now. As I said, I had already decided to appoint a Committee 
and I have been in correspondence with the Supreme Court 
in order to ascertain whether the Supreme Court would be 
prepared to spare the services of one of their Judges to act 
as the Chairman of this Committee. Unfortunately, as hon. 
Members know, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is out 
of India for the moment and it has not been possible for me 
to get his final reply. He will be coming, I am told, some time 
early next month, and as soon as he comes and as soon as he 
lets me know as to which particular Judge he would be in a 
position to spare to act as the Chairman of this Committee, 
the Committee will be appointed and will begin to function. 
I also propose to appoint the Attorney-General, the Advocate- 
General of one major State, a retired High Court Judge, and 
one or two Members of Parliament who have been taking keen 
interest in the subject to constitute this Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


771 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 771 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): Which major State ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Any of the major States — I have not 
decided which. By major State I mean a Part A State. I also 
propose, although I have not decided as yet, that we should 
have one member drawn from what we call Part B State, 
particularly Rajasthan and that area where the system that 
is operating is not quite familiar to us, at any rate it is not 
quite familiar to me, and I would therefore like to have one 
representative from that area to be on the Committee to give 
us information as to how exactly the bar functions in that 
area. I would request the Committee to make a report with 
about three or four months so that after the report is received 
and considered Parliament will have a point of legislation 
brought before it for a consideration. I hope this will satisfy 
my hon. friend and he will withdraw the Resolution. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : I would suggest three 
Members of Parliament with judicial knowledge. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am prepared to include Mr. Sidhva if 
he likes. He should have a non-legal Member also because 
he would bring in common sense. 

Pandit M.B. Bhargava : Will it be open to this Committee 
to specify the powers, functions and constitution of these Bar 
Councils and their relation inter se with the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava: May I know whether the 
disciplinary jurisdiction will vest in these Councils or only 
in the High Courts ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have already laid before the House what 
I regard as special problems which create difficulties for the 
moment. Incidental questions will undoubtedly be considered. 

An Hon. Member: The Committee will give its suggestions. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I believe an informal Committee 
also sat on this question and made some recommendations 
to the hon. Minister. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


111 


772 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no recollection. May be that is so. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In view of the statement made by 
the Hon. Minister I do not think the resolution is pressed. 
Has the mover the permission of the House to withdraw his 
resolution ? 

The resolution was by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The amendments automatically 
go. Next resolution. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


773 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


773 


( 39 ) 

CONDUCT OF A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT 

*The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopalachari): 

Of course, the Law Minister will speak with greater 
authority. The article that is referred to as well as any 
other rule is conceived and put down in a form of words 
for application in the ordinary course. There are, however, 
certain general principles which guide every procedure which 
has the quality of a judicial procedure. Any law or any rule 
must be interpreted and applied so that the law itself may 
not be circumvented. Here is a case where proceedings were 
started in order to enquire into the conduct of a Member. 
It appears to me a matter of fundamental general principle 
that the object and procedure of Parliament cannot be 
circumvented by a technical act like this. Therein comes what 
Mr. Santhanam points out that the words “as soon as” is not 
there automatically to bring about a vacancy. Apart from any 
technical defect in the matter, the general principle. I submit, 
is important that the law is intended for the ends of law and 
not to be circumvented. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us hear the Hon. Law Minister. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The point 
has come upon me quite suddenly and I am therefore only 
expressing, if I may say so, my first impressions, after reading 
article 101, clause (3). Vacation of a seat may take place for 
the reasons which have been specified in Articles 101 and 
102. Article 101, clause (3) sub-clause (b) refers to resignation 
by a Member of Parliament; the clause under which the hon. 
Member whose conduct is the subject-matter of investigation 
has acted. There is also another article which deals with 
disqualifications of Members for being chosen and for being 
a Member. If a Member falls under any of the conditions 


* P. D., Vol. 14, 27th August 1951, pp. 3247-48. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


774 


774 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

mentioned in Article 102, he also vacates his seat. The 
question that arises for consideration is whether Articles 101 
and 102 are exhaustive or whether there is any other article 
in the Constitution which also may operate independently 
although the case does not fall under articles 101 and 102. 
My submission is this, that Article 105(3) is an additional 
power, given to Parliament to bring about a vacancy of a 
seat and is not concluded by anything contained in article 
101 and article 102. 

This is a case where a Member has committed a breach of 
privilege and when the House takes it upon itself to come to 
a finding that the breach of privilege has been committed and 
that the case is so serious that an expulsion may be ordered, 
the House can order the expulsion under article 105(3). The 
House is competent to do so, because of what is stated in Article 
105(3), where it is stated that the powers etc. of Parliament 
shall be those of the House of Commons, and any reference to 
May’s Parliamentary Practic. I think, will show that expulsion 
is one of the powers of the House of Commons and one of the 
powers that it possesses for punishing a breach of privilege. 
Therefore the powers to bring about a vacancy in a seat by 
ordering an expulsion is there under articl 105(3) and that is 
in no way abrogated by the provisions contained in articles 101 
and 102. The only other question that arises for consideration 
is this, whether the proceedings that have already been started 
against the hon. Member under provisions of article 105 by a 
specific order of Parliament can, so to say, come to an end if the 
Member chooses to resign under the provisions of Article 101. 
My humble submission is that an hon. Member cannot bring 
about a stoppage of the proceedings under article 105 by 
resorting to Article 101. These proceedings must continue, 
notwithstanding the fact that the hon. Member has brought 
about his resignation under Article 101, and in fact it is not 
possible for Parliament to inflict a direct punishment upon 
him by virtue of their proceedings. Therefore, it may still be 
open for Parliament, notwithstanding the resignation of the 
hon. Member to proceed with the proceedings which have been 
already started under Article 105. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


775 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 775 

Shri Santhanam: I would just add one more word to what 
the Hon. Law Minister has said. The only construction of the 
word “resignation” is that the resignation should be formally 
notified by the authority concerned before it becomes operative. 
Otherwise all kinds of complications will arise. Suppose a 
letter is delivered at your house and you are not there. And 
you come after, say, four days. Can it be taken that the day 
it was delivered at your house it becomes operative ? In such 
cases the real construction is the one I have given. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But we are not on that point. 


*Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): Sir, I want you and also 
the hon. Members of the House to very carefully bear in mind 
that for the action we are taking now there is no precedent. 
A point of Constitutional law has been raised and it is of 
very great importance. We have no precedent whatsoever to 
go upon, either in May’s Parliamentary Practice 

Dr. Ambedkar: Oh, yes. 

Pandit Maitra: I know May’s Parliamentary Practice 
lays down certain forms of penalty, e.g., censure, admonition, 
putting into jail etc. — all these things are nothing new. The 
point that has been raised by my hon. Friend, the Home 
Minister, if it is logically followed up, comes to this : that once 
a proceeding is started it can never be terminated. Is that the 
legal position ? It is coming to this, that if the hon. Member had 
died last night — I am taking a hypothetical case — would you 
proceed with it ? In giving its decision I am asking the Chair 
to bear these things in mind. It is a Constitutional point. The 
point is whether a Member ipso facto vacates the seat as soon 
as he delivers his letter of resignation to the Chair. I do not 
agree with my hon. Friend Mr. Santhanam that there should 
be a time-lag between the presentation of the resignation and 
its acceptance ; nowhere in the Constitution is it provided 
that it should be accepted or that you may or may not accept 
it. The law provides, the Constitution provides that the 


* P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 24th September 1951, pp. 3251-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


776 


776 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

moment one delivers in writing his resignation to you in his 
own hand it is effective. And in this case he has delivered 
his letter of resignation in person to you, Sir, presiding over 
this House. There is nowhere provided in the Constitution 
that there should be a time-lag. Therefore, the question that 
would arise is whether or not when an hon. Member delivers 
his resignation on the floor of parliament, into the hands of 
the Chair, he vacates his seat forthwith. If he does vacate his 
seat, wherein lies the scope for further action on this motion ? 
That is a matter to be considered. I am not going to criticise 
your ruling (. Interruption ). Of course, my friend might sit in the 
Chair, but at the moment I do not accept his interpretation. 
Sir, we have closely to apply our mind because we are laying 
down a precedent for future guidance. I am interested from 
that point of view, not from the point of view of the merit 
of the case. The Parliamentary Committee has gone into 
considerable detail, devoting much time and considerable 
energy to this matter. With what object? In order that this 
whole question may be investigated, thrashed out and decided. 
The hon. Member having made a statement straightaway 
tenders his resignation and leaves the House. The question is 
whether you take this stand that once a proceeding has been 
set in motion it can never be interrupted ; or whether if due 
to any voluntary act of the person concerned, or if by reason 
of accident or death that man is removed from the scene the 
proceedings are to be continued. This is a very important 
matter to be carefully considered before you give your ruling. 
You are laying down for the first time in the history of this 
Parliament a precedent which will be the guide for the future. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I add a word or two with your 
permission, to what I stated, because I feel that probably my 
statement has not been quite complete as it should have been. 
In view of the fact that my hon. Friend Pandit Maitra has 
raised this question. I think it is desirable to have our mind 
clear about this matter. If my hon. Friend will forgive me, I 
will put the matter in a somewhat technically legal fashion, 
and it is this. When a Member has been charged with a breach 
of privilege and before the proceedings have been concluded he 
resigns, is it a case that Parliament has lost its jurisdiction 
over him because he has resigned ? That I think is the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


111 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 777 

question which we have to consider and which is the question 
which my hon. Friend has raised, although not in those 
technical terms. The answer to that question is this, that 
the jurisdiction of Parliament for punishing people or taking 
proceedings against people for contempt — this is a case of 
contempt — is not confined to Members of Parliament, but it 
also extends to the members of the public who have committed 
contempts of the Parliament and I shall read a little passage 
which I have bodily taken from “May”: 

“The penal jurisdiction of the Houses is not confined to their 
own Members nor to offences committed in their immediate 
presence, but extends to all contempts of the houses whether 
committed by Members or by persons who are not Members, 
irrespective of whether the offence is committed within the 
house or beyond its walls.” 

Therefore, the jurisdiction of parliament to protect itself 
against contempt which is one aspect of the breach of privilege, 
is not confined to Members of Parliament. It extends to 
all citizens. No citizen shall commit any act which would 
amount to contempt of the privilege of the House. Therefore, 
assuming for the purposes of argument that the resignation 
of Shri Mudgal which has been tendered to you now becomes 
effective immediately, nonetheless my submission is that the 
jurisdiction of this house to proceed against him continues. 
He cannot escape it. What form the punishment may take 
is a different matter which may be considered when we 
actually come to that. If the contention of my hon. Friend 
Pandit Maitra is that by submitting your resignation you 
escape the jurisdiction of Parliament, then I think that it is 
absolutely wrong. 

Pandit Maitra: I put it in a different way. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have put it in a way which is more 
intelligible. 

Pandit Maitra : Once an action is set in motion, it cannot 
be anybody’s case that it can never be interrupted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: So long as the jurisdiction exists, the 
action may continue. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


778 


778 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar B. S. Man : On a point of order. The motion 
which is being discussed was permissible when it was 
introduced but now, due to subsequent happenings, it has 
become inadmissible. I want your ruling on this. You will 
see that the motion specifically says: 

“That this House, having considered the Report of the 
Committee appointed on the 8th June 1951 to investigate into 
the conduct of Shri H. G. Mudgal, Member of Parliament...” 

So, the question is not one of jurisdiction of parliament. 
We are discussing the conduct of a “Member of Parliament” 
and Shri Mudgal is no longer a “Member of Parliament”. 
Therefore, my contention is that the motion was admissible 
to start with, but due to subsequent happenings it has 
become in the meantime inadmissible and we can now no 
longer proceed with the discussion on this motion. 

Shri Rajagopalachari: The more we argue in this 
manner the more clear it becomes to my mind that 
circumvention cannot be permitted. The terms and manner 
in which points are taken show that this is nothing but 
circumvention. Continuing what Dr. Ambedkar said, it must 
be remembered that punishments are additional in “May”. 
It says : 

“In the case of contempts committed against the house of 
Commons by Members two other penalties are available...” 

Expulsion is not the only penalty. 

“ ...normally suspension from the service of the house and 
expulsion...” 

Expulsion is an additional penalty available against 
Members, apart from any kind of punishment which the 
House is competent to pass against anyone who is guilty of 
contempt. Now that expulsion may, in the opinion of some 
Members, become impossible, because he has ceased to be 
a member, the house will have to consider other forms of 
punishment. The guilt and proceedings cannot be terminated 
by an act of the person who is charged. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


779 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 779 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us hear the Law Minister. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The amendment 
moved by my friend. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad has really nothing 
to do with the resignation by Mr. Mudgal. His amendment 
had been submitted long before the resignation. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: I would not have moved it. I 
had already decided not to move it and I gave expression to 
that view privately to the Government whip ; but I moved it 
simply because of this new contingency. When I tabled the 
amendment it was under a mistaken impression that the 
house had no jurisdiction, but later on I found that the house 
had full jurisdiction and I decided not to move it. Later on, in 
view of this contingency of resignation I thought this might 
be relevant, though at the time when I tabled the amendment 
there was no such purpose. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not understand the motives and 
purposes of my hon. Friend. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : No, it is difficult some times. 

Dr. Ambedkar: But the fact remains that the notice 
of the amendment was given long before the resignation of 
Mr. Mudgal and the purpose of the amendment undoubtedly 
was to soften the punishment that was proposed in the original 
motion that was moved by the Hon. Prime Minister. The 
question that has now arisen is this : whether in view of the 
resignation of Mr. Mudgal the motion as moved by the Hon. 
Prime Minister could be carried out in its original form or 
whether any subsequent amendment is necessary. The whole 
question seems to me to hang on the other issue, namely 
whether the resignation of Mr. Mudgal is in order so that it 
could be accepted as resignation and take effect immediately. 
My submission to you, Sir, is that the act of resignation must 
be a simple act of resignation without expressing either the 
grounds for resignation or casting any aspersions on the 
House as to why the hon. Member is resigning. When the 
question was last raised you were good enough to say that 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 25th September 1951, pp. 3271-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


780 


780 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it was open to you to accept the resignation subject to the fact 
that certain words and phrases used by Mr. Mudgal could be 
expunged and the resignation made proper as a result of this 
expunction. My submission to you, Sir, is this. No doubt it is 
open to the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker or for that matter 
anyone sitting in the Chair to expunge any part of the debate 
which he thinks is defamatory, indecent or unparliamentary or 
undignified. But the point that I wish to submit is this, that 
the authority of the Speaker to expunge any part of the record 
relates only to anything said in the course of the debate. I 
should like to read Rule 176 of the Rules of Procedure. Rule 
176 deals with report of proceedings. Rule 176A deals with 
expungment of matter and says: 

10-00 A.M. 

“If the Speaker is of opinion that a word or words has or have 
been used in debate which is or are defamatory, or indecent, or 
unparliamentary, or undignified, he may in his discretion order 
that such word or words be expunged from the proceedings of 
the house.” 

As you will see, this rule is confined to anything said in 
the course of the debate. I submit with all respect that the 
resignation tendered by Shri Mudgal can by no stretch of 
the meaning of the word be regarded as anything done in 
the course of the debate. It therefore stands quite outside 
the proceedings of the House and therefore there is no power 
in the Speaker to expunge the words which admittedly both 
(I believe) in the opinion of the house as well as in the opinion 
of the Government are such that they are not liable to be 
expunged on the grounds mentioned in Rule 176-A. Therefore, 
Rule 176-A would not permit the Chair to apply the provisions 
contained therein to the application for resignation by Shri 
Mudgal. Therefore, the application must be treated as it stands 
without any kind of expungment and my submission is that 
the application should not be treated as an application for 
resignation ( Interruption .) 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): On a point of order. 
Dr. Ambedkar: I have not finished. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He is rising to a point of order. 
Let us hear him first. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


781 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 781 

Pandit Kunzru : You ruled yesterday, Sir, that your final 
opinion was that the resignation had become effective. Is that 
point open to discussion now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know. 

Pandit Kunzru : The Deputy Speaker said so yesterday. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It was not final, so far as I remember. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): Sir, you said yesterday 
that the operative portion of the motion should be kept in 
abeyance. That was your ruling and that was all that you 
said. The point raised by me was whether or not, as soon as 
Shri Mudgal’s resignation was tendered and delivered to you, 
he vacated his seat in the House. That was the main point 
raised and as far as I could gather from Pandit Kunzru you 
were earlier of the same opinion that the resignation was 
effective. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He said ‘subject to consideration’. 

Pandit Kunzru: I think the record will show it. 

The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopalachari): 

I think, Sir and the record will show it that you definitely 
said that you will take time to consider. 

Pandit Kunzru: Anyway, the point that you were to 
consider was whether the motion moved by the Prime Minister 
could be taken up by the house without any amendment or 
whether any amendment should be moved and what further 
action could be taken. But so far as the resignation itself was 
concerned, you drew attention to article 101 and said that 
you had no doubt in your mind that the resignation was final 
and had become effective. 

An Hon. Member: No, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall read from the record. This 
is what happened: 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I have heard sufficient. I have 
already told the house that so far as the operative part of it 
is concerned, what action has to be taken is a matter which 
must be considered at leisure. I will consider that matter. As 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


782 


782 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I already referred to that portion of May’s Parliamentary 
Practice, expulsion of a Member or suspending him is an 
additional remedy because he is a Member of Parliament. 
Anybody inside or outside may commit a contemt of the House. 
Merely because he is a member we have more jurisdiction 
over him than over the other person. So far as the other 
person, that is the outsider, is concerned, in the very nature 
of things we cannot expel or suspend him because he is not 
a Member. Therefore, all the same, whether one is a Member 
or an outsider one may commit a contempt of the house. It 
is only so far as the remedy is concerned that in the altered 
circumstances that remedy may have to be altered. But we 
do not come out of the seizin of this motion that has been 
moved already. When it was originally quite in order. I do 
not think by a unilateral resignation or withdrawal from the 
house all the further proceedings can be terminated. 

Regarding the other matter I shall consider it at leisure. 
Whoever wanted to speak now, let him not be under the 
impression that I will not hear. It is not on the floor of the 
House that I need hear him. He may communicate his opinion 
to me. 

Pandit Maitra: On what ? We are not interested in the 
merits. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All the matters: when the 
resignation takes effect; merely because the Member resigns, 
when his conduct has been brought to the notice of the 
House, whether by his mere resignation this House loses its 
jurisdiction — when, particularly, it has jurisdiction even with 
respect to persons who are not Members of this House if they 
commit a contempt of the House. That is a point which hon. 
Members have to note. If a person committed contempt of the 
House outside, there is no question of resignation. The House 
will still not stultify itself but proceed against him. Whether 
the position is changed by mere resignation is a matter which 
we have to consider. At present I do not think it alters the 
position except in regard to the remedial portion, that is as 
to what remedy has to be applied. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


783 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 783 

*Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar): Is Mr. Mudgal now a 
Member of the house or not ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is exactly what we are 
deciding. My view was that he is no longer a Member. I am 
prepared to hear any arguments to show that he continues 
to be a Member, and therefore the operative portion also 
holds good. 

So far as the earlier portion is concerned, I have not seen 
any precedents to the contrary that once this House is seized 
of the matter of contempt, merely by a unilateral act of the 
other person, it will lose its jurisdiction. So far as the operative 
portion is concerned, if he has already resigned there is no 
question of expulsion. If he has not resigned the question of 
expulsion comes in. Therefore it is a narrow point as to how 
far the oprative portion can be passed by this house. I would 
like to hear the Hon. the Law Minister and also any other 
hon. Member who would like to speak on this matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far, Sir, I have submitted that it will 
not be open to make the resignation valid by expunging certain 
portions, because under rule 176A the power to expunge is 
confined only to the proceedings and to the debates. The letter 
of resignation does not form part of the debate and proceedings. 

My second submission is of a totally different sort and 
it is this. When a question arises as to the propriety of a 
resignation, who is the authority to decide it ? My submission 
is that when any such question arises, the authority to decide 
it is the house itself. You will allow me, Sir, to refer to a 
speech which I delivered in the Constituent Assembly in this 
very question on an amendment moved by Mr. Kamath. I 
said that as a matter of fact the resignation is submitted to 
Parliament, because the purpose of resignation is to dissociate 
himself from the body, namely the Parliament to which he 
was elected. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker is merely a 
channel of communication to the House. I said in the course 
of that debate that although theoretically the resignation is 
to the collective body of people called Parliament, it would 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 25th September 1951, pp. 3277-79 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


784 


784 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be quite impossible for any Member who wanted to resign 
to send his resignation to the 292 or 295 Members of the 
House. Therefore, so far as the channel of communicating his 
wishes that he wants to dissociate himself from Parliament is 
concerned, to that extent the Speaker is the person to whom 
the resignation is to be submitted. But if a question were to 
arise as to whether the resignation was in valid form or not, 
the matter I think has to be decided by the House itself. 

Pandit Maitra : Where is it provided in the Constitution ? 
Everything must be provided in the Constitution. Please do not 
forget that you have a written Constitution for this country. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Therefore, my submission is this. If 
certain portions of the resignation cannot be expunged and 
they must stand part of the letter, and a question is raised 
whether the letter of resignation in its original form is valid 
or not, I think it is the House which will be called upon to 
decide whether Mr. Mudgal’s resignation is valid or not. These 
are the two submissions that I wish to make with regard 
to the point, that Mr. Mudgal’s resignation is valid and has 
become effective so that the last portion of the motion moved 
by the Prime Minister has become infructuous. That is the 
relevancy of the whole thing. All that we have to consider 
is this : whether the last portion of the motion moved by 
the Hon. the Prime Minister has been made infructuous by 
reason of the resignation of Mr. Mudgal, because it would 
not be proper for the House to proceed to do something to 
which it cannot give any legal effect. My submission is this 
that in view of the fact that Mr. Mudgal’s resignation is not a 
valid resignation. Mr. Mudgal still continues to be a Member 
of the house and the last portion of the motion moved by 
the Hon. the prime Minister can be made effective so far as 
Mr. Mudgal is concerned. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We will assume an hon. member 
tenders his resignation — it is not the case of Mr. Mudgal — and 
subsequently after a few moments he writes another letter 
to the Chair saying that he wishes to withdraw it. Is there 
provision for withdrawal ? Can I allow him to sit and vote? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


785 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 785 

Dr. Ambedkar: No: unless the first matter is disposed of. 

Pandit Maitra: Disposed of in this case simply means 
submission of the resignation to the Chairman or Speaker. 
Nothing else is contemplated in the Constitution. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is there any form prescribed in 
the Constitution for the letter of resignation ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think there is. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


786 


786 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 40 ) 

SELECT COMMITTEE MEETINGS 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to report 
under sub-rule (3) of rule 65 that the Select Committee 
appointed by the House to consider the Notaries Bill has 
failed to meet successively on two days. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister has merely 
intimated the fact — it may be followed up by any concrete 
motion that he may make. 

Dr. Ambedkar: For the moment I merely propose to report 
as required by sub-rule (3) of rule 65. It is for the House to 
decide whether the house will discharge the Select Committee 
which has been appointed and proceed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I ask any hon. Member in 
the Select Committee to state what exactly is the position ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): I am one of the 
members of the Select Committee 

Dr. Ambedkar: I should like to say that I do not cast 
any aspersion on the members of the Select Committee for 
their failure to meet because I am very well aware that they 
are engaged in many other Select Committes which are also 
meeting simultaneously, but since the rule casts upon the 
chairman of the Select Committee the responsibility to report 
to this house I am making this formal motion to bring the 
matter to the notice of the House. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I was submitting that so 
far as this Select Committee is concerned, its meetings were 
held at such time that Members could not possibly attend 
them. We are Members of several Select Committees and we 
have to make a choice as to which Comittee to attend. Even 
yesterday, I had some amendments to move to this Financial 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 28th September 1951, pp. 2617-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


787 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 787 

Corporations Bill, but because I was engaged on another 
Committee I could not be present in the House and I took 
your permission for that. I have since understood that those 
amendments were not allowed to be moved which you were 
pleased to tell me would be allowed. So, it is happening like 
this — Members of the Select Committee are not to blame. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not blaming. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I would rather, under 
these circumstances, beg of Dr. Ambedkar to kindly give up 
this Bill. This Bill is not important — it does not require 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am prepared to give every Bill that is 
standing in my name. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I would suggest that 
this Bill be dropped. 


*Mr. Deputy Speaker: So far as the Select Committee 
on the Notaries Bill is concerned, due to causes beyond their 
control hon. Members could not be present. They had to attend 
various, other Select Committees and the meetings could not 
be held for want of quorum. I would request the Hon. Minister 
to make another effort in this direction. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am in the hands of the House. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): May I suggest that the time 
for submitting the report of this Select Committee may be 
extended up to the 6th ? The time expires today. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall take notice of the oral 
motion. Is it the pleasure of the House to extend the time ? 

Dr. Tek Chand : We shall meet on the 4th or 5th and 
by this time the other Select Committees will have finished 
their work. This is only half an hour’s work. Therefore, I am 
making the suggestion for extension of time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Does the Hon. Minister agree with 
the proposal for extension of time ? 


*P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 28th September 1951, pp. 3619-21. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


788 


788 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have no objection. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I thought the Hon. Minister who 
is the sponsor of the Bill will make the motion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is a difficult matter for me at 
this stage. If the House appoints a Select Committee, surely 
Government will take the necessary steps to put the measure 
through. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Considering the peculiar 
circumstances of this House, the House does not seem to be 
in favour of discharging the Select Committee and an oral 
motion has been made for extension of time by one of the 
hon. Members. I would like this motion to be made by the 
Hon. Minister himself. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not know whether I can do that. It 
is not for me to make any motion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He is the sponsor of the Bill. 
Therefore, he has to make the motion. Just a minute. The 
time does not expire today. The Select Committee can report 
up to the 1st. Therefore, in due course the Hon. Minister may 
make a motion for extending the time up to the 6th. He is 
now aware that the house is generally in favour of continuing 
the Select Committee. That disposes of this particular matter. 

So far as other matters are concerned. I would ask hon. 
Members to refer to rule 7o. It is true that hon. Members 
are on various Select Committees, and with sessions in the 
morning and evening the Select Committees will have to 
sit while the House is in session. Rule 70 says that Select 
Committees may sit whilst the House is sitting, provided that 
on a division bell being rung the Chairman of the Committee 
shall suspend the proceedings of the Committee for such time 
as will in his opinion enable Members to vote on the division. 
I understand this is the practice in the House of Commons 
also. Hon. Members want many matters to be referred to 
Select Committees. On one hand there is this desire and 
on the other there is a desire to say ‘ We are called in the 
Select Committee’. My remarks yesterday did not apply to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


789 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 789 

hon. Members who were away in connection with Select 
Committees. Select Committee work is as good as work in 
this Parliament. As far as Shri Sidhva is concerned, he need 
not complain that Government have put him in several Select 
Committees. Why should he be anxious to serve on more than 
one Select Committee ? 

Shri Sidhva : We did not approach for Select Committee 
membership. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The work of the Select Committes and 
the house will be faciliated if care is taken, while nominating 
people to Select Committees, to see that the same people are 
not nominated to two Committees. 

Shri Sidhva: Quite right. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: In future, care should be taken to 
see that Members are spread over various Select Committees 
instead of clogging or requesting one Member to be on more 
than one Select Committee. Even if a mistake is committed 
by the sponsor of a Bill in putting the same Member again, 
the Member concerned might consider whether it is proper for 
him to accept membership of more than one Select Committee 
and not complain to the House that he has no time to attend 
meetings. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


790 


790 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 41 ) 

^MOTIONS RE : DELIMITATION OF 
CONSTITUENCIES ORDERS 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We will take up motions re- 
delimitation of constituencies. I will call the names of hon. 
Members who have given notice of motions, they need merely 
say they move. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I have got to 
make five motions which are the main motions. Thereafter, 
there are certain motions for amending my motions. Therefore, 
I submit, subject to your ruling, the proper course would be 
to call upon me first to move my motions and then ask the 
other Members who want to move amending motions to move 
theirs. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister may move his 
motions now. 

Council Constituencies (Bombay) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (Bombay) Order, 1951, laid on the 
Table on the 20th September 1951, namely; — 

(1) That in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Bombay City (Graduates)” in 
column 1, for the entry “Bombay City” occurring in column 2, 
the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Greater Bombay.” 

(2) That in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Northern Division (Graduates)” 
in column 1, for the entry “Northern Division” occurring in column 
2, the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Northern Division excluding Bombay Suburban Districts 
and Ahmedabad City.” 


*P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 6th October 1951, pp. 4399-4404. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


791 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


791 


(3) That in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Central Division (Graduates)” 
in column 1, for the entry “Central Division” occurring in column 
2, the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Central Division excluding Poona City.” 

(4) That in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 

Constituencies” against the entry “Bombay City (Teachers)” in 
column 1, for the entry “Bombay City” occurring in column 2, 
the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Greater Bombay.” 

(5) That in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 

Constituencies” against the entry “Northern Division (Teachers)” 
in column 1, for the entry “Northern Division” occurring in column 
2, the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Northern Division excluding Bombay suburban Districts and 
Ahmedabad City.” 

(6) That in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 

Constituencies” against the entry “Central Division (Teachers’)” 

in column 1, for the entry “Central Division” occurring in column 
2, the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Central Division excluding Poona City”. 

(7) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Bombay City (Local 
Authorities)” in column 1, for the entry “Municipal Corporation of 
Bombay City” occurring in column 2, the following be substituted, 
namely: — 

“Area under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporation 
of Greater Bombay.” 

(8) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Ahmedabad City (Local 
Authorities)” in column 1, for the entry “Municipal Corporation of 
Ahmedabad” occurring in column 2, the following be substituted, 
namely: — 

“Area under the jursdiction of the Municipal Corporation of 
Ahmedabad.” 

(9) That in the Table, under the heading “Local authorities’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Ahmedabad District (Local 
Authorities)”, in column 1, for the entry “Ahmedabad District 
(excluding Ahmedabad City Municipal Corporation) and 
Sabarkantha District” occurring in column 2, the following be 
substituted, namely: — 

“Ahmedabad District (excluding the area under the jurisdiction 
of the Municipal Corporation of Ahmedabad) and Sabarkantha 
District.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


792 


792 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(10) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Poona City (Local Authorities)” in 
column 1, for the entry “Municipal Corporation of Poona City” occurring 
in column 2, the following be substituted, namely: — 

“Area under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corpration of Poona.” 

(11) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Poona (Local Authorities)”, in 
column 1, for the entry “Poona District excluding Poona City Municipal 
Corporation” occurring in column 2, the following be substituted, 
namely: — 

“Poona District (excluding the area under the jurisdiction of the 
Municipal Corporation of Poona.” 

Council Constituencies (Madras) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation of 
Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, laid on the Table on the 
20th September 1951, namely: — 

(1) That at page 1, in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Madras South (Graduates)” in column 

1, for the words “Madras City, and the Chingleput” occurring in column 

2, the words “Madras, Chingleput” be substituted. 

(2) That at page 2, in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Madras South (Teachers)” in column 

1, for the words “Madras City” and the Chingleput” occurring in column 

2, the words “Madras, Chingleput” be substituted. 

Council Constituencies (Mysore) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

That the following modification be made in the Delimitation of 
Council Constituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951, laid on the Table on the 
20th September 1951, namely: — 

That in the Table, the word “Revenue” wherever it occurs, be omitted. 

Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madras) 
(Amendment) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move : 

(1) That the following modification be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madras) (Amendment) 
Order 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 1951, namely: — 

‘That at page 17, in Item (69) — “Villages comprising the firka of 
Vaniyambadi in Tirupattur Taluk” — for the words “and Chinnakallupalli” 
occurring at the end, the words “Chinnakallupalli and Devasthanam” 
be substituted.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


793 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


793 


(2) That the following modifications be made in the 
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Madras) (Amendment) Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 
20th September 1951, namely : — 

1. That at page 1, in para 2 (b), in the proposed Explanation, 
for the words “area comprising the villages” the word “areas” be 
substituted. 

2. That at page 2, for para 5 of the said Order the following 
be substituted, namely : — 

“5. in item (23) of the Appendix to the said Order, for the 
words “Sevalur part, Pothuravuthampatti, Manapparai” the words 
“Manapparai panchayat” shall be substituted. 

3. That in para 6, — 

(i) in item (2) of the Schedule, for the words “Pitali, Sirimamidi 
and Gollagandi” the words “Pitali and Sirimamidi” be 
substitued; 

(ii) in item (14) of the Schedule, after the words “Venkampeta 
near Ramavaram” the word “Ramavaram.” be inserted; 

(iii) in item (21) of the Schedule, after the word “Derasan,” the 
word “Pydibhimavaram” be inserted ; 

(iv) in item (63) of the Schedule, after the words “Koppedu 
Kapula, Kandriga,” the word “Agaram,” be inserted; 

(v) in item (80) of the Schedule, for the word “Kallupatti” 
where it occurs for the second time, the word “Sethupatti” 
be substituted ; 

(vi) in item (87) of the Schedule, for the word “Aruppukkottai” 
the words “Aruppukkottai Municipality” be substituted ; 

(vii) in item (93) of the Schedule, for the words and brackets 
“Devakottai Rural (Eravaseri)” the words and brackets 
“Devakottai Municipality, Eravaseri (Rural)” be substituted; 
and 

(viii) in item (95) of the Schedule, for the words and brackets 
“Keppapatnam (Manamathurai Panchayat Board)” the words 
“Kepparpatnam, Manamadurai Panchayat” be substituted. 

Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Uttar 
Pradesxh) (Amendment) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) 
(Amendment) Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 
1951, namely: — 

(1) That at page 1, in para. 2 (ii), after the words “but 
including Mohammadi,” the words “Atwa Piparia,” be inserted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


794 


794 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) That at page 1, in para. 2 (iii), after the bracket and words 
“excluding Mohammadi,” the words “Atwa Piparia,” be inserted. 

(3) That at page 2, in para, 3 (i), in the Table for the entry 
“Pauri (North) cum Chamoli (East)” in column 1, the following 
entry be substituted, namely: — 

“Pauri (South)-cam-Chamoli (East)” 

(4) That at page 2, after para. 3 (iii), the following new 
sub-para, be inserted, namely : — 

“(iiia) for the entries “ Mohammadi (West) and Mohammadi 
(East)” in column 1, and for the entries against them in column 
2, the following entries be substituted, namely: — 


1 


2 


Mohammadi (West) ... Mohammadi, Atwa Piparia, Magadpur and 

Pasgawan Parganas of Mohammadi tahsil. 

Mohammadi (East) ... Mohammadi tahsil (excluding Mohammadi, 

Atwa Piparia, Magadpur and Pasgawan 
Parganas).” 


*Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall take up Bihar first. Have 
they come to any arrangement ? 

Bihar order 

Dr. Ambedkar (Bombay): I had a meeting with several 
Members who have tabled amendment motions to my main 
motion with regard to the Constituencies Orders issued by the 
President. The arrangement arrived at is this. Out of list 4, I 
accept amendment No. 6, parts 1 and 2 (amendment moved 
by Shaikh Mohiuddin and Mr. Kshu diram Mahata). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I understand there are only two 
parts. The Hon. Minister is accepting both the parts ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Anyhow, I would like to particularise the 
parts ; I accept parts 1 and 2. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is all with respect to Bihar ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 


* P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 11th October 1951, pp. 4617-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


795 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 795 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall put it to the House. Any 
other hon. Members wanting to speak ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Before we accept 
the Bihar order, will the Hon. Minister kindly state what 
are the actual changes that he is accepting? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There are no changes made. The 
amendment as a whole is accepted. I shall read it. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Because there stand in 
the name of Mr. Kshudiram Mahata several amendments. 
Therefore we would like to know exactly. 

Dr. Ambedkar: After accepting certain amendments 
moved by the hon. Members, I thought that there might be 
some point of order that might be raised against them in view 
of the fact that in certain cases there were amendments to 
propositions which did not exist at all. Therefore, I thought 
it much better to take upon myself the responsibility of 
moving these amendments so that there may be no point 
of order arising. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: I am not raising any point of 
order. I only wished to understand the particular amendment 
of Mr. Mahata which was being accepted. If you will kindly 
read out or if the Hon. Minister will explain, we will know 
what exactly the position is. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The position is this. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: May I suggest one thing ? I 
shall allow the Hon. Law Minister to move the amendment 
which he accepts. Thereafter, I shall consider the other 
amendments. If they are barred, they will be barred. If 
any other hon. Member wants to move any amendments 
which are not barred, the House will consider them. The 
amendments have already been moved. If they want to 
speak, they may speak. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The amendments moved by Sheikh 
Mohiuddin and Shri Kshudiram Mahata deal with the 
spliting up of the Graduates Constituency for the Council of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


796 


796 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

States. Originally, in the Order issued by the President, the 
grouping was done in a different manner. The Members of 
the Committee which I had invited mentioned that the Order 
proposed by Sheikh Mohiuddin and Mr. Mahata should be 
adopted; in other words, there should be a separate division 
for Patna, a separate division for Tirhut, and separate division 
for Bhagalpur and a separate division for Chota Nagpur. 
On the whole I thought that there was some substance in 
the arguments presented by these two Members who had 
taken upon themselves the responsibility to move these 
amendments. The same has been done with regard to the 
Teachers Constituencies for the Council of States. In other 
words, Bihar has been divided into four divisions. Patna, 
Tirhut, Bhagalpur and Chota Nagpur. So far as I could 
understand the sense of the Bihar Members who were present 
at that meeting the sense was unanimous in favour of the 
arrangement proposed by this amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He has only done this. Instead 
of the entire state being a single constituency for Graduate 
in Bihar, it has now been divided into four constituencies, 
under this amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Both for Graduates and Teachers. 

Deputy Speaker: In the Order of the President, Graduates 
alone is noted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If you will kindly refer to list 4, Bihar, 
you will see 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am putting the Teachers 
Constituency later. Hon. Members will refer to the 
Delimitation of Council of States Constituencies Order. In the 
Table. Bihar, Graduates is the earliest entry. The following 
is the amendment. In the place of the ‘Entire State’ as the 
Graduates Constituency in the second column, the hon. 
Member has given notice of his amendment that the entire 
State may be divided into four subdivisions for the purpose 
of elections. I shall put that to the House and then I shall 
come to Teachers later. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


797 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 797 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951 laid on the Table 
on the 20th September 1951, namely: — 

1. That in the Table, for the entry “ Bihar (Graduates)” in column 
1 and all the entries occurring against it in columns 2 and 3 


the following be substituted, namely: — 

1 2 3 

Patna Division (Graduates) Patna Division 2 

Tirhut Division (Graduation) Tirhut Division 2 

Bhagalpur Division (Graduates) Bhagalpur Division 1 

Chota Nagpur Division (Graduates) Chota Nagpur Division 1 


2. That in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ Constituencies” 
for all the entries occurring in columns 1, 2 and 3, the following 


be substituted, namely: — 

1 2 3 

Patna Division (Teachers) Patna Division 1 

Tirhut Division (Teachers) Tirhut Division 1 

Bhagalpur Division (Teachers) Bhagalpur Division 2 

Chota Nagpur Division (Teachers) Chota Nagpur Division 2 

The motion was adopted. 


Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order relating to 
the Teacher’s Constituency relating to Bihar stands modified 
to this extent. 

Also, the President’s Order relating to the Teachers’ 
Constituency relating to Bihar stands modified to this extent. 

Have all the other hon. Members who have moved 
amendments to this Order the leave of the House to withdraw 
them ? 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Bombay Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: With regard to the Bombay Order (Council) 
I accept Amendment No. 1 in List No. 1 parts 1 and 2 by 
Shri Deogirikar and others, as modified by amendment No. 
3 in List No. 3 by Shri Deogirikar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


798 


798 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I may explain the substance of these amendments which 
is the same as the substance of the amendments which we 
have accepted in respect of the Bihar Order. 

The original Order issued by the President distributing 
the graduates seats between Bombay, Ahmedabad and Poona 
in certain proportion gave two seats to Bombay and one seat 
combined to Ahmedabad and Poona. It was the desire of Shri 
Deogirikar and others who has tabled the amendment to 
modify this distribution. They wanted first a rotation between 
Ahmedabad and Poona or one seat, going to each by turn. I 
do not think this rotation system is good, however, I accepted 
that it may be desirable to treat all the towns like Bombay, 
Poona and Ahmedabad on an equal footing although it was 
not possible to assess the total strength of all the graduates 
residing in those particular towns. Consequently I accepted 
the amendment so as to distribute the seats between Bombay, 
Poona and Ahmedabad equally, one each; and I have done the 
same thing with regard to the Teachers’ Constituency also. 

The motion was adopted. 


*Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s order relating to 
the Bombay Teachers’ Constituency stands modified to the 
extent of the amendment that has been accepted by the House. 

So also the President’s order relating to the Bombay 
Graduates’ Constituency stands modified to the extent of the 
amendment that has been a accepted by the House. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I request leave of the house to withdraw 
parts (1) to (6) of my amendment No. 2 in List No. 2 Bombay 
order (Council) in consequence of the acceptance of the 
amendment of Shri Deogirikar and others. 

Parts (1) to (6) of the amendment were, by leave, 
withdrawn. 


* P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 11th October 1951, pp. 4621-22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


799 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 799 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s order stands 
modified in the extent of this amendment, in addition to the 
modification effected by the amendment of Shri Deogirikar. 

The question is : 

That the following modifications ho made in Delimitation of 
Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, laid on the Table 
on the 20th September 1951, namely : — 

(1) That at page 1, in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Madras South (Graduates)” 
in column 1, for the words “Madras City, and the Chingleput” 
occurring in column 2, the words “Madras, Chingleput” be 
substituted. 

(2) That at page 2, in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Madras South (Teachers)” 
in column 1, for the words “Madras City., and the Chingleput” 
occurring in column 2, the words “Madras, Chingleput” be 
substituted. 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir, I accept amendment No. 2 on List No. 2 
(Madras Council Order) moved by Shri Kesava Rao. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951 laid on the Table 
on the 20th September 1951, namely: — 

That in the Table, in column 2, after the words “Malabar 
and South Kanara Districts” wherever they occur, the following 
be added, namely: — 

“and the West Cost Islands of Minicoy, Laccadives and 
Amin di vis”. 

The motion was adopted, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The president’s order relating to the 
Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) stands modified 
to the extent of the two amendments accepted by the House. 

Uttar Pradesh Order 

**Dr. Ambedkar: I am accepting amendment No. 1, Parts 
(1) and (2), second alternatives, by Babu Gopinath Singh. It 
provides for contiguity and hence I am accepting it. 

*P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 11th October 1951, p. 4624. 

** Ibid-., pp. 4425-26. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


8-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


800 


800 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951, laid on the 
Table on the 20th September 1951, namely: — 

(1) (i) That in the Table, under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Uttar Pradesh West (Graduates)” 
in column 1, for all the words occurring in column 2, the words 
“Meerut, Agra, Jhansi, Allahabad and Faizabad Divisions” be 
substituted. 

(ii) That in the Table under the heading “Graduates’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Uttar Pradesh East (Graduates)” 
in column 1, for all the words occurring in column 2, the words 
“Rohilkhand, Kumaun, Lucknow, Banaras and Gorakpur Division” 
be substituted. 

(2) (i) That in the Table, under the heading “Teachers’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Uttar Pradesh West (Teachers’)” 
in column 1, for all the words occurring in column 2, the words 
“Meerut, Agra, Jhansi, Allahabad and Faizabad Divisions” be 
substituted. 

(ii) That in the Table under the heading “Teachers’ 
Constituencies”, against the entry “Uttar Pradesh East (Teachers)” 
in column 1, for all the words occurring in column 2, the words 
“Rohilkhand, Kumaun, Lucknow, Banaras and Gorakpur Divisions” 
be substituted. 

The motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am prepared to accept amendment No. 2 
in list No. 2 moved by Dr. C. D. Pande to the Delimitation of 
Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951, laid on the 
Table on the 20th September, 1951, namely: — 

(1) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies” against the entry “Uttar Pradesh North-East (Local 
Authorities)” in column 1 for the word “Shahjahanpur” occurring 
in column 2, the word “Budaun” be substituted. 

(2) That in the Table, under the heading “Local Authorities’ 
Constituencies’^ against the entry “Uttar Pradesh Central (Local 
Authority)” in column 1, for the word “Budaun” occurring in column 
2, the word “Shahjahanpur” be substituted, 

The motion was adopted. 

The other amendments to the order were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order relating to 
the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


801 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 801 

stands amended by the amendments adopted by the House, 
which stood in the names of Babu Gopinath Singh and 
Dr. C. D. Pande. 

West Bengal Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendment No. 2 in List No. 
2, standing in the names of Messrs. Samanta and Abdus 
Sattar, to the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West 
Bengal) Order, 1951. 

Shri Chattopadhyay (West Bangal): In view of the 
agreement reached I beg leave of the House to withdraw 
my amendment. But before you put the motion to the House 
I have a doubt to be clarified which relates to the case of 
nominated members of local authorities. It has never been 
the desire of this Parliament or the Constituent Assembly 
that nominated members should have any right to vote in 
the matter of elections to Councils. We have provided in the 
Constitution that nominated members of the Upper Houses 
in the Centre as well as States should have no right to vote 
for the election of the President in this Constituency under 
discussion there are as many as two municipalities with a 
total strength of 24 members, who are all nominated and 
if they get the right of vote in the matter of election to the 
Council I think the Council in the State of Bengal will become 
something like a farce because the members of the Council 
elected by nominated members will stand on a par with 
the representatives sent by elected members. It was never 
the desire of Parliament nor the Constituent Assembly that 
nominated members of local bodies should have any right 
to vote in the matter of election of the President or in the 
matter of election to the Councils. It is due to oversight that 
a mistake of so grave character has crept in and I would 
like to know whether anything could be done to remedy the 
mistake. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I see the significance of the point raised 
by my hon. friend but the difficulty is a constitutional 
difficulty. The Constitution does not make any distinction 
between nominated members and elected members. Although 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


802 


802 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I agree with my friend that it was not the intention of the 
Constituent Assembly to permit nominated members to take 
part in the election, as this matter was not brought to the 
attention of the Constituent Assembly, it is now impossible 
for us to do anything unless by amending the Constitution, 
which is of course an impossible proposition. 

Shri Chattopadhyay: May I know whether the State 
Government could do something to debar such members 
from being voters in the election and whether the State 
Government even at this stage could do away with their 
membership by an executive order? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is of course quite open to the local 
Assembly to pass another Municipal Act making the whole 
of the Municipality wholly elected, before the election takes 
place so that the difficulty raised by my friend can be 
obviated. But there is nothing which this Parliament can 
do in this matter. 

Shri Chattopadhayay: May I know whether the Law 
Ministry is going to instruct the State Government to this 
effect ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose it would be for the Prime 
Minister to take this point into consideration and to inform the 
Ministry if he thinks that it is desirable that the nominated 
members should not take part in the election. 

Shri Chattopadhayay: May I have the opinion of the 
Prime Minister in this matter ? 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): I am 

sorry I have not quite followed the argument 

Dr. Ambedkar: The point, if I may tell the Prime 
Minister, is this, that there are certain Municipalities in 
West Bengal where a large number of the membership of 
the Municipality is by reason of nomination 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab): In Punjab also. 

Dr. Ambedkar: In Punjab also. In our Constitution, when 
we considered the question of the constitution of the Upper 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


803 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 803 

Chamber we merely used the general expression “members 
of the municipality” without making it a qualification 
“elected members”. The question has arisen whether it is 
desirable that the nominated members of the municipality 
should also take part in the election of members to the 
Upper Chambers. The answer I gave was that although 
it is not possible for us to do a anything by reason of the 
fact that we have got this constitutional provision, still, 
as municipalities are a subject for the State it would be 
possible for the State Governments to modify their Municipal 
Acts so as to eliminate the nominated members from the 
Municipalities. The question put to me was whether the 
Central Government could do anything. I said the only 
answer that I could suggest was that perhaps the Prime 
Minister, if he so thought fit, might instruct the Chief 
Ministers of West Bengal or Punjab that this anomaly may 
be eliminated. 

The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopala- 
chari): What the Law Minister means is that they may be 
eliminated from the Council — they cannot eliminate them 
from their functions under the Constitution. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No, no. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: So long as they are members of 
municipalities, nominated members, under the Constitution, 
are entitled to vote. The suggestion is not, that the 
Constitution may be modified overnight — the suggestion is, 
that if they modify the existing law relating to municipalities, 
dissolving all the existing municipalities, and before the 
election takes place, allow all the seats to be filled by 
election, then it would meet the purpose. But are we making 
suggestions now on the floor of the House, as to what ought 
to be done? Let us proceed. We have very little time left. 
The matter in hand is the Delimitation of Constituencies’ 
Orders. I do not think we should trouble the hon. Prime 
Minister unless he wants to do it himself. Let us proceed 
with the legitimate work before us. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


804 


804 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mysore Order 

*Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have the amendment in List 
No. 1. 

Shri Shankaraiya (Mysore): Before it is put to the vote 
of the House I would like to suggest to the hon. Minister to 
consider that instead of deleting the word “Revenue “as it 
stands in column 2, it may be allowed to remain by putting 
if within brackets ; the effect will be the same. Removing 
the word or putting it in brackets will practically mean the 
same thing. By putting it in brackets it will be more clear 
and authentic. 

Dr. Ambedkar: This is a purely administrative matter 
and we are acting upon the advice received from the Mysore 
Government that if the word u Revenue “is retained there 
might be some complications or mistakes arising. In view of 
that I must support this amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

That the following modification be made in the Delimitation 

of Council Constituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951, laid on the Table 

on the 20th September 1951, namely : — 

That in the Table, the word “Revenue” wherever it occurs, be 

omitted. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: To this extent the President’s Order 
stands modified. 

The Council Constituencies Orders are over. The House 
will now proceed to the consideration of amendments relating 
to Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We are now taking Amendment Orders. 
The President himself has issued certain Amending Orders 
and there are amendments to these Amending Orders. 


*P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 11th October 1951, pp. 4629-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


805 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 805 

PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES 

Bombay (Amendment) Order 

Dr. Ambedkar: I accept amendments Nos. 2 and 3 in 
List No. 2. All the others are going to be withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

(i) That in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Bombay) (Amendment) Order, 1951, after item 
No. 2, the following new item No. 2A, be inserted, namely: — 

“2A. In Table A. -Parliamentary Constituencies of the said 
Order. — 

(i) against the entry “Ahmednagar North” in column 1 
the words “Nandgaon Municipal Area” in column 2, shall be 
omitted ; and 

(ii) against the entry “Nasik Central” in column 1, the words 
“Nandgaon Municipal Area and in column 2 shall be-omitted.” 

(ii) That in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Bombay) (Amendment) Order, 1951 after item 
No. 3, the following new item No. 3A be inserted, namely: 

“3A. In Table B. — Assembly Constituencies of the said 
order. — (i) against the entry “North Malegaon” in column 1, 
for the existing entry in column 2, the following entry shall be 
substituted, namely: — 

‘Malegaon Municipal Area and Maleaon Taluka excluding 
such of the villages as are specified in item (36) of the Appendix’.; 

(ii) against the entry “South Malegaon-North Nandgaon” 
in column 1, for the existing entry in column 2, the fallowing 
entry shall be substituted, namely: — 

‘Such of the villages of Malegaon Taluka as are specified in 
item (36) of the Appendix; and Nandgaon taluka (excluding such 
of the villages as are specified in item (35) of the Appendix).’; and 

(iii) against the entry “Yeola-Nandgaon” in column 1, the 
words ...Nandgaon Municipal Area “in column 2, shall be 
omitted.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: To this extent the President’s 
Order stands modified. 

Have the other hon. Members who have tabled other 
amendments the leave of the House to withdraw them ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


806 


806 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Amendment 
order relating to Bombay was modified to the extent of the 
amendments accepted by the House. 

Madhya Pradesh (Amendment Order) 

Dr. Ambedkar: Sir I move amendment No. 1 in list No. 
1 and amendment No. 3 in list No. 3. Amendment made: 

That the following modification be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madhya Pradesh) 
(Amendment) Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 
1951, namely: — 

That in sub-para, (i) of para. 3 of the Order, for the words 
“Ordinance Factory; Khamaria, Gun Carriage Factory” the words 
“Ordinance Factory Khamaria, Gun Carriage Factory Estate,” 
be substituted. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar \ 

Further amendment made : 

That the following modification be made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madhya Pradesh) 
(Amendment) Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 
1951, namely: — 

That at page 1, after para. 3(i) of the Order, the following 
new sub-paras, (ia) and (ib) be inserted, namely: — 

‘(ia) against the entry Nagpur 1” in column 1, for the existing 
entry in column 2 the following entry shall be substituted: — 

“Ward No. 1 including villages Somalwada Chichabhuwan, 
Ajni, Wards Nos. 2 to 4, 7, 37 and 38 and Ward No. 39 including 
villages Borgaon, Hazaripahad and Dhaba, Wards Nos. 40, 41 
including villages Kachimeth and Sonegaon Sim and Ward no. 

42 including villages Jaitala, Bhamti, Sonegaon (Bazar), Khamla, 
Takali Sim, Parsodi and Shiwangaon of Nagpur City of Nagapur 
tehsil.”; 

(ib) against the entry “Nagpur IV” in column 1, for the existing 
entry in column 2 the following entry shall be substituted : — 

“Ward No. 8 including villages Babulkheda Sakardara, 
Manewada, Chikhali Khurd, Ward No. 10 including villages 
Harpur, Dighori, Bidpeth and Wathoda, Ward No. 22 including 
villages Hiwari, Pardi, Bhandewadi, Chikhali (Deosthan). Punapur 
and Bharatwada, Wards Nos. 23 and 24 including villages 
Kalamna, Wanjara and Wanzari, Wards Nos. 29 to 32, Ward 
No. 33 including Nari, Ward No. 34 including Takali (Big) and 
Gorewada, Ward No. 35 including villages Nara, Indora and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


807 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


807 


Mankapur and Ward No. 36 of the Nagpur City, and Nagpur R.I.C. 
(excluding patwari circles Nos. 1 and 10 to 12) of the Nagpur 
tehsil.”;’. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Are the other amendments withdrawn 
by leave of the House ? 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Amendment Order 
relating to Madhya Pradesh stands modified to the extent of 
the amendments accepted by the House. 

Madras (Amendment) Order. 

Amendment made : 

That the following modification be made in the’ Delimitation of 
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madras) (Amendment) 
Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 1951, namely: — 

“That at page 17, in Item (69) — “Villages comprising the 
firka of Vaniyambadi in Tirupattur taluka” — for the words “and 
Chinnakallupalli” occurring at the end, the words “Chinnakallupalli 
and Devasthanam” be substituted.” 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Further amendment made: 

That the following modifications be made in the Delimitation of 
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madras) (Amendment) 
Order, 1.951 laid on the Table on the 20th September, 1951 
namely : — 

1. That at page 1, in para. 2(b), in the proposed Explanation, 
for the words “area comprising the villages” the word “areas” 
be substituted. 

2. That at page 2, for para. 5 of the said Order the following 
be substituted, namely 

“5. In item (23) of the Appendix to the said Order, for the 
words “Sevalur part, Pothuravuthampatti, Manapparai” the 
words “Manapparai panchayat” shall be substituted.” 

3. That in para. 6, — 

(i) in item (2) of the Schedule, for the words “Pitali, 
Sirimamidi and Gollagandi” the words “Pitali and Shrimamidi” 
be substituted ; 

(ii) in item (14) of the Schedule, after the words “Venkampeta 
near Ramavaram “the word “Ramavaram”, be inserted; 

(iii) in item (21) of the Schedule, after the word “Derasan,” 
the word “Pydibhimavaram” be inserted ; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


808 


808 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(iv) in item (63) of the Schedule, after the words “Koppedu 
Kapula Kandriga”, the word “Agaram”, be inserted. 

(v) in item (80) of the Schedule, for the words “Kallupatu,” 
where it occurs for the scond time, the word “Sethupatti” be 
substituted; 

(vi) in item (87) of the Schedule, for the word “Aruppukkottai” 
the words “Aruppukkottai Municipality “be substituted ; 

(vii) in item (93) of the Schedule, for the words and 
brackets “Devakottai Rural (Eravaseri)” the words and brackets 
“Devakottai Municipality, Eravaseri (Rural)” be substituted ; and 

(viii) in item (95) of the Schedule, for the words and brackets 
“Kepparpatnam (Manamathurai Panchayat Board)” the words 
“Kepparpatnam, Manamadurai Panchayat” be substituted. 

— [Dr. Ambedkar ] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Amendment Order 
relating to Madras stands modified to the extent of the 
amendments accepted by the House. 

Uttar Pradesh (Amendment) Order 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): It is not enough that 
an order making changes by the President is laid before the 
House nor is it enough that my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar 
should propose further changes in them. We should like to 

know why these changes have become necessary The 

constituencies as demarcated I think gave general satisfaction 
and we ought to be careful therefore in making changes in 
them. If my hon. friend the Law Minister tells me the precise 
reasons why the changes in the case of Parliamentary and 
Assembly constituencies of U.P. have become necessary. It 
will be possible for us to decide whether we should vote with 
him or against him, but at present we are just helpless. We 
do not know what to do. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no reason to complain against my 
hon. friend Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru for raising the point 
which he has raised, for undoubtedly every one of us should 
be very careful against permitting any kind of political gerry 
mandering in the making up of constituencies, and if there 
was any suspicion that any particular party was manoeuvring 
to change a constituency which has already been prescribed 
by the President and approved by the House it is a legitimate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


809 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 809 

matter to be raised on the floor of the House. But I would 
like to tell my hon. friend that so far as my information and 
knowledge go there is in this amendment not the slightest 
evidence of any kind of gerrymandering. The amendments 
which I have sought to make consist only of two things. 
One is to rectify errors which have crept in by some kind 
of inadvertence. Some thana which ought to have been 
mentioned has not been mentioned in the appropriate place 
and some other thana or some other place has been mentioned 
in its place. The second thing is that it has been discovered 
that in some of these cases where contiguity was possible, 
somehow by some mistake the principle of contiguity has 
been lost by the inadvertent mixture of some thanas from 
one constituency to another and an attempt is made in this 
amendment to remove these two errors, i.e. mistakes of a 
topographical kind and secondly mistakes which brought 
about a certain amount of discontiguity. 

Pandit Kunzru: May I ask my hon. friend whether 
he is saying this with reference to his own amendment or 
with regard to the amendments in the President’s Order ? 
If he is saying this with reference to the president’s Order, 
then I should like him to turn to the changes proposed in 
the Garhwal constituency and tell me where the question 
of restoring contiguity exists. There is contiguity between 
the various parts of the constituency suggested. I know it 
is very difficult for him to deal with this local matter, but I 
mention it only in order to point out to him that the changes 
suggested are not due entirely to the reasons mentioned by 
him. 

Dr. Ambedkar: May I continue, Sir ? 

You will remember that last time when the President’s 
Order with regard to delimitation was passed by this house, 
out of caution I moved a motion that the Speaker of the 
house should be given power to make such changes as it 
may be found necessary in order to remove certain errors. 

Shri Kamath: Verbal errors, verbal amendments. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


810 


810 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

10-00 A. M. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Verbal, minor, consequential or 
incidental — I think those were the words which were used. 
I was very careful to make the proposition as broad as I 
possibly could make for the simple reason that the House will 
remember that we carried the motion approving the orders 
of the President in great hurry and after great bustle and 
meetings, further meetings and further meetings. 

Notwithstanding that it has been discovered that even we 
were not in a position to advise the Speaker with regard to the 
errors that had crept in. Some errors, therefore, had remained 
and we thought this was the proper occasion to make some 
provision in order to eliminate the errors that still remained, 
notwithstanding the scrutiny of the Local Governments, the 
scrutiny of the Law Ministry and the scrutiny of the Speaker. 
I do not think my hon. friend Pandit Kunzru will go to the 
length of saying that simply because we have at one time 
passed the Orders as issued by the President, we should not 
take any further occasion to remove any errors that may still 
be remaining in the Orders. 

With regard to the particular constituency to which he 
referred, he was good enough to suggest that I myself by 
my own knowledge or information was not in a position 
to give a correct answer whether a particular constituency 
was contiguous with the amendment that we are making 
in this Delimitation Order. We have to depend upon the 
Local Government on this matter. As he will remember I 
took particular care to call a meeting of the members of the 
Uttar Pradesh Delimitation Committee to aid and advise me 
on the grounds which were alleged for making these changes 
in the Uttar Pradesh Delimitation Orders, namely correcting 
errors and making contiguity more possible than it was, but 
unfortunately he could not come to that meeting. He was the 
President of the Uttar Pradesh Delimitation Committee and 
if notwithstanding the advice that has been given to us he 
still contends that some things have been done which do not 
produce contiguity, all that I can say is that the fault must 
lay on his shoulders, for he did not come to the meeting to 
advise me as to whether what I was doing was correct or not. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


811 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 811 

Pandit Kunzru: I received no such notice, Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think I did send a message to my 
hon. friend. My hon. friend sent it to me back with a 
note that with regard to certain amendments that I was 
accepting from Mr. Gopinath, he was perfectly prepared 
to support that amendment. 

Pandit Kunzru: I was consulted only with regard 
to 

Dr. Ambedkar: He was more interested in the Press 
Bill 

Pandit Kunzru: suggestions made by the 

Committee appointed by the Speaker under the 
Representation of People Act, 1950 so far as the Legislative 
Council constituencies went and I gave my reply with 
regard to them. 

As regard the other changes if the U.P. Government 
has informed the Central Government of the reason for 
proposing them why should my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar 
not place those reasons before the House ? 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): If I may be 
permitted as a Member of the Delimitation Committee, 
to speak. I should like to say that the changes proposed 
in this notification and as moved by the hon. the Law 
Minister are not exactly consequential or incidental. I 
have tried to go carefully into the various changes that 
are being proposed. Take, for instance, the Benaras 
District with which I am fully acquainted. I do not know 
for what reason another pargana, has been added, which 
means an increase in the number of voters. In regard to 
Garhwal, I do not know why Chamoli is being shunted 
about like this. 

The Minister of State for Finance (Shri Tyagi): 

Which one is it ? 

Shri T. N. Singh: It is not Dehra Dun: it is Garhwal. 

Shri Tyagi: I am equally interested. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


812 


812 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri T. N. Singh: Similarly with regard to Kanpur — 
Farukhabad General Constituencies, the changes proposed 
do require careful looking into. 

After having gone into all these questions in detail. I 
think it will be unfair to the House if it is not allowed to go 
into all the various aspects of the question. I would in this 
connection like to tell the House that under the guidance of 
our Chairman we went into the question in every detail, we 
went into the demarcation of every village, every patwari’s 

circle and devoted a lot of time to it But just at present, 

I find it really very difficult to support the amendment being 
in the dark and without knowing what it really means. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The position is this in regard to the first 
amendment, namely: That at page 1, in para. 2 (ii), after the 
words “but including Mohammadi,” the words “Atwa Piparia” 
be inserted. There is a place which is called Atwa Piparia which 
is not mentioned in the original order at all. That means the 
citizens of India who are residing in Atwa Piparia will not 
be entitled to take part in the election at all, because they 
do not form part of that particular constituency. In order to 
rectify this mistake, it has been proposed that this addition 
should be made. Now when this addition is made certain 
consequential amendments also have to be made in the other 
constituencies in order to bring them in line with the rules laid 
down in our Constitution that every constituency must have 
a certain number of voting strength and the representation 
distributed accordingly. 

The main amendment there, as I am advised now, is 
only in regard to this Atwa Paparia. The rest of them 
are merely consequential. They have no substance except 
for the fact that they must be made if we accept the first 
amendment, namely to add “Atwa Piparia”. I think hon. 
Members will realize that the first amendment is absolutely 
essential because we cannot omit any particular part from 
any particular constituency. If we add something to that 
constituency and that constituency becomes bigger than the 
constituency contemplated for giving one single member, then 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


813 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 813 

obviously other changes must also be made. I am only 
explaining to my hon. friend that there is no catch in it at all. 

Shri T. N. Singh: What about other places. There are also 
other constituencies in which radical changes appear, at least 
to me to have been made. For instance, against Banaras it is 
“Sheopur pargana and Dehat Amanat pargana excluding the 
Municipality and Cantonment of Banaras”. Again take them 
(v): “Jalhupur, Sultanipur and Katehar parganas of Banaras 
tahsil”. Formerly I think it was only Sultanpur and Katehar 
parganas. You have added one full pargana. I want to know 
what is the reason for this change. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I will now put it to the House. 

The question is : 

That the following modifications b made in the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) 
(Amendment) Order, 1951 laid on the Table on the 20th September 
1951, namely: 

(1) That at page 1, in para. 2 (ii), after the words “but 
including Mohammadi.” the words “Atwa Piparia,” be inserted. 

(2) That at page 1, in para. 2 (iii), after the bracket and words 
“(excluding Mohammadi,” the words “Atwa Piparia.” be inserted. 

(3) That at page 2, in para. 3 (i), in the Table for the entry 
(North) cum Chamoli (East)” in column 1, the following entry 
be substituted ; namely: — 

“Pauri (South) cum Chamoli (East)” 

“(iiia) for the entries “Mohammadi (West)” and “Mohammadi 
(East)” in column 1, and for the entries against them in column 
2, the following entries be substituted, namely: — 


1 


2 


Mohammadi (West) ... Mohammadi, Atwa Piparia Magadpur 

and Pasgawan Parganas of 
Mohammadi tahsil. 

Mohammadi (East) ... Mohammadi, tahsil (excluding 

Mohammadi atwa Pipardia, 
Magadpur and Pasgawan Parganas. 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


814 


814 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The President’s Order relating to 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Uttar Pradesh) stands moditied to the extent of the amendment 
accepted by the House. 

Pandit Kunzru: May I know whether this is with regard 
to the U. P. Legislative assembly also or only with regard to 
the changes in the Parliamentary constituencies ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It covers both. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have done both in respect of 
the Council constituencies and in respect of the Parliamentary 
and Assembly constituencies. Now there are no more motions. 

Pandit Kunzru: Could I put a question to the hon. the 
Law Minister about one of the Assembly constituencies ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The matter is over now. 

Pandit Kunzru: After considering the matter we have said 
that one constituency should be a two-member constituency. 
But the U.P. Government have changed that now. Why has 
that become necessary? Have they found that the proportion 
of the scheduled caste voters in the constituency as proposed 
by them will be higher than in the constituency as proposed 
by the Speaker’s Committee ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no information that they have 
made any such change. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


815 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


815 


( 42 ) 

BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. the Prime Minister will 
make a statement regarding the work before the House and 
the holidays. 

The Prime Minister and the Leader of the House 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): Tomorrow I believe, has been 
notified as a holiday in our list of holidays on account of the 
tenth day of Mohurrum. But I understand that the moon did 
not behave according to the prescribed date and the tenth 
day has been calculated to be the day after tomorrow and not 
tomorrow, and in fact that the Chief Commissioner of Delhi 
has declared day after tomorrow as a holiday on account of 
Mohurrum. I would suggest therefore that this house too may 
observe day after tomorrow, and not tomorrow, as a holiday 
on account of Mohurrum — that means, sitting tomorrow and 
not the day after. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh): Will the session end 
tomorrow ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I cannot say that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is so much of work on the 
order paper. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: Let us meet tomorrow. We do 
not meet day after tomorrow. But we may have to meet the 
day after that, possibly on Sunday. 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): Why on Sunday ? Why 
not on Monday ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: We can consider that. Why not 
Sunday and Monday? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


816 


816 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Kunzru : Our privileges being those of the British 
House of Commons, and as the British House of Commons 
does not meet on Sundays, we have every right not to meet 
on a Sunday. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: The House of Commons, on 
the other hand, meets on the Mohurrum day. 

Pandit Kunzru : If the hon. the Leader of the House 
has the courage to make that suggestion, let us meet on 
Mohurrum day. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : I am going to show the courage 
by asking the Ho use to meet on Sunday. 

Pandit Kunzru: That is against our privileges. 

Shri Kamath: May I suggest that instead of meeting 
on Sunday we might observe Mohurrum festival by meeting 
and working harder in the service of the nation, just as 
we did on the occasion of Vinayaka Chaturthi and Anant 
Chaturdasi ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We need not have a discussion 
on this matter. Tomorrow will be a working day. Though 
the 12th was originally notified as a holiday, Parliament 
will meet tomorrow. The holiday will be transferred to a 
day after tomorrow. 

There is so much of work put down on the order paper, 
and if the Government wants to continue the work, certainly 
we can sit on Monday and Tuesday also. 

So far as Sunday is concerned, normally I am against 
sitting on Sundays. But we will consider that matter 
according to the nature of the work, later on. 

The House will now proceed with the Industries Bill. . 

Dr. Ambedkar : rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Minister might make 
his statement in the afternoon. 


Dr. Ambedkar: After this Bill ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


817 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 817 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: At about 6 O’clock. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It was first arranged between you and 
me and the Prime Minister that I should make a statement 
on the 6th. As certain part of the business was not finished 
on the 6th it was definitely agreed that you would be pleased 
to suspend the rule about the transaction of business and 
allow me to make the statement on the 11th. So this is the 
time when I should make the statement would be read as an 
ex-Minister ? I think he was not told that at 6 O’clock the 
correspondence. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is true that I said to the hon. 
the Law Minister that I will suspend the rule. Normally under 
rule 128, immediately after the question hour is over any hon. 
Minister who has resigned can make, with the permission of 
the Speaker, a statement in explanation of his resignation. 
Today I have to suspend the rule for that purpose, and I am 
going to do it. I am only suggesting that it may be put off 
till 6 O’clock. That is all. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Why not now ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: At 6 O’clock I will hear the hon. 
Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not quite understand why my 
statement should be postponed to 6 O’clock. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Under the rules the Speaker 
must give his consent before any hon. Minister can make 
a statement. I would like to know what statement the hon. 
Minister is going to make. Of course it, involves my consent. I 
am not disclosing anything to the House which is not provided 
for, I would request the hon. Minister to give me a copy of 
the statement and I will allow him to read the statement 
this afternoon. 

Dr. Ambedkar: If that was so, you could have already told 
me when I saw you that I should hand over my statement 
to you before you give the permission. You did not do so. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


818 


818 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is no harm. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I came and subsequently wrote a letter 
but so far as I am concerned you did not say that I should 
furnish you with a copy of my statement before you come to 
the conclusion that you would permit me to make a statement 
and so far as I read rule 128, I do not see. that there is any 
provision therein which requires that a statement should 
be submitted to the Speaker before he gives consent. The 
Prime Minister had asked me for a copy of my statement 
and I have given him a copy of my statement. If you had 
also given me an order that I should submit a copy of my 
statement to you before you come to the conclusion Whether 
I should make it or not, I should have been very glad to do 
so but you gave me no such indication when I came to you. 
I felt the difficulty was that under the rules the statement 
should be made immediately after the question hour and the 
Prime Minister was very keen that I should finish certain 
business which it may not be possible for other; Members 
to undertake because it involves certain difficult matters. 
I agreed to this and then I came to you and said, “Will 
you kindly suspend the rules so that I may help the Prime 
Minister in getting the business through” ? You never said 
that you wanted to see a copy of my statement before’ you 
permitted me and I see that now you have raised this point 
for the first time. 

Pandit Kunzru: May I know whether the Chair can 
claim some sort of censorship as stated by you ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, The kind of censorship which 
the Chair can always exercise is to avoid the matter which 
ought not to be placed before the House, Which is libellous, 
slanderous, irrelevant and so on and so forth, (. Interruption ). 
Order, order, I am only answering the question which was 
put. I can certainly do so. I am not going to allow observations 
of an irrelevant nature and improper statements. I will 
confine myself strictly to rule 128 and if an Hon. Minister 
goes on making a statement on the floor of the House, I am 
entitled to call him to order, if I find that the statement 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


819 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 819 

is lacking in decency or decorum or I otherwise regard it as 
irrelevant. I have always got the power. Otherwise, this rule 
would be meaningless. 

So far as giving the permission to the Hon. Minister is 
concerned, I agree he came to me. Possibly his memory is 
short, but he did not suggest to me that under the rules I 
can suspend the standing orders. I wanted to accommodate 
him and said I would allow him to make a statement at any 
time that he liked and I brought to his notice that I can 
suspend the order. He agreed. Even now during the course of 
his statement if I do not agree and if I feet that a particular 
statement ought not to be made. I can certainly ask that 
portion to be erased from the proceedings of the house. In 
order to avoid all this. I would like to know what exactly 
the statement is. It is not going beyond the rules and the 
scope of my powers. I am prepared to allow him to make a 
statement suspending the rule, that immediately after the 
question hour the statement may be made. It still stands. I 
am not going behind that position and as it is open to me 
while the Hon. Minister is making a statement, to see that 
this kind of matter ought not to be stated on the floor of the 
House. I only asked him, now that there is time, to give me 
a copy of the statement. I learn that he has given a copy to 
the Prime minister, the Leader of the House. But to the hands 
of the Speaker the entire privilege of the house, the honour, 
the decorum and everything is entrusted. Therefore there 
ought to be no difference so far as the Speaker is concerned 
in this matter. I am not going out of the way. I am trying to 
exercise my powers without prejudice either to the dignity of 
the house or of the hon. Members with regard to the freedom 
of making a statement. I will allow the Hon. Minister to make 
the statement at 6 O’clock. 

Shri Kamath: Is it not a fact that under the rules a 
Minister or a Member may be called to order on the ground 
of irrelevance or otherwise, but that the statement should 
not be pre-censored ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is not so, I think under the 
rules I am entitled to see what is the statement that the Hon 
Minister is going to make now. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


820 


820 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I take it that you do not wish me to make 
a statement that is how I interpret your ruling. I am no longer 
a Minister. I am going out. I am not going to submit myself 
to this kind of dictation. 

Pandit Kunzru : May I know when Shri Shyama Prasad 
Mookerjee resigned if he was asked by the Speaker to be 
supplied with a copy of the statement before he made it in 
the House ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He had a talk with the Hon. 
Speaker and he told him what he intended to state on the 
floor of the House. 

All that was discussed in the House. The House will now 
proceed with the next business. 

Pandit Kunzru: A copy of the speech was not supplied 
to him. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That was not necessary. 

Shri Kamath: We have been deprived of the statement 
anyway. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It was left to him. Hon. Members 
are now told that he is not going to make a statement. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


821 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


821 


( 43 ) 

*DR. AMBEDKAR’S LETTER OF RESIGNATION 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I said that at Six O’clock Dr. Ambedkar 
may make his statement if he likes. I do not find him in his 
seat. Under the rules, immediately after the question hour 
is over, any hon. Minister who has resigned can, with the 
consent of the Speaker, be allowed to make a statement. To- 
day the question hour was over this morning after the short- 
notice question and Dr. Ambedkar piloted the Delimitation of 
Constituencies Motions and that is why it could not be done 
immediately when he wanted to make a statement. Thereafter, 
I thought, in keeping with the practice, either he may do it 
immediately after the questions or at the close of the day at 
Six O’clock. Therefore I fixed 6 O’clock. I would be only too 
glad to give him an opportunity now, but he is not here. 

6-00 p.m. 

As regards the copy of his statement, it is true when he 
wanted to make an oral statement, at the time he approached 
me in the Chamber, I could not anticipate and ask him to 
put the thing in writing and give it me. It was not right. 
Therefore I allowed him to make a statement and even said 
that I would suspend the rules, if he could not make the 
statement immediately after the question hour. But this 
morning I found that what he wanted to make by way of 
a statement, he had put it in writing and had given a copy 
to the Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of the House. 
Naturally, I sent word through the Secretary, sufficiently 
in advance or long before he rose to make his statement, 
to send me a copy of the statement. I am sorry to say that 
he would not furnish me with a copy. I do not know why. I 
have to regulate the debate ; not that I wanted to interfere 
with the statement at all. When any statement is read before 


*P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 11th October 1951, pp. 4730-37. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


822 


822 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the house usually the person gives me a copy. I do not know 
the reasons why he declined to do so. 

When he wanted to make a statement I said that he may 
make a statement without any reserve at 6 O’clock but he 
did not choose to do so. I am, therefore, sorry that he did 
not avail himself of the opportunity. I wanted to clear a 
misunderstanding. I had also asked him before he stood on his 
legs to furnish me with a copy, which unfortunately he could 
not furnish. At 6 O’clock whether he furnished me with a copy 
of the statement or not I would have allowed him to make a 
statement orally in this House. He has not chosen to do so. 

Shri Jnani Ram (Bihar): The statement has already 
appeard in the press. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not know. The House will not 
take any notice of it. 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): May I 

say a few words in this connection. It is a matter of regret to 
me, if for no other reason, for the fact that an old colleague 
should part company in the way that he has done today. I 
do not wish to go into the various matters that have arisen 
to which you have referred. I got a copy of that statement at 
9-30 a.m. as I was sitting in my place here, about 45 minutes 
before he actually rose to make it. I read it with some surprise, 
because it was not the kind of statement that I had expected 
from a Minister resigning. However, there it was and it was 
my intention when he made that statement to say a few words, 
because it was not desirable nor permissible under the rules 
to have a debate on such a matter. I should just like, with 
your permission, to read out the letter of resignation sent to 
me and a few other letters exchanged before and after. 

The first letter which I received from him. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): On a point of order, if 
it was the desire of the Chair to give Dr. Ambedkar another 
opportunity then I think instead of the Prime Minister making 
any statement on this issue just now, it would be better to 
wait to see if Dr. Ambedkar is prepared to avail himself of 
the opportunity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


823 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 823 

Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar): We have already got a 
copy in our hands... 

Dr. Deshmukh: If an opportunity is proposed to be 
given... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not know whether any 
hon. Member can speak on behalf of another Member and 
I do not know whether Dr. Deshmukh has any authority 
from Dr. Ambedkar... 

Dr. Deshmukh: Not at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Though he might have resigned 
as a Minister he is still a Member of the House. We 
expect in fairness that when he asked the Deputy Speaker 
to waive notice and the Deputy Speaker had agreed to 
waive notice and fixed 6 O’clock for the statement, we 
expected him to be here and make his representation. It 
was open to him to make the statement or not, but he 
is not in his seat at all. The prime Minister wants to 
make a statement... 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I wish to read out to 
the House his letter of resignation because normally 
a statement by a Minister is related to his letter of 
resignation. 

Dr. Deshmukh: How does it arise, since the statement 
is not there ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It arises this way. We have 
Ministers introduced to the House when a Minister is 
appointed under the direction or on the advice of the 
Prime Minister. It is open to the Prime Minister to read 
the letter of resignation to the House. 

Dr. Deshmukh : It is the privilege of a Member to 
make a statement. If that is lacking I do not know under 
what rules you are proposing to act and how the necessity 
for any other statement arises. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is always open to the Chair to 
allow any statement to be made on behalf of the Government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


824 


824 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Deshmukh: I do not object to that. I want to point 
out how it arises out of the situation that arose this morning. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Government wants to make 
an explanation regarding a particular matter and where all 
persons are interested an opportunity should be given. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : As you know, Sir, so far as 
I am concerned I was expecting him to make his statement 
and if I may say so with all respect. I did not know that 
the statement would not be made then or that you would 
fix another time for it. I did not expect the developments as 
they occurred. But since this has happened and the statement 
has been published in the press or is going to be, I think the 
House would be interested greatly in the letters exchanged. 
I am not referring to the statement in the least, but I am 
referring to the letters exchanged between Dr. Ambedkar 
and myself. 

The first letter he wrote to me does not refer to his 
resignation and is dated the 10th August 1951. It reads : 

New Delhi. 

10th August 1951. 

My dear Prime Minister, 

My health is causing a great deal of anxiety to me and to 
my doctors. They have been pressing that I must allow them 
a longer period of about a month for continuous treatment 
and that such treatment cannot now be postponed without 
giving rise to further complications. I am most anxious that 
the Hindu Code Bill should be disposed of before I put myself 
in the hands of my doctors. I would, therefore, like to give the 
Hindu Code Bill a higher priority by taking it up on the 16th 
of August and finish it by the 1st of September if opponents 
do not practice obstructive tactics. You know I attach the 
greatest importance to this measure and would be prepared 
to undergo any strain on my health to get the Bill through. 
But if the strain could be avoided by getting through the Bill 
earlier I am sure you will have no objection. In proposing 
16th August, I am allowing priority to all urgent Bills such 
as those relating to the Punjab, the Ordinances and Shri 
Gopalaswami Ayyangar’s Bill relating to Part C. States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


825 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 825 

I write this because I heard that in the last Party meeting 
you are reported to have said that the Bill may be taken 
up in the first week of September. I am sure that that was 
merely your suggestion. It was not your decision. 

With kind regards. 

Yours sincerly, 

Sd/- B. R Ambedkar. 

I wrote to him the same day : 


10th August 1951. 

My dear Ambedkar, 

I wrote to you yesterday about the Hindu Code Bill. Today 
I got your letter of the 10th. 

I am sorry that your health is causing anxiety. I suggest 
that you take things a little easy. 

About the Hindu Code Bill, you know that we have a good 
deal of opposition not only inside the House but outside. With the 
best will in the world, we cannot brush aside this opposition and 
get things done quickly. They have it in their power to delay a 
great deal. We must therefore proceed with some tact and with 
a view to achieve results. I am anxious that the Bill should be 
passed in this Session. 

The Cabinet decision was, and I think it was recorded in 
the minutes, that the Bill should be taken up at the beginning 
of September. I mentioned that at the Party Meeting and they 
agreed. For us to try to hasten it and bring it earlier would 
needlessly give a handle to our opponents and create trouble. 
Also it would be far more advantageous to have it early in 
September, after we have finished with some of the important 
Bills — the ordinances, the Part C States Bill, the Industry Bill. 

If we try to have the Hindu Code Bill before any of these, again 
that will create a furore and give a handle to others. I think 
that, taking everything into consideration, it is far better to stick 
to the dates we have announced and then go ahead with it. We 
shall be able to do so then with greater vigour and somewhat 
less opposition. Parliament is going to sit till at least the 1st 
week of October. So there is plenty of time. 

Yours sincerly, 
Sd/-Jawaharlal Nehru. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


826 


826 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On the 27th September I received the following letter of 
resignation : 

“For a long time I have been thinking of resigning my seat from 
the Cabinet. The only thing that had held me back from giving 
effect to my intention was the hope that it would be possible to 
give effect to the Hindu Code Bill before the life of the present 
Parliament came to an end. I even agreed to break up the Bill 
and restrict it to marriage and divorce in the fond hope that at 
least this much of our labour may bear fruit. But even this part 
of the Bill has been killed. I see no purpose in my continuing to 
be a member of your Cabinet. 

I would like my resignation to take effect immediately. The 
only possible consideration that may come in the way of your 
accepting my resignation is the fact that there are certain Bills 
and Motions standing in my name and which have not yet been 
finished. But I feel that my absence may not be felt because these 
Bills and Motions can be put through by any other Minister of 
your Cabinet. However, if you wish that I should put then through 
before my resignation takes effect, I shall be prepared to stay on 
till they are finished but only till then. For I do not wish to deny 
the civility I owe to you and the Cabinet. In that event I would 
request that the Bills and Motions standing in my name should 
be given priority over others.” 

My reply dated the same day, that is the 27th September: — 

“I have your letter of the 27th September. Two days ago news of 
your resignation appeared in the press and I was rather mystified. 

At the beginning of the session you spoke to me about your ill- 
health and I know of course that you have not been keeping well. 

In view of your ill-health and your desire to resign from the 
Cabinet. I cannot press you to stay on. I should like to express, 
however, my appreciation of our comradeship during these years 
since we have worked together in the Cabinet. We have differed 
sometimes, but that has not affected my appreciation of the good 
work that you had done. I am sorry indeed that you will be going 
away. 

I can quite understand your great disappointment at the fact 
that the Hindu Code Bill could not be passed in this session and 
that even the Marriage and Divorce part of it had ultimately to 
be postponed. I know very well how hard you have laboured at it 
and how keenly you have felt about it. Although I have not been 
intimately connected with this Bill, I have been long convinced 
of its necessity and I was anxious that it should be passed. I 
tried my utmost, but the fates and the rules of Parliament were 
against us. It seemed clear to me that nothing that we could do 
could get it through during this session. Personally, I shall not 
give up this fight because I think it is intimately connected with 
any progress on any front that we desire to make. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


827 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


827 


You say that you would like your resignation to take effect 
immediately. But you are good enough to suggest that you might 
stay on till some of the Bills and Motions standing in your name 
are dealt with. I shall look into this matter. In any event this 
session is going to last only till the 6th of October, that is a little 
more than a week from today. There is not much room left for 
priorities during a few days. We shall try to push in your Bills 
and Motions as soon as possible. I hope therefore that you will 
stay on till the end of the session. 

With all good wishes to you”. 

To that he sent an answer on the 1st October: — 

“I am in receipt of your letter dated the 28th September 
1951, in which you have informed me of the acceptance of my 
resignation. Since you desire me to continue in office till the 
end of this session, which I understand will terminate on the 
6th instant. I am prepared to fall in line with your wishes in 
this behalf. 

I also like to inform you that on the 6th October 1951 I 
propose to make a statement in Parliament which a retiring 
Minister usually does.” 

My reply dated 3rd October was, — 

“You can certainly make a statement in the house on the 
last day of the session. I do not know yet when the last day 
will be. It seems most unlikely that it would be the 6th October. 

It, is possible that I might also like to make some statement 
following yours. I should be grateful, therefore, if you could send 
me a copy of the statement you intend to make.” 

Dr. Ambedkar’s letter of 4th October: 

“I am in receipt of your letter No dated October 3, 1951. 

You have said that I should make a statement in the House 
on the last day of the Session. Does this mean that I should 
not make my statement on the 6th. If the 6th does not happen 
to be the last day of the Session ? I should like to have a clear 
idea about the day on which I am to make my statement. For 
I have to inform the Deputy Speaker. 

I observe that you wish to make a statement following mine. 
It is not customary to make a statement such as the one you 
propose to do. You are free to exercise any right which the Rules 
of Business give you. Personally I will raise no objection to your 
making a statement following mine. Regarding your request for 
an advance copy of my statement, as you know, I am not in the 
habit of writing out my speeches’ or my statement. So far I have 
not written out the text of my statement. If I find time to write 
out my statement in time. I shall be glad to send you an advance 
copy thereof. How far in advance I am of course unable to say.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


828 


828 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
My letter to Dr. Ambedkar, dated 4th October: — 

“Your letter of the 4th October. It is clear to me that the 
session will last at least till October 11th. I informed the House 
so. If it suits you, you can make a statement on that day. 

As regards my making a statement, I have not definitely 
decided to do so. But I thought perhaps I might like to say a 
few words on that occasion.” 

Dr. Ambedkar’s letter, also dated the 4th October: — 

“As suggested in your letter No. 3373-PM dated 4th October. 

I am agreeable to your proposal and will make my statement in 
the Parliament on the 11th October. I have spoken to the Deputy 
Speaker and he has agreed to allow me to make my statement 
on that date after the business standing in my name, namely 
the Delimitation Order, is finished.” 

That was the last letter, Sir. 


*Shri Kamath : Before we proceed further, may I have 
your permission to ask whether yesterday, Dr. Ambedkar, 
who is now present in the House, was informed that the 
correspondence between him and the Prime Minister was 
going to be read in the House ? It was only fair, — and 
courtesy to the Minister demanded it — that he should 
have been informed that his correspondence was going to 
be read. If he was not informed, the House ought to know 
why he was not informed. I do not know whether he was 
informed or not. He might tell the House whether he was 
informed or not. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am not primarily concerned with 
all that. When the spokesman of Government wants to read 
out certain papers in connection with this, I naturally allow 
that. Apart from that, I fixed 6 O’clock for Dr. Ambedkar 
to make his statement. At that time, he was not present 
in his seat. Then, all relevant matters relating to that and 
these letters were read. It was expected ; therefore no special 
notice need be given. 


*P. D., Vol. 16, Part II, 12th October 1951, pp. 4751-53. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


829 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 829 

Shri Kamath : But, was the other party to the 
correspondence informed ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If he chooses to be absent, what 
can be done ? 

Shri Kamath: He left the Chamber, saying that he 
had resigned. Would he have been permitted to make a 
statement as an ex-Minister ? I think he was not told that 
at 6 O’clock the correspondence would be read. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Making a statement is not as a 
Minister, not while in office, but after resigning. Whatever 
may be the point of time, one minute after resignation, he 
ceases to be a Minister; he is an ex-Minister. According to 
the rules, a Member who has resigned his office of Minister 
may, with the consent of the Speaker make a personal 
statement in explanation of his resignation. The moment he 
resigns and it is accepted by the Prime Minister, whatever 
may be those rules, I am not concerned with that, when 
he resigns and wants to make a statement, he does not 
make a statement as a Minister. At that time, he is only 
an ex-Minister. I would not allow any surprises to be 
sprung upon me. If the hon. Member wanted to raise any 
question, if he had either talked to me in chamber or told 
me in advance. I would have referred to these matters. 
Let us not continue this further. 

Shri Kamath: May I submit, again, that this surprise 
was sprung yesterday by the correspondence being read. 
As Dr. Ambedkar is present today, will you permit him, if 
he so desires, to make a statement on the correspondence 
read out yesterday ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am aware that the hon. 
Member is quite able to take care of himself. All I wish to 
say is that I cannot answer hypothetical propositions here. 
Therefore, if the hon. Member wants to do any particular 
thing himself, if he himself is anxious or wants to make 
a statement or do something like that, I shall consider 
the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


830 


830 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar (Bombay): I only want to make just two 
observations, with your permission. When I left the chamber, 
I think I was quite sure that I left the impression upon the 
House and upon yourself that I would not be prepared to 
make the statement at six o’clock. I think I made that quite 
clear. I am not asking for an opportunity now, or saying 
that I feel injured by the prime Minister having read out the 
correspondence at six o’clock, knowing full well that I had 
stated clearly in the morning that I was not going to obey 
the observations that you had made, that I should make a 
statement at six o’clock. Whether it was justified on the part 
of the Prime Minister or not I leave it to you, without first 
informing me that he was reading out the correspondence. 
That I leave to you and the Prime Minister, because I know 
there are other channels open to me of correcting any wrong 
impression that the correspondence might have made. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is always open to the hon. 
Member to change his mind: but I had fixed six o’clock and 
six o’clock stands. Therefore I was observing that the hon. 
Member was not in his seat at six o’clock. 

• • 


(Dr. ambedkar’s statement in explanation of his resignation from the Cabinet 
was distributed to the Press and also to the Members of Parliament which 
has been included as Annexure I in Part II of Vol. 14 in this Series — Ed.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


831 


SECTION VII 

19th May 1952 
TO 

6th December 1956 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


832 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


SECTION VII 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

44. Thanks on address by the President 

45. Budget (General) 1952-53 General Discussion 

46. Andhra State Bill, 1953 

47. Estate Duty Bill, 1953 

48. International Situation 

49. Government order on Bank Disputes 

50. Report of Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and 

Tribes for 1953 

51. Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill, 1954 

52. Untouchability Offences Bill, 1954 

53. Constitution (Fourth amendment) Bill, 1954 

54. States Reorganisation Bill, 1956 

55. Obituaries reference — Demise of 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 


Pages 

835-840 

841-850 

851-864 

865-873 

874-886 

887-894 

895-918 

919-924 

925-943 

944-961 

962-973 

974-983 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


834 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


835 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


835 


( 44 ) 

THANKS ON ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT 

*Mr. Chairman : All I can say is that there are certain 
amendments which by no stretch of imagination can be brought 
under discussion of matters referred to in the President’s 
Address. There are certain questions like food production, land 
revenue, foreign policy and preventive detention which are 
referred to in the President’s Address and the amendments 
which have a bearing on them may be moved. 

Shri H. P. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh) : Have all the 
amendments that have been presented been admitted or not ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : The procedure followed in 
the Provisional Parliament was this. Perhaps it is not a new 
thing. It is going on for the last two or three years since the 
Constitution has come into operation. As far as I remember — 
there are many Members of the Lower House; they will correct 
me — the procedure followed by the Speaker of the House of 
the People was that he would allow all the amendments to be 
moved in the beginning. Of course, those were amendments 
that could be admitted. Subsequently, he called upon the 
proposer of the different amendments to make speeches in 
support of their amendments. It was always understood that 
because a person has moved his amendment, he necessarily 
will not have any right to speak. But the Speaker, out of 
consideration for the fact that certain gentlemen had indicated 
their intention to move an amendment, did allow them a chance 
of making a speech. That was the procedure that he adopted. 
I think the same procedure might be adopted here also. 

With regard to one other observation, I should like to say 
with the deepest respect that in making the reference to what 


* Parliamentary Debates (Council of States) Vol. I,’ 19th May 1952, pp. 81-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


836 


836 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

happens in the House of Commons, you indicated that only 
those amendments which refer to subjects which have been 
expressly mentioned in the Address of the President would 
be admitted. With all respect I think that the rule ought 
to be the other way round. The purport of a debate on the 
Address is this. Government is pleased to inform the House, 
through the Address of the President, the subjects to which 
they allot what may be called priority or urgency. Article 87 of 
the Constitution of India says that the purport of the debate 
on the Address of the President is to inform Parliament of 
the causes of its summons. The purport of the Debate on the 
Address is to let the Opposition tell the Government what are 
the purposes which they ought to have included. Therefore, 
any subject which is not included in the Address of the 
President, for that very reason becomes a matter of urgency, 
because, Members of the Opposition may feel that Government 
has given priority and urgency to matters which they think 
important but which, in the opinion of the Opposition, are 
less important than other matters. Secondly, I submit that 
merely because an amendment refers to a subject which 
has not been referred to in the Address of the President, it 
should not on that account be ruled out. But the Opposition 
should be given an opportunity to discuss and to place before 
Government any particular subject, which is the subject matter 
of the amendment, as a matter of urgency which must be 
given priority over subjects which have been spoken of by 
the President in his Address. I thought I should make these 
observations so that you might be in a position to regulate 
the procedure about the amendments. 

The LEADER of the COUNCIL (Shri N. Gopalswami): 

I greatly sympathise with the point of view which has been 
urged by my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Nobody is “Honourable” in this 
House any longer. 

Shri N. Gopalswami : I referred to him as “my hon. 
friend”. That is not taboo. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


837 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 837 

Sir, the real point for our consideration on this question is 
whether the Constitution and the rules that have been framed 
for the procedure of this House permit of giving effect to the 
suggestion that has been made by my hon. Friend. 


*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): I had originally thought 
not to participate in this debate, because I felt that it was 
right and proper that the new Members of this House who 
are sitting on the front Opposite Bench ought to be given 
the fullest chance to express their views on these important 
matters dealt with in the speech of the President. But some 
of my friends said that it would be useful if I said what I 
felt about the two important matters which undoubtedly loom 
large before the minds of some Members of the House at any 
rate and a large majority of the public. The first matter which 
looms large is obviously the matter of food. There can be no 
doubt that this country has found itself in the grip of one 
of the biggest problems that it has ever been called upon to 
face. Sir, as a younger boy, I had witnessed famines myself 
because my father was engaged as some kind of a cashier to 
pay the wages of many people who were engaged in famine 
relief work. I was living with him as a young boy and I could 
see the condition of the famine -striken people. As a student of 
economics I had the opportunity of reading those magnificent, 
books by one of the greatest Indian civil servants namely, 
Romesh Chandra Dutt, who had given a complete picture of 
the periodical famines that had taken place in this country, 
right from the beginning when the British came to occupy. 
But, Sir, remembering all this past history, my imagination 
cannot recall anything that I have seen or anything that I 
have read in any way comparable to the condition that we 
see today. I think it would not be an exaggeration to say that 
there was a time when there were famines but they occurred 
sometime at an interval of 10, 15 or 20 years. Today we have 
reached a stage when there is a famine almost every month in 
this country. This month there is a famine in Bihar, another 
month there is a famine in Rayalaseema, a third month there 


* P. D. (Council of States) Vol. I, 21st May 1952, pp. 266-69. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


838 


838 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is a famine in some other part of the country. I think it 
would be impossible for any person who reads newspapers 
to say that any month has passed when there has not been 
a famine in this country. I was quite interested to listen to 
the argument which has been urged by some Members of the 
Congress Party that the Opposition should not be too hard on 
the Government. The Opposition must remember that when 
the British left, they left this country as an empty shell, with 
the resources undeveloped, with the people of this country 
untrained for economic production. Those arguments, if I 
may say so with all respect, are without substance. It may 
probably pass muster in this House or may pass muster with 
those who are inclined towards the party in this House. But 
I should like to tell even my friends who are sitting on the 
Opposite side that this excuse will not go down for a long 
time with the people 

An hon. Member : You were yourself in the Government 
once. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Don’t you recollect my past. I am 
now a divorcee. What I want to tell my friends on the other 
side is that this excuse will not serve them for a long time. 
No hungry man is going to be sympathetic to a critic who is 
going to tell him “My dear fellow, although I am in power, 
although I am in authority, although I possess all legal power 
to set matters right, you must not expect me to do a miracle 
because I have inherited a past which is very inglorious.” If 
this Government will not produce results within a certain 
time, long before the people become so frustrated, so disgusted 
with Government as not to have any Government at all, 
a time will come when I suppose unless we in Parliament 
realise our responsibilities and shoulder the task of looking 
after the welfare and good of the people within a reasonable 
time, I have not the slightest doubt in my own mind that this 
Parliament will be treated by the public outside with utter 
contempt. It would be a thing not wanted at all. 

Sir, the situation has been greatly aggravated by the 
sudden decision the Government has taken with regard to this 
subsidy. The subsidy is in another way an additional project 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


839 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 839 

which the Government has undertaken to relieve the people 
against the high cost of living. The subsidy, so far as our 
information goes, has been in operation 

Shri B. B. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): What percentage of 
the population does the hon. Member want to be subsidised 
for food ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, my submission is this that 
he will not want me to go into the details of the rationing 
system. I do not want to go into details as to how the 
population should be classified so that we might be in a 
position to say that the following classes shall be subsidised 
and the following classes shall not be subsidised. That 
information Government has not placed before us. If the 
Government places that information before us, I certainly 
will be able to make such contribution as I can make to 
that proposal. For the moment I am saying this, that this 
reversal of the policy of giving subsidy seems to me an 
absolutely new thing. I find that from 1946-47, when the 
subsidy made was 22 crores, it has increased in 1951-52 to 
36 crores. In the last Budget which the Finance Minister 
presented to the Provisional Parliament for the purpose 
of obtaining a vote on account, he had estimated that the 
subsidy which he might be prepared to give in this year 
would come to about 25 crores. That was the estimate that 
he had made. I am sure about it that at the time when 
he presented the Budget he must have been ready in his 
mind to commit himself to that magnitude of expenditure. 
Suddenly thereafter we find this sudden change. Some 
reasons have been given. One reason is that the subsidy 
would come to about 55 crores. Some Members have said 
it would be about 90 crores. I do not know what the 
correct figure exactly is.. But I do want to say that even 
in the last Provisional Parliament, when the Budget was 
presented, Government was agreeable to take upon itself 
the responsibility of a subsidy to the extent of 25 crores. I 
do not quite understand why the Government has stepped 
aside from that promise, from that obligation. There are 
of course 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


840 


840 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: Your time is up. You can take one or two 
minutes more. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have something else to say. It will 
not be possible for me to finish within the one or two minutes 
that you are very gracious to give me. I will stop here. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


841 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


841 


( 45 ) 

BUDGET (GENERAL) 1952-53 GENERAL 
DISCUSSION 

* Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): Mr. Chairman, I propose 
to begin from the point from which I had to leave off, before, 
my observations on the President’s Address. The House will 
remember that when I had to break off, I was dealing with 
the question of food subsidy. Today I find myself in a much 
better position to deal with the matter, because in the interval 
we have had a statement from the Finance Minister justifying 
why he has taken what might be called a ‘political roundabout’. 
The explanation that the Finance Minister has given is 
an explanation which I think is more intended to frighten 
people from demanding any subsidy with regard to food. His 
explanation is this, that if he at all must do anything in the 
matter of food subsidy, he must do it in a manner so that 
he might be able to maintain the price level at the level it 
stood in the last year. That is, I believe, his starting premise. 
And then he develops this premise by saying that if on the 
basis that the subsidy is given only if he maintains the last 
year’s price level, if the subsidy is to be confined to industrial 
areas, he would be required to pay Rs. 60 crores; and if that 
subsidy is to be extended to the rural area, he will be required 
to pay Rs. 90 crores. Obviously if these figures are correct, 
they are quite calculated to moderate the spirit of the great 
enthusiasts who want some kind of food subsidy to be given, 
so that the misery of the cosuming classes may be alleviated 
to some extent. So far as I understand, nobody has pitched his 
flag so high as it has been represented to be by the Finance 
Minister. So far as I have been able to pursue the discussion 
that has been taking place in the various newspapers, nobody 
has said that you must give subsidy to such an extent 
and on such a magnitude that the price level of this year 
would be the same as the price level of last year. Nobody is 


* P. D. Vol. I of 1952, 27th May 1952, pp. 469-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


842 


842 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

demanding that. Secondly, Sir, with regard to the question 
of the rural demand which has been put forth by the Hon. 
the Finance Minister as a ground for refusing subsidy, I am 
sorry to say that he has now agreed to accept that contention 
when the same has been urged upon him for the last several 
years and which he has repudiated all along. I am sure that 
it has been the demand of the provincial Ministers that if 
you are giving subsidy, you must not make a discrimination 
between the industrial population and the rural population. 
You must give subsidy to all or you must give subsidy to none. 
That has been an old old argument. But I do not remember 
a single Finance Minister or a single Food Minister — and we 
have had a series of them one after the other — having ever 
agreed to that proposition. It has always been the policy or 
the contention of the Government of India that in the matter 
of allocating subsidy, certain classification must be made. A 
classification must be made 

The Minister for Finance (Shri C. D. Deshmukh): On 

a point of information, Sir. The system of subsidy whereby 
only industrial towns were subsidized was adopted only last 
year. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, the demand that the subsidy 
should be extended to the rural area is not a new thing at 
all. No Government of India, so far as I remember, has ever 
agreed to that demand. 

Shri C. D. Deshmukh: What I meant was that before 
last year the subsidy was given to rural as well as urban 
areas; so, no such contention could have been made. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: If that is so, then it is all the 
worse for the Finance Minister, I should say if in the past 
you have accepted the demand that subsidy should be given 
to all, then I do not quite understand why you should resile 
from that position now. 

Shri H. N. Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): Whatever may be 
the demand, he has said in this connection that subsidy was 
given not merely to industrial centres, but to all urban and 
rural areas. Is that a fact ? Was subsidy given to those rural 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


843 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 843 

areas where there was a large heavy deficit in the country as 
a whole, in accordance with the recommendation of the first 
Food Policy Committee ? 

Shri C. D. Deshmukh: My point was that the subsidy 
was not confined only to the industrial areas except during 
last year. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: My contention has been that because 
you cannot do the very best, let not the better be the enemy 
of the good. Do whatever good you can; if you cannot do it 
better, the country will be prepared to excuse you, because 
of your limited resources. But because you are not preparing 
to do even the good, when you agree to do it, by making a 
provision of Rs. 25 crores in the Budget, I think the public 
will have a legitimate right to complain. 

Sir, I would like to draw the attention of the Finance 
Minister to what the Chancellor of the Exchenquer has 
done in England in the course of his Budget. He knows, I 
think, much better than I do. I have collected my facts from 
newspapers and other magazines where I have been able 
to find a certain analysis of the Budget presented by the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer to the House of Commons. Now, 
Sir, confining our attention to the matter of food subsidy, 
I find that in the year 1950 in England, the food subsidy 
was £480 million. In the last Budget the subsidy has been 
reduced — there has been a cut of £160 million. Well, so far 
as this part of the Budget of the Chancellor of the Exchequer 
is concerned, probably the Hon. Finance Minister may take 
comfort in the fact that after all he is not doing something 
different from what the Chancellor of the Exchequer has done 
in England. But if you look at the other side of the picture 
of the Budget presented by the Chancellor of the Exchequer 
in England — taking the other side, the counter-blancing 
proposals of the Chancellor in England, — I find that while 
the subsidy has been reduced, there has been an increase in 
income-tax relief to the extent of £2.228 million. Secondly, 
there has been an increase in family allowances to the extent 
of £37 million. There has been a considerable increase in 
pensions. There has been an enormous increase in the housing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


844 


844 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

subsistence. Now, all these reliefs which have been provided 
for by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his Budget 
beyond question have the effect of increasing the purchasing 
power of the consumer. If there is so much increase in the 
purchasing power of the consuming community, it matters 
very little if the subsidy has been reduced by £167 million. 

What are the reliefs that our Hon. Friend the Finance 
Minister has provided for in his Budget ? Nothing. The 
level of taxation, whether of direct or indirect character, is 
just the same. The purchasing power of the people remains 
where it was. In addition to that, he is now increasing the 
cost of food. This I find to be a fundamental difference in 
the approach of the Hon. Finance Minister to the problems 
of the people and that of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. 
I think my Hon. friend the Finance Minister may well 
consider whether he might not copy something from what 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer proposes to do in England 
for increasing the welfare of the people. 

Now, Sir, I have not been able to exactly understand 
what position the Hon. Finance Minister proposes to take. 
9-00 a.m. But I want to put it in the best light because I 
know he is an honest person with the greatest 
good of the people at his heart. What is he trying to do ? 
So far as I have been able to understand the policy of the 
Government of India with regard to food, I do not think 
that the Hon. Finance Minister is opposed to subsidy. If 
I put his position correctly as I understand it, he is in 
favour of subsidy, but his position seems to be that the 
subsidy instead of being granted to the consumer ought 
to be granted to the producer, either in the form of grow 
more food grants or in some other way. His object, logically 
speaking — I do not find any difficulty in accepting its 
validity — is that if you produce more food in the country, 
prices will fall, consumers will benefit and subsidy to the 
consumer may then not be necessary. I believe that I have 
stated his position somewhat correctly if I have understood 
it. He wants subsidy, but he wants it to be given to the 
producer and not to the consumer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


845 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 845 

Well, Sir, that may be one kind of approach, different 
though it may be from the line of approach which some of us 
take. The question I think that we have to ask with regard 
to this attitude is this : Which is going to benefit the people 
quickly ? So far as this subsidy for the grow more food policy 
is concerned, I do not think that it could be contended by the 
Government that that subsidy has been of any consequence 
so far as the production of food is concerned. I think it is not 
necessary for Members of the Opposition to cite any authority 
when we know as a matter of fact that the Reserve Bank, in 
one of the investigations which it undertook, reported that the 
grow more food policy has been a complete failure. Obviously, 
therefore, the policy of not giving subsidy to the consumer, but 
giving it to the producer, has not produced the effect desired 
by the Hon. Finance Minister. 

The second thing which I find why this emphasis on the 
grow more food has failed is because of the contradictory policy 
which the Food Department or the Government of India, has 
been following. On the one hand, they have been giving subsidy 
to farmers and others to provide more food. At the same time, 
they are giving encouragement for the production of what are 
called cash crops, which are every moment competing with 
the production of food. A farmer finds it much more to his 
advantage to produce cotton-seeds, black pepper and things 
of that sort. He does not care for the growing of more food. 
Surely, if the Government’s objective — and firm objective — is 
to produce food, Government ought to have taken some steps 
in order to curb the tendency on the part of the farmers to 
produce something other than food. That, Government has not 
done. The result is that we have in this country two competing 
economic activities so far as agriculture is concerned, the cash 
crops versus food production. 

The result is that notwithstanding the Grow More Food 
Campaign and the amount of money that has been spent, we 
have not been able to produce more food so as to make any 
impression upon the food prices. The question that I would 
like to ask the Hon. the Finance Minister is this. Would he 
or would he not realise that if his object is to reduce prices 
by the production of more food, and if that object has failed, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


846 


846 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

would he still continue to penalise the consumer and not 
give him any subsidy or offer him any kind of relief from 
the distress from which he is suffering ? That is the point. 
There is no dispute that some kind of subsidy is necessary in 
this country in the situation in which we find ourselves. The 
whole question is, at what point the blood may be supplied, 
at what point the subsidy may be given, to the producer or 
the consumer. I make this observation in the hope that the 
Hon. the Finance Minister will reconsider the line that he 
has been pursuing, namely, that our immediate problem could 
be solved more by giving subsidy to the producer and not to 
the consumer. He may succeed. As we know, originally, our 
Government, when I was a member of it, had announced that 
we must achieve self-sufficiency by the year 1952. Our Prime 
Minister, day in and day out, emphasised that after 1952 we 
shall not import a single grain of food from outside. Today, 
I think I am right in saying that the Government of India 
have realisd that reaching self-sufficiency in 1952 was an 
idle dream. They have now proclaimed that we will achieve 
it by 1956. God only knows. The target is always receding; 
it goes back and back. We do not know for how many years 
the consumers in this country will have to undergo this agony 
and allow the Finance Minister and the Minister of Food to 
delay the thing, by trying as if in a laboratory, the various 
ideas, the various proposals and the various schemes they 
have in their mind. I do not wish to dilate upon this subject 
any more. 

Sir, I would now say a few words with regard to the General 
Budget as a whole. The Budget undoubtedly in every country is 
an expression of the function which a Government undertakes 
towards its people. There was once a time in this country when 
the function of the British Government was to collect taxes 
and to maintain law and order. The welfare of the public, 
the well-being of the people, their educational advancement, 
public health, unemployment, or any of those remedies and 
reliefs, which were now found functioning on such a large 
scale in the Budgets of the various European countries, had 
no place. Not only they had no place in the Government but 
the Government itself had not accepted any liability on that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


847 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 847 

account. We thought and we hoped that when this country 
became independent, that aspect of the matter would change, 
that the Government would not be merely a Government of 
an agency to collect taxes and a magistrate to punish people 
for wrongful action, that the Government would do something 
more, that the Government would assume the function which 
all civilised Governments have assumed in the 20th century. 
Sir, can anyone scanning the Budget which has been presented 
to this House say that they can find any trace of any other 
functions, which all modern civilised nations and States 
assume to themselves, reflected in the Budget of the Finance 
Minister ? I can find nothing. We are still repeating the old 
history of the British, namely, to collect taxes, to punish 
offenders. No provision is made for all the social benefits which 
are conferred upon the poorer and the lower classes in other 
countries in the world. I want to ask the Hon. the Finance 
Minister : “Can he promise us, as he had been promising in 
the case of the food subsidy, that we will be self-sufficient in 
food in 1952, if not in 1952 it shall come in 1956, if not in 
1956 it shall come in the year 1960 ?” There is some hope, so 
long as there is a fixed day or a promised day of the arrival 
of the new regime. Can he tell us that we can tread upon 
the path foreign countries have been following so far as social 
services are concerned ? He has said none. The whole thing in 
the Budget, to put it in a nut- shell — it has been put, I know, 
by other speakers before me — the crux of the whole matter 
in this country is that the Army is eating up into the vitals 
of the funds that are necessary for the well-being of this 
country. We have, in a total Budget of Rs. 404 crores, a sum 
of nearly Rs. 200 crores spent on the Army. It is difficult to 
understand this position. Sir, when peace came, an order of 
demobolisation was passed. It was decided by the then British 
Government that the Army of India shall be reduced. What 
do we find ? We find that in the year 1947, the revenue of the 
Government of India was somewhere about Rs. 172 crores. I 
am speaking of the Budget for the 8 months that was then 
presented from August 1947 to April 1948. The Military 
Budget then was Rs. 90 crores. Our revenue today has grown 
to Rs. 404 crores, and our military expenditure has also grown 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


848 


848 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to nearly Rs. 200 crores. It is an extraordinary thing that 
as your revenue rises, your military expenditure also rises. 
My view was that the reverse should be the process, that 
your military expenditure ought to go down. If you can 
reduce the military expenditure by a modest sum of Rs. 50 
crores, how much good we can do to our people ? We can 
apply this reduction of Rs. 50 crores in the Army Budget to 
river valley projects. The Damodar Valley Project could be 
completed within 3 years out of our revenue Budget instead 
of having to go to foreign countries for aid. If we could spend 
that amount of Rs. 50 crores out of the military Budget for 
the betterment of our own people, what amount of good we 
can achieve ? But I have not been able to understand why 
the Government of India has been consistently and regularly 
increasing the military Budget. Sir, it is an extraordinary 
thing from another point of view. We have been told that our 
foreign policy is a policy of peace and friendship. My hon. 
Friend, Diwan Chaman Lall, called it the Nehru doctrine. 
If that is the object of the Nehru doctrine, it is a welcome 
doctrine provided it was observed by all. Now, if the object 
of the foreign policy of this country is to maintain friendship 
and peace throughout the world, I want to know who are our 
enemies against whom we want to maintain this huge army 
at a huge cost of Rs. 197 crores. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): Our next door 
neighbour. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I do not know that. If we were 
informed that our relations with certain foreign countries 
were not happy, that there might be any time a danger 
to our safety and to our security, it would be possible for 
most of us to agree that rather than wait for the arrival of 
the danger, we should keep the Army ready so that in an 
emergency we may face the danger squarely. But we are 
told that we have no enemy at all in this world. Then, why 
this army is maintained, I do not quite know. Secondly, the 
only possible enemy, if one may use that world, is probably 
Pakistan. And that too, on account of Kashmir. Now, with 
regard to Kashmir, I hope that this House will have a full 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


849 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 849 

opportunity of discussing that question. I did not have time 
to say anything, nor did I think it right to spend just a few 
moments on a problem so great as that of Kashmir. But surely 
the matter is within the charge of the U.N.O., and I do not 
think that Pakistan would be so foolish as to invade Kashmir 
or to invade this country in the teeth of the U.N.O. decision 
on the subject. Therefore, again, why are you maintaining 
this Army? I am quite unable to understand the point. 

Then, Sir, on our part we never seem to be able to realise 
that the sooner we settle this Kashmir problem the better 
for us, because if the excuse for this enormous is increase 
in our Defence Budget is to be attributed to the Kashmir 
tangle, is it not our duty to do something, to contribute 
something, positively in order to bring that dispute to an 
end ? I cannot expatiate on the subject, but so far as I have 
been able to study the part played by the Government of 
India in connection with the negotiations that have been 
taking place on the settlement of the Kashmir issue, I am 
sorry to say that I have not read a single word which I 
can describe as a positive and not a negative suggestion on 
the part of the Government of India to settle this question. 
All that they are dealing with is the question of military 
allotment. The question of plebiscite is in no way new in the 
history of the world. One need not go back to the ancient 
past to find precedents for settling questions of this sort by 
plebiscite. After the First World War, I certainly remember 
there were two questions to be settled by plebiscite. One 
w as the question of Upper Silesia and the other was the 
question of Alsace-Lorraine. Both these questions were 
settled by plebiscite, and I am sure that my hon. Friend 
Shri Gopalaswami Ayyangar, with his mature wisdom and 
sagacity, must be knowing of this. It is not possible for us 
to borrow something from the line of action taken by the 
League of Nations with regard to the plebiscite in Upper 
Silesia and Alsace-Lorraine which we can usefully carry into 
the Kashmir dispute and have the matter settled quickly so 
that we can release Rs. 50 crores from the Defence Budget 
and utilise it for the benefit of our people ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


850 


850 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I do not want to say much more, but I do want to say that 
most of us are feeling very keenly that the Defence Budget 
is the greatest stumbling block in the path of the welfare of 
this country. 

There is one other thing to which I would like to draw the 
attention of the Finance Minister. He has already indicated 
in the course of his Budget speech that the prospect for this 
country, so far as taxation is concerned in the future, is not 
a very happy one. He himself has admitted that our income- 
tax revenue would not remain at the same level at which 
it has remained for the last two years. He knows very well 
that the export duty, which forms a very large part of the 
present revenue of the country, is no longer to be regarded 
as a permanent part of the revenue structure of this country. 
Export duties, which in all countries are of an unusual sort, 
extraordinary in their character, never can be regarded as 
a natural part of the tax structure of a country and depend 
upon conditions in foreign countries. The moment those 
conditions vary, you have got to vary the tax. You may meet 
with a situation where you may have to abandon such duties 
completely. The fear which I feel on account of the prospect 
in the decline of revenue is this : How is the Finance Minister 
going to make good the losses that might occur by the reduction 
of certain items on the revenue side ? Will he cut into the 
Defence Department’s Budget, or will he cut into the Budgets 
of the other Departments which are ministering to the social 
welfare of the people ? I have no idea. If the opinion in favour 
of the retention of the armed forces at the present level of 
expenditure prevails, our conditions, so far as the welfare 
of the people are concerned, will deteriorate considerably. I 
want the Finance Minister to take note of this fact and tell 
us something about what he would do when such a prospect 
presents itself to him in the concrete. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


851 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


851 


( 46 ) 

* ANDHRA STATE BILL, 1953 
Mr. Chairman: Motion moved. 

“That the Bill to provide for the formation of the State of 
Andhra the increasing of the areas of the State of Mysore and the 
diminishing of the area of the State of Madras, and for matter 
connected therewith, as passed by the House of the People, be 
taken into consideration.” 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): Mr. Chairman, this is 
a Bill the object of which is to create a new State for the 
Andhras. As such it is the subject matter of the Andhras 
themselves. Others who are not Andhras can only take part 
in it in a general way, and solely because this new Province 
is a portent of probably some other linguistic provinces to 
come into existence. It is only because of the feeling of the 
latter kind that I have stood up today to say a few words. 

Sir, when one goes into the Bill, one is very much puzzled 
as to whether one should congratulate the Government on 
the Bill such as has been brought forward before the house, 
or whether one should congratuate the Andhras who are 
clamouring for a separate Province. As anyone in this House 
knows, as soon as the Congress Party was organised and had 
a constitution in the year 1921, the first thing it did was 
to incorporate the principle of linguistic provinces. I have 
no idea that at any time from the year 1921 up to the year 
1949 or these about, the Congress either ever withdrew that 
principle from its constitution or regretted having entered that 
principle in its constitution. In 1949 I believe — if I am wrong 
my friends will correct me — but I think that is about the year, 
when the Drafting Committee was sitting, and one Member 
of then Assembly tabled a Resolution for the formation of the 
linguistic provinces. I was in charge of the Law Department 
and as such the Resolution fell within my portfolio. I had to 

* P. D. Vol. 4 (Council of States) of 1953, Part 1, 2nd September 1953, 
pp. 864-79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


852 


852 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consult my cabinet collegues in order to know what sort of 
reply I should give to this Resolution. They said that the 
better thing would be for me to transfer the Resolution either 
to the Prime Minister or to the late Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel which I very gladly did, because I did not want the 
responsibility to fall upon my shoulder for the answar that 
might be given to that. Resolution. It was then arranged 
between the mover of the Resolution and the members of 
the high command of the Congress, that although they were 
not prepared to accept the Resolution in all its generality so 
as ‘to apply to all the multi-lingual provinces then existing, 
they were prepared to consider the question of creating an 
Andhra Province. The members of the Drafting Committee 
were waiting to know what exactly they should enter Andhra 
as a separate province in the Schedule of the States. Hon. 
Members who are particular to know about this will find in a 
foot-note to the first draft of the Drafting Committee’s report 
that I referred to the Prime Minister in order to let me know 
whether Andhra should be entered in the Schedule to the 
Constitution, I got no reply, with the result that Andhra then 
did not become a separate province. It was a great surprise 
to me that when practically for twenty years, a party had 
stood by the principle of linguistic provinces, it should have 
developed cold feet after twenty years. Surely, 20 years was 
a long period for even the greatest dullared to think over 
the matter and come to a clear conclusion as to whether the 
principle that was adopted in 1921 was a mistaken principle 
and ought completely to be withdrawn, or whether it was a 
principle which should be pursued with certain modifications. 
The result has been that from 1949 up to this period, there 
has been a vacillating attitude on the part of the Government, 
once saying that there shall be no linguistic provinces, 
at another time saying, “Yes, we shall create an Andhra 
Province”. And unless and until one honourable gentleman 
had sacrificed his life for the sake of creating an Andhra 
Province, the Government did not think it fit to move in the 
matter. I have no idea and I do not wish to be harsh on the 
Government; but I am dead certain in my mind that if in 
any other country a person had to die in order to invoke a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


853 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 853 

principle which had already been accepted, what would have 
happened to the Government. It is quite possible that the 
Government might have been lynched. But here nothing has 
happened. The Government is playing with the proposition. 

The argument that has been brought forth by the 
Government is that if you create linguistic provinces, you 
will break up the unity of India. That has been the argument 
which one heard time and again from every member of the 
Government. Sir, I am surprised that such an argument should 
have been used. If anyone were to look up the Schedule of 
States attached to the Constitution, he would find that there 
are altogether 27 States filling up different parts — Part A, Part 
B and Part C. I am not taking into account Part D. Now, if 
you take up these 27 States, you will find that 23 States are 
linguistic States. Only 4 are multi-lingual. I should like to 
ask my hon. Friend, the Home Minister, whether he thinks 
that the 23 linguistic States which have existed from the very 
beginning of the Constitution have in any way done anything 
in order to disrupt the unity of this country. I would like him 
to answer that question. These 23 linguistic States have not 
been able to disrupt the unity of India. I am as keen as he 
is on maintaining the unity of India and I shall not support 
any step which will bring about the break-up of this country. 

We have, by God’s grace achieved not only independence 
but also unity, and it is our bounden duty, no matter to 
what party we belong, to see that this independence and this 
unity is retained. But, to say, in the face of this fact, with 
23 linguistic States, that linguistic States would break up 
the unity of India is to say something which is puerile. They 
must produce some very weighty arguments in support of 
their contention that they cannot pursue a policy of creating 
linguistic States. 

Now, Sir, coming to the Andhras on whom this blessing is 
showered by the Government after such a long delay, what 
do they get by it ? First of all, as I look at the Bill, I do not, 
find anywhere mention about the capital of this new State 
of Andhra. The capital is the very life source of a State. I 
cannot understand how one can imagine a State without its 
capital. In fact, it is the capital that give life to the States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


854 


854 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There is no mention of it at all. Who is to create this capital ? 
Is it the Legislature of the new Andhra State which is to 
meet and decide what is to be its capital ? Is it the Executive 
Government of the new State which is to sit at some place 
and decide that the capital of the new Andhra State will be 
this ? There is no indication at all in the Bill, as to which is 
the authority which is to create this capital. Reading from the 
newspapers it does appear that there is no unanimity among 
the Andhras on the question of the capital. There is a section 
which wants Vijaywada, there is a section which wants Kurnool 
and those in favour of Kurnool I think, won by one vote or 
so. In a situation of this kind, I think the Government would 
not have fallen — I am sure about it, they have an enormous 
majority to beat down any opposition — if they had taken 
courage in both hands and said that, “in our judgement this 
should be the capital,” leaving liberty to the Andhras at a later 
stage to change it if they so liked. Sir, in connection with this 
question of the capital, there is one point which I would like 
to mention. I do not know what is the town that is going to 
be selected as the capital of the Andhra State, but, any how, 
everybody seems to be taking that whatever town is selected 
for the purpose of a capital, it shall be a temporary capital. 
That is what I hear. Now, Sir, it strikes me — whether they 
select a town which is Vijaywada or Kurnool or some other 
place — that they may be spending a certain amount of money 
for the construction of the necessary buildings for the housing 
of the capital. Surely, there must be the Secretariat: surely, 
there must be the houses for the Ministers 

Shri C. G. K. Reddy (Mysore): That is very important. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: and various other things in 

order that the capital may come into existence. I have no idea 
of the amount of money the new Andhra Government proposes 
to spend on the creation of this temporary capital. After what 
is being said that this will only be a temporary capital and 
that the permanent capital will be selected at a later stage, 
what would happen ? In my judgement, what would happen 
is this : the five crores of rupees or so that might be spent 
initially on the construction of a temporary capital would all 
be a waste and another five or ten crores of rupees will have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


855 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 855 

to be spent on what the Andhras might regard as the permanent 
capital for their new State. I do not know whether the Hon. 
the Home Minister or the Hon. the Finance Minister who, I 
believe, in his most charitable way gives grants to anybody 
who wants to come and ask for a grant, is prepared to give 
five crores of rupees for a temporary capital and another five 
or ten crores for a permanent capital. That would certainly 
be a wonderful way of managing the finances of this country. 

Then, Sir, looking at the financial position of the new 
State, it has been shown that the new State will begin with a 
deficit of Rs. 5 crores. Many optimistic Andhras who are more 
keen on having an Andhra State than on stability told the 
investigator — Mr. Justice Wanchoo — that, in their judgement 
there were a variety of means whereby they could bridge the 
gap and make the State self-sufficient. 

Mr. Justice Wanchoo examined every one of the suggestions 
that were made to him by the various parties of the Andhra 
people; and he has, in unmistakable terms, said that all 
these are fertile imagination and that it is neither possible 
to increase the revenues of the new State, nor is it possible 
to reduce the expenditure; at the most, anything may happen 
either by the way of increasing the revenue or by the way of 
reducing the expenditure. Nonetheless, the new Andhra State 
will begin with a deficit of Rs. 2 crores. That is the least that 
the Andhras will have to face to begin with. Well, it is the 
concern of the Andhras whether they could make good deficit 
which may be Rs. 5 crores or which may be Rs. 2 crores; we 
have not much to say about it; it is for them. 

Then there is a third point which I would like to put to my 
hon. Friend the Home Minister. It seems to me that my hon. 
Friend has not considered what I might call the demographic 
picture of the Andhra State. What is the social composition 
of this State ? When I am dealing with the social composition 
of Andhra, I beg of my Andhra friends not to mistake me. It 
is not that I am making the statement, which I am about to 
make, by way of accusation against the Andhras, but it is a 
general proposition which I am enunciating and which I shall 
develop at the conclusion of my speech. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


856 


856 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sir, as I said, I am not an Andhra. But I belong to what 
might be called a political group — I shall not give it the 
honorific name of a Party’ — which is called the Scheduled 
Caste Federation. As the Leader of that group. I had the 
occasion to move round in the Andhra country in order to 
see what the condition of the Scheduled Castes there is. My 
picture is this that, in this Andhra country, there are, as 
everywhere else, as I am going to show, some big communities 
and some very small communities. Of the big communities, the 
biggest, I believe, is the Reddy community; below the Reddys 
come the Kamma; below the Kammas come the Kappu; and 
below them come the unfortunate Scheduled Castes people 
working as landless labourers. That is primarily the picture 
of this area. As I said, this is not a lonely case. There are 
many other areas of the same pattern. 

The second thing I noticed is this that all the lands 
practically are in possession of the Reddys. The Reddys 
are the biggest landlords there. Next, probably, come, the 
Kammas, to which my friend Professor Ranga belongs. I 
was told very recently how great is this evil; I was told in 
a very vivid way by one of the Congressmen himself. I do 
not know whether he would feel offended if I mention his 
name. It would lend great authority to the statement that 
I am making, but I shall not mention his name as I have 
not asked him. 

An hon. Member: Is he a Member of this House ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: He is a Member of the Lower 
House. 

Dr. K. N. Katju: I do not like it to be called the Lower 
House. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: When we were discussing this 
question, my friend told me that that was by no means 
peculiar. There was a certain village in the Andhra area. 
The entire land of the village measured 1,400 acres. Out of 
that, only 14 acres were owned by private individuals; the 
rest of it was owned by a single Reddy. One has just to 
imagine the picture 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


857 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 857 

Shri P. Sundarayya (Madras) : Let us confiscate it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no idea what they have 
done. The third fact he told me was that all trade in the 
village was in the hands of the Reddys 

An hon. Member: What is wrong ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The lowest village officer is also a 
Reddy; the ‘mulki’ is also a Reddy. Well, Sir, I want to know for 
myself, especially in view of the fact whether the reservation, 
which was so blissfully granted to us by the Congress Party 
for ten years, is going to disappear. 

An hon. Member: You accepted it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, what else can one do; if you 
can’t get puri you must get roti. Sir, in view of the situation 
that is obtaining there, you can imagine what is likely to 
be the position of the Scheduled Castes. What provision has 
my hon. Friend made for the purpose of granting protection 
against tyranny, against oppression, against communalism, 
that is sure to be rampant not only in the Andhradesh but 
everywhere in the States similarly situated. One of the greatest 
regrets that I have is that the Home Member, whose duty 
it is to see that every citizen is well protected against the 
tyranny of the majority, has come here with a Bill with no 
idea, with no conception as to what the State is likely to be 
and what is likely to happen to millions of people. I know, 
Sir, he is a high born person. 

Dr. K. N. Katju: Who ? I ? I started life in a normal 
manner 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: But the fact is that he is a Kashmiri 
Pandit. Even if he takes to the profession of a Bhangi he 
will still remain a Kashmiri Pandit. He may never suffer. All 
people may respect him for his ancestry, for his noble birth, 
for his learning. What about us who have been tyrannised 
for the last 2,000 years ? 

Shri H. P. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh): But we all respect 


you. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


858 


858 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I may die in ten years time. Now, 
Sir, these are the three considerations which I thought I 
should urge before my hon. Friend, the Home Minister, for his 
consideration. There is still time even in this House, if he likes. 

Shri K. S. Hegde : Is it the suggestion that Andhra should 
have a different tradition altogether ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am going to suggest that. That 
is what I am going to tell him, that he has not applied his 
mind to this subject. 

Shri K. S. Hegde : That will be applicable to all the States. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have said so. 

Shri K. S. Hegde: It is a general proposition. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Wait a minute now, please. 
Mr. Chairman we are not going to finish our troubles with the 
creation of the Andhra State. There are plenty of other States 
which are making a similar demand and I think it is therefore 
necessary for the Government to find out whether there are any 
other ways and means whereby we could keep the multi-lingual 
provinces as they are, and remove the feelings and the lots 
of blemishes that arise therefrom and only in excusable cases 
resort to the creation of a linguistic State, I have been devoting 
a certain amount of attention to this question because I know 
that this is going to be one of our most crucial questions. Sir, 
my suggestions are two-fold. Wherever I find a multi-lingual 
State I would vest the Governor there with certain special 
powers to protect the minorities in that State. That is one 
proposition that I would place before the Government for its 
consideration. I shall presently cite some authority in order that 
they may not think that this is my imagination. I am going 
to cite some constitutional precedents. And the second thing 
that I would like to be done would be that in all such States 
where there are multi-lingual people you should establish by 
law committees of members belonging to different linguistic 
sections which would have the right to hear and the right 
to ask the Ministry whether they are doing justice to their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


859 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 859 

problems. Also they should have the right to appeal to the 
Governor to set aside any act of injustice that might have 
been done to any one section. I think, if these three things 
are done, we should be able to keep the States as they are, 
at any rate in the first stage. If ultimately we find that we do 
not succeed even with these measures, then fate may take us 
to the logical extreme end, namely, to have a linguistic State. 

Sir, in the case of creation of linguistic States, in my 
judgement there appear to me to be two considerations. One 
is that the linguistic State must be a viable State. It may be 
that this is a small State which has got a culture and which 
has got a language and which has got a separate feeling and 
an entity. Yet it is so small that it cannot find the means of 
carrying on its Administration. People do not live on culture. 
People do not live on language. People live on the resources 
that they possess. But if God has given them culture and God 
has given them language but God has not given them the 
resource, I am afraid they cannot have the luxury of having 
a separate linguistic State, The second thing is this. It is only 
in our country that we find that linguistic provinces create 
difficulty. I would like to ask the question as to why there 
are no difficulties in Switzerland although Switzerland itself 
is a multilingual unit. The Cantons have French, German and 
Italian. Yet they are a very happy nation and they are the 
most prosperous nation today. Why is it that Switzerland has 
no provinces although it is a multi-lingual unit ? The answer 
which I can give is this that linguism in Switzerland is not 
loaded with communalism. But in our country linguism is 
only another name for communalism. What happens when 
you create a linguistic province is that you hand over the 
strings of Administration to one single community which 
happens to be the majority community and I can cite many 
provinces where this is likely to happen. That community 
charged with a feeling of its own sacred existence begins to 
practise the worst kind of communalism which otherwise is 
called discrimination. Discrimination creates injustice and 
injustice creates ill-feeling. If our linguism was not charged 
with communalism our linguism would not be a danger to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


860 


860 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

us at all; but the fact is that it is. But it seems to me that in 
order to do away with the community practising communalism 
being in office these two remedies are worth while, namely, 
to give the power to the Governor to override and, secondly, 
to appoint small committees who can make representations 
either to the Ministry or to the Governor. 

Now, Sir, we have inherited a tradition. People always keep 
on saying to me : “Oh, you are the maker of the Constitution”. 
My answer is I was a hack. What I was asked to do, I did 
much against my will. 

Shri P. Sundarayya: Why did you serve your masters 
then like that ? 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: But, Sir, we have inherited, on 
account of our hatred of the British, certain ideas about 
democracy which, it seems to me, are not universally accepted. 
We inherited the idea that the Governor must have no power 
at all, that he must only be a rubber stamp. If a Minister, 
however scoundrel he may be, however corrupt he may be, 
if he puts up a proposal before the Governor, he has to ditto 
it. That is the kind of conception about democracy which we 
have developed in this country. 

Shri M. S. Ranawat (Rajasthan): But, you defended it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: We lawyers defend many things. 
(Interruptions.) You should listen seriously to what I am 
saying, because this is an important problem. 

Sir, as I said, we happened to develop a theory of democracy, 
simply because of our opposition to the British. The British 
must go and the British must have no power. A Governor 
must have no power. Let me cite two cases. 

One case which I propose to cite is about the Constitution 
of Canada and I refer to section 93 of that Constitution. As 
everyone in this House knows, Canada, like ourselves, is a 
billingual place. A part of it speaks English; a part of it speaks 
French. And what is worse still is that the English-speaking 
people are Protestants; the French are Roman Catholics. In 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


861 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 861 

1864, when the Constitution of Canada was made, the Catholics 
were very much afraid as to what might happen to them 
under the English Protestant majority and they were not 
prepared to come into the Constitution of a united Canada. 
Therefore the Parliament enacted section 93 in the Canadian 
Constitution. That section does two things. It says that if 
any province — naturally the reference was to provinces in 
Protestant areas — where Roman Catholics lived passed any 
law with regard to certain matters which the Roman Catholics 
regarded as their special privilage based upon religion, they 
had the right to appeal to the Governor General that a wrong 
was done to them, and the Governor General by section 93 
had the right to look into their complaint. It was a statutory 
right of complaint. Not only did section 93 give the catholics a 
statutory right of appeal against the decision of the majority 
to have a certain measure annulled, but it goes much further 
and says that the Governor General shall have the right to 
enact a positive measure in protection of the Catholic minority. 
I would like to ask my friend, the Home Member, whether, 
with the inclusion of section 93 in the Canadian Constitution, 
he regards the Canadian Constitution to be democratic or 
undemocratic. What is his answer ? 

11-00 A.M. 

Dr. K. N. Katju : My answer is that you had drafted this 
Constitution. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: You want to accuse me for your 
blemishes ? 

Mr. Chairman : He has said that he defended the present 
constitution because it was the majority decision. Get along. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, therefore, my submission is 
this that no harm can be done to democracy and to democratic 
Constitution if our Constitution was amended and powers 
similar to those given to the Governor General under section 93 
were given to the Governor. At any rate, that would be 
some kind of a safeguard to certain small linguistic areas or 
linguistic groups who find that the majority in the State are 
not doing justice to them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


862 


862 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The second suggestion that I would like to make is from 
the English Constitution. My hon. Friend must be aware of the 
position of Scotland in the British Constitution and therefore 
I would not go into greater details. But he will remember two 
things. One is this that although Scotland and England are 
one — nobody can say that they are two separate countries — still 
there is a special Secretary of State for Scotland under the 
British Constitution to look after the interests of the Scottish 
people. He must have gone to London, I think, various times. 
(The Hon. Minister indicated by signs — three) Three times. 
Surely, he must have passed by the Parliament Street and 
just by the side of 10, Downing Street, there is a big brass 
board ‘Scottish Office’ which is the place where the Secretary 
of State for Scotland sits. That is the one provision which 
the British have made. They have not argued, as my friends 
have argued, that this is a recognition of communalism. Have 
they ? Scotland came and joined England some hundreds of 
years ago and yet the British people, in order to recognise 
the sentiments of the Scots, in order to respect their feelings, 
have created statutorily an office called the Secretary of State 
for Scotland. 

The second thing to which I would like to refer is this that 
in the British Parliament there are two Committees. One is a 
Committee for Wales and Monmouthshire and there is another 
Committee for Scotland consisting of Scottish members. All 
Bills referring to Scotland have to be sent to the Scottish 
Committee so that the Scottish members may have their full 
say in the matter. In the same way the members of Wales 
and Monmouthshire are also brought on committees connected 
with their affairs. It is by placating the sentiments of smaller 
communities and smaller people who are afraid that the 
majority may do wrong, that the British Parliament works. 
Sir, my friends tell me that I have made the Constitution. 
But I am quite prepared to say that I shall be the first person 
to burn it out. I do not want it. It does not suit anybody. 
But, whatever that may be, if our people want to carry on, 
they must not forget that there are majorities and there are 
minorities, and they simply cannot ignore the minorities by 
saying, “Oh, no. To recognise you is to harm democracy.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


863 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 863 

I should say that the greatest harm will come by injuring 
the minorities. I fear sometimes that if the minorities are 
treated in the way in which they are being treated in our 
Bombay State — I do not want to be parochial, but my friends 
have been telling me, as I am not there and I do not take 
any interest in my State, as you know, and I do not even 
like to call myself a Maharashtrian — I do not know what will 
ultimately happen. I am fond of Hindi, but the only trouble 
is that the Hindi-speaking people are the greatest enemies 
of Hindi. 

Mr. Chairman: Dr. Ambedkar, it is an aside. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is an aside. 

Now, Sir, I am told that the Ministers are drawn from the 
two provinces. The clever members of the Ministry draw all 
the funds for developing the resources in that particular area, 
and the other area gets nothing. The same is being said about 
the Rayalaseema area, that the coastal people are generally 
able to get larger funds for their area and the Rayalaseema 
people get nothing. If my friend could make a provision in 
the Constitution that there shall be constituted lawfully under 
this very Bill a committee consisting of the members belonging 
to Rayalaseema, who will have the right to represent to the 
Governor and to the members of the Ministry that their part 
is to be included, I think a large part of the grievance would 
disappear. Similarly, Sir, I find that our Bengali Members are 
considerably agitated over the fact that part of Bihar — they 
say — is Bengal. I do not know; it may be, because originally 
Bengal spread over everywhere. The Governor General had 
a very large area, and wherever the Governor General went, 
the Bengalis also went with him. 

Mr. Chairman: Go on with the Andhra Bill. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes. I am only giving an illustration. 
My illustration is this, that supposing such was the case that 
the Biharis were not treating the Bengalis well. Well, the only 
way open for solving this problem would be that there should 
be a committee of the Legislature consisting of the members 
who are Bengalis and who would have the right to represent 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


864 


864 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their grievances to the Ministry as well as to the Governor or 
to the President. When all these things fail, then I suppose 
we shall have to go to the naked proposition that we shall 
be linguists first and linguists last, and that we shall not 
recognise India. If that is to be our ultimate aim, well, God 
save us. But, Sir, my submission to my hon. Friend is this 
that he should examine carefully some of the points I have 
made, particularly in the last part of my speech, and see 
whether he can find any solution to the problem of linguistic 
provinces, based on the suggestions that I have made, in the 
new measure that he may have to bring — he may not be very 
willing to bring a new measure, but he may have to bring it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


865 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


865 


( 47 ) 

ESTATE DUTY BILL, 1953 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): Mr. Chairman, I would 
just like to make a few observations on the measure that 
is placed by the Finance Minister before this House. I am 
supporting the measure; at the same time I think that there 
are certain points which require to be elucidated. I should 
have thought that the very first thing in the collection of 
an estate duty is to know what the amount of the estate is 
which a deceased person has left. So far as this measure is 
concerned, I have not as yet been able to find out how the 
authorities which have been created under this Act are going 
to find out what estate a deceased person has left. Referring 
to section 4 of the Bill, it merely lays down three authorities : 
the Board, the Controllers of Estate Duty, and the Valuers. 
Speaking for myself, I should think that it would be a matter 
of the greatest difficulty for the authorities who are created 
to administer this measure to know what a person has left. 

In the first place, it would be very difficult for them to know 
who is dead and when he is dead. In this country, it has been 
a long, long complaint that we have not yet a measure which 
would compulsorily require a person to report that a child is 
born to him either male or female or that a certain person 
in his family is dead, to the Municipal authorities or to the 
village authorities. He may, if he liked. In the villages, it is 
the village officer of lowest grade on whom the duty is placed 
of going and reporting to the village patel that a child is born 
to a certain person in the village. He may do so, or he may not 
do so, he may do so after a long time. In the municipality — I 
am speaking of the Bombay Municipality which is, I think, 
one of the biggest municipalities — every one knows that there 
is hardly any compulsion on anybody to go and report to the 


* P. D., Vol. 4B. (Council of States), 18th September 53, pp. 2805-15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


866 


866 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

municipality that somebody is dead though an official 
permission is necessary for the purpose of either burying him 
or burning him. My own experience has been that we often 
carried the dead body to the graveyard, and there was some 
sort of insignificant clerk to whom we paid four annas and 
who gave us a counterfoil of a ticket saying: “All right, you 
have brought the dead body and you can either bury or burn 
it as may be the custom prevalent amongst you”. I do not 
know the party to whom this particular certificate — what may 
be called the death certificate — may be of any use, except to 
take it to the mill manager and say: “So-and-so is dead: I am 
his relative, and I want the balance of wages that are lying 
in your hand”. I have no idea whether the clerk who stays in 
the burial ground reports the matter to the municipality or 
not that so-and-so was dead, and his dead body was brought 
there, and was either cremated or buried. That is the condition 
of the register of births and deaths in this country. 

I submit, Sir, that it would be very difficult for the 
authorities who are created under this Act to go about hunting 
every nook and corner to find out who is dead. In England, 
the operation of the estate duty law becomes simple for the 
simple reason that there everybody dies after making a will 
and so far as that is concerned, some one has to take what 
is called a ‘probate’ so that all the Inland Revenue Officers — 
as they are called in England — who operate the internal tax 
system have only to go to the Registrar of the High Court in 
order to find out whether any application has been made for a 
probate. If so, from that they can find out who is dead, what 
is the total estate that has been disclosed in that application. 
But, unfortunately, in our country, we have not got the habit 
of obtaining a probate. No doubt, there is a rule that, so far 
as the Indian Succession Act goes, a probate shall be taken, 
if there is a will, under the Probate Act. If a party is not 
governed by the Indian Succession Act, all the same, a party 
can obtain a probate on a will, if any will is left, under what 
is called the Probate Administration Act. We have got no 
such system at all here. I have been wondering at myself, 
if my hon. Friend appointed me as Controller of the Estate 
Duty under this Bill, what I would do, where would I go to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


867 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 867 

find out deaths ? It would be with very considerable difficulty. 
That, I find, is one lacuna in this Bill. 

The second thing that I found in this Bill is this. The 
hon. member has provided in clause 17 of the Bill as to who 
should pay the estate duty. If the interest of the deceased 
is in a controlled company, then somebody representing the 
controlled company shall pay; if it is others, then, some other 
persons may pay. All the same, the question remains : how is 
a Controller to know that the deceased person had a share in 
the controlled company or that the deceased person had other 
property ? I should think that this Bill should have a clause 
like the one that I am suggesting, requiring every successor, 
whether the deceased left a will or not, to go to the Court 
and to make a declaration of the property left if there is no 
will, so that the Controller would know from the declaration 
that so much property has been left. He can then proceed 
to find out whether there had been any concealment of the 
property that the deceased had left. Otherwise it would be a 
sort of a roving enquiry that the Controller will have to make 
in order to find out what is the exact amount of property. In 
the present circumstances in which we exist and in which we 
find so much corruption, I am very greatly doubtful whether 
a law of this kind leaving the matter entirely in the hands 
of the Controller would not result in much more corruption 
than what exists today. These are the two things which, I 
find, require to be rectified so that the law which is bound 
to cause harshness — and every law causes harshness — does 
not cause unnecessary harassment to the people who are to 
pay this duty. 

The second question to which I wish to draw the attention 
of the house is the question of the amount that is likely to 
be realised by this estate duty. I have been following the 
speeches of the hon. Member, which he has made on various 
occasions with regard to the Estate Duty Bill and I find 
that he has been very cautious not to commit himself to any 
particular figure. I think last time when he introduced the 
Bill in 1952 he said to the House that he was quite unable 
to even make a guess of what was likely to be the yield of 
this tax. Well, I think that with regard to a measure of this 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


868 


868 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sort which spreads so widely, the Hon. the Finance Minister 
ought to have at least made a guess with the figures that are 
available, or at least asked the Board of Revenue to make some 
investigation and to give him an idea as to whether the yield 
of this tax would be commensurate with the troubles that he 
was taking. I have been looking into the report of the Board 
of Revenue and I find that there are certain figures which 
the Finance Department could have used for the purpose of 
telling us, now that the rates of duty are fixed and attached 
to the Bill, as to what is likely to be the yield. The Board 
of Revenue does give figures about income tax. It also gives 
figures as to the total number of joint families that exist in 
India; it not only gives the total amout of the income tax 
that was collected from joint families but also the figures 
of the total number of joint families which were assessed 
and the total amount of income which was shown by them 
in their returns. Sir, I think this tax is going to affect to a 
very large extent the joint families in this country and with 
the information which is shown in the report of the Board 
of Revenue for the year 1950-51, it would have been possible 
for us to know what exactly the Hon. Minister expects from 
this source as revenue. We would have been then in a much 
better position to say with all alacrity that no matter what 
the trouble is, the tax may be levied. But if in the end we 
find that the amount realised is not commensurate with the 
measure, the Hon. the Finance Minister himself may regret 
the trouble that he has taken in bringing forward this Bill. 

Shri B. C. Ghose (West Bengal): Then he will raise the 
duty. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Another thing to which I would like 
to make a reference is this. There is a feeling that there is a 
great deal of difference between the estate duty as such and 
income tax as such, and while there might be some feeling 
against the income tax there cannot be such a feeling against 
the estate duty, the difference being that the income tax is 
a tax on the income and the estate duty is a tax on capital. 
Superficially, this distinction no doubt is correct because when 
we levy the estate duty we do not take out of the income, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


869 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 869 

but we take out of the capital that the man has left. In the 
case of income tax we take something from the current income 
that he earns. Sir, I should like to say that this is a very 
superficial distinction, for ultimately there is no distinction 
between the income tax and the estate duty because the estate 
duty is merely nothing more than accumulated income which 
is taxed at one source, at one defined period, namely, when 
the man is dead. Now, it seems to me a matter of considerable 
importance as to whether the tax that you levy at the death 
of the man is likely to produce effects which would dry up 
the source of revenue, or whether it is so good, and the 
country is so resilient, that nothwithstanding the estate duty 
the country produces more and therefore it does not matter 
whether you levy the estate duty and it does not matter at 
what pitch you levy it. My hon. friend must be knowing the 
facts much more than I do, but I would like to tell the House 
some of the figures in Great Britain. I have taken them from 
the report of the Board of Revenue for 1951-52. They give 
relevant figures. In 1942-43 the total amount of income tax 
collected in Great Britain was 18 million pounds and in 1951-52 
it was 20 million pounds. So far as the death duties are 
concerned, in 1942-43 the total collection was £93,340,343 and 
in 1951-52 the total collection was £182,600,643. I would like 
the house to consider similar figures so far as this country 
is concerned. Sir, my Hon. friend, the Finance Minister must 
be aware of the recent report that was made by one of the 
U.N.E.S.C.O. Committees. There are so many committees in 
the U.N.E.S.C.O. There was a Committee which investigated 
into the question of finding out why the South Asiatic 
Countries were so backward in the matter of their industrial 
and economic advancement. And the reason that they gave 
was that the saving in the country was so small that there 
was no capital formation at all. And in the absence of capital 
formation, there was the absence of industry and other things. 
Of course, if we were a Communist Country — and I have no 
doubt that we shall very soon become one — and our economic 
life or industrial life or agricultural life was taken charge of 
by the Government, for better or for worse, it would matter 
very little how much we save and how much we do not save. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


870 


870 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

If we save a little, probably the Government would make us 
save more. And there would be no difficulty on that account 
at all. But so long as we have not got a Communist Regime 
which takes complete responsibility for the welfare of the 
people and their education 

Shri B, B. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): And for their “ill- 
fare” 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I do not know; there is always 
something wrong here and there; no system is perfect. 

Mr. Chairman: Go on, go on. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am sorry, he broke my chain of 
argument. So, what I was saying was this, that so long as 
we haven’t got a system of that sort which takes complete 
responsibility for the welfare of the people, and so long as we 
have got a system which makes people responsible for their 
welfare, well, that State, I suppose, only aids the people in 
their welfare, but it does not do welfare. It is very accessory 
that our taxing system should be such that it should leave 
sufficient for the purpose of creating capital. Every time 
the Government takes something from us and we are never 
allowed to carry on. Sir, this Bill which has been brought 
forward by my hon. friend, as I know it from experience, is 
not a new measure at all. I remember that the first time that 
such a Bill was adumbrated was in the year 1944-45. Sir 
Jeremy Raisman, who was then the Finance Member, said 
in the course of his Budget speech that he would introduce 
a Bill like the Estate Duty Bill as soon as Parliament had 
rectified omission which was contained in Schedule I. The Act 
of 1935 did not contain any such entry at all as an Estate 
Duty either to be levied by the Provinces or to be levied 
by the Centre. Then, in 1946. Sir Archibald Rowlands who 
succeeded Sir Jeremy Raisman brought forward a Bill. The 
curious thing about that Bill of 1946 was that it was opposed 
both by the Congress as well as by the Muslim League. The 
Congress members said, “You have no right to levy any tax 
like the estate duty”. And the Muslim Leaguers said, “If you 
levy such a tax, you would be affecting our Waqf, which is a 
trust, and which is partly for God and partly for man.” And 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


871 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 871 

so, the Government, with no support from either the Congress 
or the Muslim League, could hardly do anything about the 
measure and the measure was dropped. Then again it was 
taken up in 1948 by Mr. Shanmukham Chetty, who introduced 
another Bill. The Bill was referred to a Select Committee and 
the Select Committee took the view that so long as the law 
of Mitakshara prevailed in this country — and it prevailed in 
a very large part of the territory of this country — it would 
be no use having an Estate Duty Bill. The result was that it 
was taken back — or rather put on the shelf. Mr. Shanmukham 
Chetty was succeded by Dr. John Matthai and Dr. John 
Matthai pressed for funds, recalled the session of the Select 
Committee and put the Bill again before them, and got a 
verdict from the Select Committee that notwithstanding the 
fact that the Hindu Code was hanging fire for four years — 
and nobody knows how long it is going to hang fire, probably 
permanently and perpetually — and no one is sorry for that 
except myself 

Dr. Shrimati Seeta Parmanand (Madhya Pradesh): The 
hon. Member is not the only Member who is sorry, but there 
are other Members also. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I know that women Members are 
very helpful. I must say that last time when I was on tenter 
hooks. I called some of the ladies — I mean, the more bulky 
ones — and I suggested to them that if any one of them went 
on threatening a fast unto death, probably we might get the 
Hindu Code through. Sir, I tell you 

Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar) : You are again giving a hint. 

Mr. Chairman: You were encouraging satyagraha, 
Dr. Ambedkar ! 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, sometimes it is useful. If it 
could not bring this Bill through, it would have certainly 
reduced the weight of the ladies and would have improved 
their health also considerably. That was the position. 
Dr. Matthai had a verdict in 1949. There was a second report 
of the Select Committee and it said, “Never mind about the 
Hindu Code. Let us proceed with the Estate Duty Bill”, but 
for three years noting happened. One does not know why. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


872 


872 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bill was lying in the file of the Finance Department till in 
1952 my hon. Friend, probably in doing the work of the office 
duster, found a copy somewhere. And what did he do ? It is an 
interesting thing. The Select Committee said that they could 
by some suitable amendment get over the difficulty of the 
Law of Mitakshara. My hon. Friend has made some effort to 
get over that difficulty and he has got over that difficulty by 
practically destroying the Mitakshara law. Clause 7 says that 
if a person below 18 dies, then there will be no estate duty 
but if a coparcener dies in a condition in which we describe 
him under the Hindu Law as the sole surviving coparcener, 
then estate duty may be levied. Well, Sir, if my hon. Friend 
can in this roundabout method defeat the Mitakshara Law, 
could he not have the courage to say, by bringing in another 
Bill or by inducing his colleague the Law Minister to bring 
in another Bill, that the Mitakshara Law is abolished ? So, 
Sir, these are some of the points which I wanted to make. 
Mitakshara Law is notionally destroyed, because under the 
Mitakshara Law there is no such thing as the passing of the 
property, because the property is already his by birth. There is 
no question of the passing of property. It is a wrong notion. I 
do not know who has told him about it. Under the Mitakshara 
Law property does not pass. As soon as a child is born, the 
property becomes his and the father’s share is reduced. What 
passes therefore on the death of the father ? Nothing. As soon 
as a son is born, the father’s share is affected. Supposing he 
has a second son, as he is likely to have, and the first child 
happens to be so unlucky as to have a brother, then the share 
is still further reduced. 

Sir, I am told that there are some 44 countries in the 
world which have passed such a law, viz. Estate Duty Law. I 
have not got the list with me, but I am sure very few of the 
Southern Asiatic Countries have passed any such law. There 
is hardly anything remaining with them. As the report of the 
Committee shows, they have nothing to pass on. Our great 
problem is. “How shall we accumulate ?” We hate capitalists 
and I do too. I Have all my life lived in Parel in a chawl of 
the Improvement Trust, Room No. 50. If people go there, they 
‘ might visit it. I paid originally Rs. 3-8-0 as rent for my room 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


873 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 873 

and I have still kept it as an emergency measure in case I 
am asked to go back again there. So I am no great friend of 
the capitalists, but I think that in this country we ought to 
make a distinction between capital and capital. If you want 
the capital from them, take it from them. Adopt the Russian 
system and go on. My only point is that you must have some 
discrimination. In their enthusiasm — which is a very good 
thing — I am afraid they are running amuck, because some 
other countries have done something. Well, India is certainly 
not Europe. I have gone to Europe several times, and I could 
very easily see the difference between India and Europe, 
very easily. What is good for Europe certainly could not be 
good for India. We have certainly to reach the standard that 
the European people have reached viz. standard of comfort, 
standard of living equality of treatment, education, etc. All 
these things we need. For that purpose, we need money. 
Take the case of the English people. Take their educational 
progress. There compulsory elementary education came in 1860, 
while the Oxford University was established some time in the 
eleventh century or the twelfth century. So, we have to be 
very careful in doing what we are doing. Our enthusiasm no 
doubt is well merited. It is good that we should bring about 
the betterment of the people, but we should be careful about 
the means that we adopt. That is all that I want to say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


874 


874 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 48 ) 

INTERNATIONAL SITUATION 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : Mr. Chairman in this 
debate on foreign policy what one can do, at the most, is 
to discuss the principles on which the foreign policy of the 
Government is based. There is hardly time for doing anything 
more. Principles are undoubtedly very valuable, but I take 
it politicians have a great dislike for principles, particularly 
politicians who are dealing with foreign policy. They like to 
deal with things ad hoc, each transaction by itself, without 
any underlying principle. 

I remember, that when after the first World War, Mr. Lloyd 
George and Mr. Clemenceau met in a hotel in Paris before 
the Versailles Treaty in order to settle, among themselves, 
where to draw the line of partition between certain territories 
belonging to Germany in order to hand them over to France 
for satisfying the strategic fears of France, they had a long 
map spread in a room which covered the whole of the room 
and Lloyd George and Mr. Clemenceau had fallen on their 
tummy to examine exactly; where the line should be drawn. 
After a long search they drew the line which was of course, 
most suitable to France. Afterwards Mr. Lloyd George called 
Mr. Nicholson, who had accompanied him as the expert from 
his Foreign Office and asked him to express his opinion about 
the line which they had drawn. Mr. Nicholson explained in 
horror saying, “Oh! this is too bad, too bad. Morally quite 
indefensible”. Both these statesmen immediately turned on 
their back and raised their legs in the air and said, “Well, 
Mr. Nicholson, can’t you give us a better reason ?” 

I remember also about 1924 or so. Mr. Low, the great 
cartoonist, having drawn a cartoon in the Evening Standard 
in London showing the various Foreign Ministers of 


* P. D., Vol. 7A (Council of States), 26th August 1954, pp. 469-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


875 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 875 

the different countries of Europe then searching for the 
settlement of European problems with their top hats, tail coats 
and striped trousers holding each other’s hands, dancing round 
and saying, “Oh ! give us peace without principles, give us 
peace without principles”. Of course, the world laughed at that. 

I am glad that that cannot be said of our Prime Minister, 
He has certain principles on which he is proceeding. It is for 
the house to decide whether the principles on which he is 
proceeding are principles which can furnish us a safe guide 
and whether they are valid principles on which the destiny of 
this country could be staked. That is the only question that 
we can discuss and it is to these principles that I am going 
to confine myself. 

The principles on which the Prime Minister is proceeding — 
and he has said so himself — are mainly three. One is peace : 
the second is co-existence between communism and free 
democracy; and the third is opposition to SEATO. These are 
the three main props on which his Foreign policy is based. 
Now, Sir, in order that one may be able to assess the validity 
and the adequacy of these principles, I think, it is necessary 
to have some knowledge of the background of the present day 
problems with which we are concerned and for which these 
principles are enunciated. 

Now, the background, to my mind is nothing else but the 
expansion of communism in the world. It is quite impossible 
to follow the principle or to understand the validity and the 
nature of the principle unless one bears in mind the problem 
that the world has to face today — that part of the world 
which believes in parliamentary and free democracy, viz., the 
expansion of communism in the world. I propose to give some 
figures to the House which I have collected in this matter. I 
am not going back into the long past but I am going to start 
from May 1945 when the War came to an end. By May 1945, 
Russia had consumed ten European States. 

Shri B. Gupta: It is an utter falsehood. 

Mr. Chairman : Mr. Gupta, you will have your chance 
to reply. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


876 


876 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri B. Gupta: He cannot say such things. An older man 
like him can not say such things. 

Mr. Chairman: Mr. Sundarayya, tell him that he will 
have an opportunity of answering and he need not get excited. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: You will have time to answer. 
Don’t be impatient. The person who is often uneasy is the 
Prime Minister but he is not today. He is quite calm. Why 
are you so excited ? 

If you want to have a look at the authority, I will give it 
to you — I have got it here — provided I am assured that you 
will return it to me. 

Shri B. Gupta: You have your document from McCarthy 
and Dulles. 

Dr. B, R. Ambedkar: Now, Sir, I was saying that if 
we take stock of the situation from May 1945, and find 
out what has happened, this is the situation. Russia has 
consumed, as I said, ten European States: one is Finland; 
two, Estonia; three, Latvia; four, Lithuania; five, Poland; 
six, Czechoslovakia, seven; Hungary; eight, Rumania; nine, 
Bulgaria; and ten, Albania. 

Shri B. Gupta: and eleven is Dr. Ambedkar! 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am glad you add to my list. You 
are more upto-date than the book. 

In addition, Russia has taken possession of parts of 
Germany, Austria, Norway and the Danish Island of Bornholm. 
Of these ten European States, three have been straightway 
annexed by Russia and made part of her country. The rest 
seven are kept under Russian influence. This European 
conquest of Russia amounts to an absorption of a total of 
85,000 square miles and 23 millions of people subjugated. 

In the Far East, Russia has annexed the Chinese territory 
of China (Tannu Tuva). Manchuria, and Korea, north of the 
38th parallel, and Southern Sakhalin. This territory in the 
Far East represents against a total area of 20,000 square 
miles and 500,000 inhabitants. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


877 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 877 

Shri P. Sundarayya: What about the People’s Republic 
of China ? Why did you omit it ? 

Shri Govinda Reddy: He said that. 

Shri B, Gupta: A great demonstration of history is going 
on; a great historian has devolved! 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They have increased the number 
by further aggression in South Korea and Indo-China. 

Well, Sir, this is the background, I say against which the 
adequacy of the principles on which the foreign policy of this 
Government is based must be considered. I will take first 
the principle of peace. We want peace; nobody wants war. 
The only question is, what the price of this peace is going to 
be. At what price are we purchasing this peace ? Now, it is 
quite obvious that peace is being purchased by what might 
be called partitioning and dis-membering of countries. I can 
quite understand the dismemberment of Austria-Hungary 
where different nationalities with different languages, 
different cultures, different races, were kept together under 
one sovereign autocracy of the Austrian Empire. The first 
World War brought about the end of the Austrian Empire 
on the well-known principle of self-determination. But here 
what you are doing is this. There are countries which are 
culturally one, which are socially homogeneous, which have 
one language, one race, one destiny, desiring to live together. 
You go there, cut them up and divide the carcase, and hand 
over a part of the carcase to what ? To countries who are 
interested in spreading communism. From the figures which 
I have given there can be no doubt about it that communist 
countries today are as big as a giant — nobody has seen a 
giant — I have not seen anyhow 

Shri B. Gupta: Except yourself. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : and he is supposed to be 

one of the biggest individuals or persons that can be imagined. 
Here you have a vast country endlessly occupied in destroying 
other people, absorbing them within its fold on the theory 
that it is liberating them. The Russian liberation, so far as I 
can understand, is liberation followed by servitude; it is not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


878 


878 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

liberation followed by freedom. But the point is this — and it 
worries me considerably. You are, by this kind of a peace, 
doing nothing more but feeding the giant every time the 
giant opens his jaw and wants something to eat. When you 
are feeding the giant regularly and constantly, the question 
that I should ask myself is this. Is it not conceivable that this 
giant may one day turn to us and say: “I have now consumed 
everything that there was to be consumed : you are the only 
person that remains, and I want to consume you”. 

Shri H. P. Saksena: Then we will consume the giant. 

Dr. B. R, Ambedkar: Let us not boost ourselves too much. 
We have not been tried as yet in an international bout and 
when we are tried in an international bout I think it will be 
found out whether we can face the situation ourselves. But 
the point that I was making is this. This principle of feeding 
the giant seems to me a most obnoxious principle and how, 
for instance as I said can we expect to be relieved ? Will 
the Russians show any gratitude because the Indian Prime 
Minister and the Indian Parliament have supported the 
partition of Indo-China or supported the partition of Korea, 
and will they not turn to us ? I think this is a question which 
the Indians should bear in mind and not forget or overlook. 

Now the other question, namely, co-existence. This 
coexistence to my mind is an astounding principle unless it 
is very strictly limited. The question is : Can communism and 
free democracy work together ? Can they live together ? Is 
it possible to hope that there will not be a conflict between 
them ? The theory, at any rate, seems to me utterly absurd, 
for communism is like a forest fire; it goes on burning and 
consuming anything and everything that comes in its way. 
It is quite possible that countries which are far distant from 
the centre of communism may feel safe that the forest fire 
may be extinguished before it reaches them or it may be that 
the fire may never reach them. But what about the countries 
which are living in the vicinity of this forest fire ? Can you 
expect that human habitation and this forest fire can long live 
together ? I have seen comments from Canadian statesmen 
and from European statesmen congratulating the policy of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


879 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 879 

co-existence. Their praises and their encomiums do not move 
me in the least. I attach no value to their view and to their 
opinion. The statesmen of Canada can very easily say that 
co-existence is possible because Canada is separated from 
China and Russia by thousands and thousands of miles. 
Similarly, England after having pulled itself out from the 
great conflagration, now thinks that she is too exhausted to 
do anything and therefore likes to enunciate and support the 
principle of co-existence. But there again it is a matter of 
distance. One must not forget that in the foreign policy of a 
country the geographical factor is one of the most important 
factors. Each country’s foreign policy must vary with its 
geographical location in relation to the factor with which it is 
dealing. What is good for Canada may not be good for us. What 
is good for England may not be good for us. Therefore, this 
co-existence seems to me a principle which has been adopted 
without much thought on the part of the Prime Minister. 

Then, Sir, I will say a few words with regard to the 
SEATO. I was very carefully listening to the Prime Minister’s 
observations with regard to the SEATO, and I was glad to 
find that he had not made up his mind about the SEATO. If I 
heard him correctly, he said that in view of the fact that this 
country has accepted the chairmanship of some commission in 
accordance with the Geneva decisions it may not be compatible 
for him and for this country to join the SEATO at the same 
time. The two things would undoubtedly be incompatible. 
But apart from that I think the merits of the SEATO must 
be considered. 

The repugnance to SEATO appears to me to arise from 
two sources. I think I am not letting out any secret nor am 
I accusing the Prime Minister of anything of which he does 
not know, that the Prime Minister had a certain amount 
of hostility, or if he does not like that word, estrangement 
between himself and the United States. Somehow he and 
the U.S.A. do not see eye to eye together. That is one reason 
why I think he always had a certain amount of repugnance 
to anything that comes from the United States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


880 


880 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri B. Gupta: Are you speaking for match-making ? 

Mr. Chairman: The Prime Minister is quiet and you are 
talking. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : And secondly from the fear of what 
Russia will think if India joins the SEATO. Here again, I think, 
it is necessary to give the House some background against 
which the merits of the SEATO may be assessed. Now, Sir, 
what is the background of all this ? The background is this. 

I have given a list of countries which have gone 
under the Russian regime. I think it is well known that 
this happened largely because, if I may say so, of the 
foolishness of the Americans during the last Great War. 
The Russians got possession of these territories with the 
consent of Mr. Roosevelt and with the reluctant willingness of 
Mr. Churchill. Mr. Churchill expressed, when the war ended 
that they had done a great mistake, and a great wrong, in 
11 00 AM sacrificing the liberty of so many nations for the 
sake of winning victory against Hitler. And the 
same feeling, I think, is expressed by him in his last volume 
which he called “Triumph and Tragedy”. It is because of this 
that he named his last volume “Triumph and Tragedy”. Now, 
Sir, what the Americans are doing. If I understand, their 
policy correctly, is this. Their point of view is that Russia 
should be satisfied with what she has got during the war, 
the ten countries. As a matter of fact. I should have thought 
that it should have been the duty of the Americans and the 
Britishers to extricate these countries, to liberate them, to 
make them free. But neither country has the will, nor the 
moral stamina, nor the desire to engage itself in such a 
stupendous task. They are therefore following, what may be 
called a second line of defence, and that second line of defence 
is that Russia should not be allowed, or China should not be 
allowed to occupy any further part of the free world. I think 
that is the principle to which all freedom-loving people would 
agree. There could be no objection to it. And it is to prevent 
Russia from making further aggression that they are planning 
the SEATO. The SEATO is not an organisation for committing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


881 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 881 

aggression on any country. The SEATO is an organisation 
for the purpose of preventing agression on free countries. I 
wonder whether the Prime Minister will not be prepared to 
accept this principle, that at any rate, such part of the free 
world as has, by accident, remained free should be allowed to 
remain free and not to be subjugated . Is India not exposed to 
aggression ? I should have thought that it is very much exposed 
to aggression. I have no time. Otherwise, I was going to point 
the House how this country has been completely encircled on 
one side by Pakistan and the other Muslim countries. I do not 
know what is going to happen, but now that the barrier between 
Egypt and England has been removed by the handing over 
of the Suez Canal, I think, there may be very little difficulty 
in the Muslim countries joining with Pakistan and forming 
a block on that side. On this side by allowing the Chinese to 
take possession of Lhasa, the Prime Minister has practically 
helped the Chinese to bring their border down to the Indian 
border. Looking at all these things, it seems to me that it 
would be an act of levity not to believe that India, if it is 
not exposed to aggression right now, is exposed to aggression 
and that — aggression might well be committed by people who 
always are in the habit of committing aggression. 

Now, I come to the other question. What will Russia say if 
we join SEATO ? And the question that I like to ask is this. 
What is the key-note of Russian foreign policy ? What is it ? 
The key note of our foreign policy is to solve the problems 
of the other countries, and not to solve the problems of our 
own. We have here the problem of Kashmir. We have never 
succeeded in solving it. Everybody seems to have forgotten 
that it is a problem. But I suppose, some day, we may wake 
up and find that the ghost is there. And I find that the Prime 
Minister has launched upon the project of digging a tunnel 
connecting Kashmir to India. Sir, I think, it is one of the most 
dangerous things that a Prime Minister could do. We have 
been hearing of a tunnel under the English Channel to connect 
France with England. We have been hearing it for 50 years, I 
think someone has been proposing, and yet the English have 
never done anything to carry out the project, because it is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


882 


882 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a double-edged weapon. The enemy, if he conquers France, 
can use the tunnel and rush troops into England and conquer 
England. That might also happen. The Prime Minister, in 
digging the tunnel, thinks that he alone would be able to 
use it. He does not realise that it can always be a two-way 
traffic, and that a conqueror who comes on the other side and 
captures Kashmir, can come away straight to Pathankot, and 
probably come into the Prime Minister’s house — I do not know. 

Mr. Chairman: Getting time. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Now, one or two small observations 

Mr. Chairman : One or two small observations to wind up. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes. The Prime Minister has been 
depending upon what may be called the Panchsheel taken by 
Mr. Mao and recorded in the Tibet Treaty of non-aggression. 
Well, I am somewhat surprised that the Prime Minister 
should take this Panchsheel seriously. The Panchsheel, as 
you, Sir, know it well, is the essential part of the Buddhist 
religion, and if Mr. Mao had any faith in the Panchsheel, he 
certainly would treat the Buddhists in his own country in a 
very different way. There is no room for Panchsheel in politics 
and secondly, not in the politics of a communist country. The 
communist countries have two well-known principles on which 
they always act. One is that morality is always in a flux. There 
is no morality. Today’s morality is not tomorrow’s morality. 

You can keep your word in accordance with the morality 
of today and you can break your word with equal justification 
tommorrow because tomorrow’s morality will be different. 
The second thing is that when the Russian Communist 
State is dealing with the other States, each transaction is a 
unit by itself. When we deal with somebody, we begin with 
goodwill and end with gratitude. When the Russians deal 
with somebody, they do not begin with goodwill, nor do they 
end with any gratitude. Each transaction begins and ends by 
itself, and this is what I am sure the Prime Minister will find 
at the end when the situation ripens. The Prime Minister has 
always been saying that there is such a thing as the principle, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


883 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 883 

“Asia for Asiatics”. Yes, in so far as colonialism is concerned, 
that principle is perfectly true. Asia must be for Asiatics, but 
we are dealing with a situation like this ? Is Asia one today ? 
In what sense ? Asia is divided now, it is a divided house now. 
More than half of Asia is communist. It has adopted a different 
principle of life and a different principle of Government. The 
rest of Asia follows a different life and a different principle 
of Government. What unity can there be among Asiatics ? 
What is the use of talking about Asia for Asiatics ? There can 
be no such thing at all. Asia is already becoming the cockpit 
of war and strife among Asians themselves. Therefore, it is 
better to align ourselves with what we call free nations if we 
believe in freedom. 

One word about Goa. There can be no doubt that the Prime 
Minister in pursuing the policy of getting Goa evacuated is 
quite right. It is a very sound policy and everybody must lend 
his support to him. I do. But there is one observation that 
I would like to make. This question about the evacuation of 
Goa by the Portuguese and handing it over to India was, if 
I remember aright, brought to his notice very early when we 
got our independence. I possess with me some notes which 
were submitted to him by a delegation — I have forgotten 
their names, but I have got them with me — but the Prime 
Minister took no active interest in it. I am very sorry to 
say that, because I feel that if the Prime Minister had in 
the very beginning taken an active interest in the matter. 
I am sure about it that a small police action on the part of 
the Government of India would have been quite sufficient to 
enable us to get possession of Goa, but he has always been 
only shouting against them, only shouting and doing nothing. 
The result has been that the Portuguese have been able, so far 
as we know, to garrison Goa. Of course, the Prime Minister’s 
information must be correct and must be accepted by us that 
Goa is still defenseless, that there is no garrison there, no 
army there, brought by the Portuguese. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: I said no such thing. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I thought he said so, but whatever 
it is, the point now is this : Personally I myself think that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


884 


884 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

this discussion over observers has no value and no consequence. 
Supposing the Portuguese give the best treatment to the 
Goanese, are we going to give up our claim over Goa ? May 
be that they give dominion status to them, so far as we know, 
and make them full-fledged citizens, but we are not going 
to give up our claim to Goa. No doubt about it. It is part of 
India. Therefore all this talk about observers seems to me 
to be beside the point. We must deal with the Portuguese 
people over this question. Are they prepared to surrender their 
sovereignty in the same way as the British did ? This is the 
only issue that I think need be discussed. Sir, it seems very 
unfortunate that some of the enlightened nations are siding 
with the Portuguese. I am sorry to see Mr. Churchill in a 
clandestine manner siding with the Portuguese saying to us. 
‘Do not use force’, Why ? Are they going to go away with a 
kiss from the Prime Minister ? And without a shot being fired ? 
Similarly Brazil, and I do not know what the attitude of the 
U.S.A. is, which has not been publicly proclaimed. Possibly, 
they may also have a soft corner for Portugal. I have been 
wondering why all these things have happened, why England, 
which voluntarily surrendered sovereignty, to the people of 
this country, should ask another country similarly situated 
to act in a contrary way. It is impossible to understand it. It 
seems to me — the Prime minister may accept my suggestion 
or may not accept it but it seems to me that they are trying 
to teach our Prime Minister that neutrality has price. 

Shri P. Sundarayya : The Prime Minister must take 
note of it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am going to make one suggestion 
to the Prime Minister. I do not think that we should have 
an armed conflict with the Portuguese if the Portuguese are 
going to be supported by other United Nations members, 
but less than that, there are two proposals that I wanted 
to make. You remember perhaps that there was the case in 
America which concerned the State of Louisiana, which was 
a French possession in the midst of American possessions 
and the Americans were very anxious to get rid of the French 
and to have Louisiana transferred to the United States. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


885 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 885 

measure that they adopted was to get it for a price. The price 
given was — I have got the figures with me. 

Shri P. Sundarayya: A few pieces or silver. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: A very small price indeed for a 
huge territory. Goa is really nothing compared with it. Goa 
is just one of the towns of Louisiana. If the Prime Minister 
wishes to adopt it 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: What is it? 

Mr. Chairman: Purchase it from Portugal 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Initiate discussion on that. I am 
suggesting alternative methods. 

Mr. Chairman: That is one suggestion. What is the other ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The other suggestion that I would 
like to put before the Prime Minister is that we can take 
Goa on lease. We all remember in our own country of the 
lease of Berar. Berar was the property of the Nizam. He had 
sovereignty over it, but the British Government in the year 
1853 or so got Berar on a permanent lease. I do not know 
what amount of money they gave the Nizam. It might have 
been very small. 

Shri B. Gupta: If we do that, we will have to mortgage 
India’s honour. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am sorry I Can’t follow him. It 
is very difficult for me to follow him. 

Mr. Chairman: It is difficult to follow him. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: What I say is this. We are hot 
interested very much as to who is the nominal sovereign in 
this matter. What we are interested in getting possession 
of Goa, and in establishing our own administration there. 
We have here a case where in our own country a territory 
belonging to another sovereign was leased over, made 
permanently part of India with certain embellishments to 
indicate that there was a sovereign. I think his son was made 
Prince of Berar. That is another method which the Prime 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


886 


886 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Minister may try. I don’t see any reason why he should not 
succeed with the Portuguese in persuading them to adopt 
either of the two methods. 

There is only one more observation I will make and I will 
sit down. I was reading the other day a volume published by 
the Institute of International Affairs at Chatham House, giving 
a survey of things that led to the Second World War, and the 
author, undoubtedly one of the best and most erudite, drew 
two conclusions as to why the war came and why it was not 
avoided. One was that Mr. Chamberlain, on account of the 
policy of disarmament which was then being agitated upon 
by the Labour Party could not preserve what is called the 
balance of power in Europe and allowed Hitler to grow and 
grow until, it was difficult to control him. The second thing, 
he said, was that Chamberlain made the greatest mistake in 
believing in the word of Hitler. There was no greater liar than 
Hitler. He was given all that he wanted when the Sudetan 
Germans were separated from Czechoslovakia and he said he 
had nothing more to ask. The whole House will remember that 
after that treaty was signed, the very next day he marched 
into Czechoslovakia. I hope our Prime Minister will not make 
these blunders. Sir, I have done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


887 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


887 


( 49 ) 

GOVERNMENT ORDER ON BANK 
DISPUTES 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : Mr. Chairman, I see 
from the speech of the Hon. the Prime Minister that it was 
more anxious to dispel certain charges which people are 
likely to make against the Government on the ground that 
they have shown a bias in favour of capitalists and against 
labour. I certainly am not one of those who are seeking to 
make such a charge against the Government. I may make out 
a case towards the end of my speech that the Government has 
altogether misjudged the position expressed in my judgement, 
has not even understood the facts which were before them. 

12-00 NOON 

The Prime Minister’s case — if I understood him correctly — 
resembled the case of a woman who had given birth to an 
illegitimate child and when she was questioned on this issue, 
she said : “Sir, it may be illegitimate, but it is a very small 
baby.” Well, I suppose we could separate the two issues, 
the fact that the decision is illegitimate and the fact that 
the decision probably is a small one. We are concerned only 
whether the decision is a just one or not. 

As the time is very short, it is not possible to indulge in 
any preliminary obersvations before entering into the subject 
matter. I, therefore, propose to begin with the subject matter 
itself. 

A certain issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition 
is this : Are the modifications made by the Government in 
the Labour Appellate Tribunal’s Award justified ? The Prime 
Minister legitimately said that the Government has the right 
to modify and I entirely agree with him that the Government 
should have the right to modify the Award, because, after all, 


* P. D. Vol. 7A. (R. S.), 2nd September 1954, pp. 1207-16. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


888 


888 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Government which he is in charge of, has to consider the 
welfare of the people as a whole and not merely of one section 
of the people, and they carry the responsibility all together. 
Therefore, that is a very legitimate right. As I said, the 
question is whether they had exercised their right properly. 

Now, Sir, in order to appreciate the point that I propose 
to make, I think it is necessary to itemise the modifications 
which the Government has made in the Labour Appellate 
Tribunal’s Award. What are the modifications ? So far as 
I see, the modifications are four. In the first place, the 
Government has added a new area, called class IV area, which 
is to comprise populations of less than 30,000. The previous 
awards, commencing from the award of Mr. Justice Sen, 
the Sastry award and the Tribunal award, have all agreed 
that it was enough to classify the areas into three classes. 
A fourth class was not necessary, but the Government felt, 
for reasons I have no doubt the Hon. Finance Minister will 
explain in the course of his reply which led them to create 
this new class IV area. Sir, the second thing they have done 
is to have fixed the salary for the Class IV area. So far as A 
Class banks are concerned, the minimum salary — I am not 
dealing with the other matters such as house rent allowance 
and dearness allowance, because what we are concerned with 
is the basic minimum salary — is Rs. 66. For B class banks 
it is Rs. 60; for C class it is Rs. 51, and for D class also it 
is Rs. 51, I think my friend will correct me if I am wrong. I 
find the two bracketed together. The third change which the 
Government has made in the Award of the Tribunal is that 
they have exempted from the operation of the Award Part B 
and Part C States, except the three towns, I think, of Delhi, 
Ajmer and some other town. I forget now. And the fourth 
modification which the Government has made is to grant 
complete exemption to a bank which is called the United 
Bank of India. 

The Minister for Finance (Shri C. D. Deshmukh): 

May I point out that protection of the present emoluments 
is also a modification of the Award ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, I take it to be so. 

Shri C. D. Deshmunkh: I assure the hon. Member that 
it is so. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


889 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 889 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Now, Sir, what we have to do is to 
consider the grounds urged in support of these modification. 
It is said that banking is a very necessary industry or service 
for the development of India, its commerce and its industry. It 
is a thing, I think, which nobody would dispute, that banking 
is a very essential thing which ought to be sustained by all 
legitimate means. Secondly if the banks are necessary, then 
salaries and wage bills of employees must be so fixed that they 
will allow the banks to make a profit. That is the proposition, 
I think, which most people would question, but that is one of 
the foundations on which the modification rests. 

The first thing to which I would like to draw the attention 
of the House is this. There is in existence today, in fact in 
operation, the Sen Award. It has been in operation since 1951. 
Its scales were certainly much higher than the scales of the 
Sastry Award. Now the point is this. This award given by 
Mr. Justice Sen in 1951 has been in operation and was put 
into operation by the Government by special ordinance, because 
the Sen Award was declared to be void, by the Supreme 
Court, on the application of certain bankers on the ground 
that there was some technical defect in its composition, and, 
therefore, the Sen Committee was not entitled to give an 
award. When the bankers had started reducing the salary of 
the employees, Government stepped in, and by an ordinance 
declared that the wages were frozen, that is to say, whatever 
was given to the employees under the Sen Award would 
continue notwithstanding the fact that the Supreme Court 
had declared the Award to be void. Now, Sir, that is one piece 
of evidence, I submit, which goes to show that the argument 
that this Award, if placed upon the shoulders of the banks, 
would not leave them with sufficient profits does not seem, 
to my mind, to carry any weight at all. 

Then again, let us compare the figures which have been 
supplied by the Reserve Bank in a booklet, I understand, 
which is called, “The Trend of Events” or something like 
that. It contains figures from 1949 to 1953. I have taken out 
just the relevant figures. Now, in the case of A class banks, 
there is a fall in the working capital of 10 per cent gross 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


890 


890 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

earnings have gone up by 20 per cent, and the dividends have 
increased by 8 per cent, during this period. In the case of 
B class banks, there is a fall in deposits of 13 per cent, also 
a fall in working capital of 13 percent., but gross earnings 
have gone up by 9 per cent. In the case of C class banks, 
deposits have gone up by 12 per cent., working capital has 
gone up by 12 percent, and there has been an increase in 
gross earnings, and also an increase in dividends. So far as 
the D class banks are concerned, they appear to me to be a 
most prosperous institution in this country, because there 
has been in their case an all-round increase, in deposits, in 
working capital, gross earnings and dividends. Now, Sir, there 
is no doubt that there is a certain amount of fall in the profits 
with regard to calss A banks and class B banks. What are 
the reasons for it ? Is it the reason that the Wage Bill has 
increased, or, does the reason lie somewher else ? It seems 
to me that there is a fall in the deposits, and a considerable 
rise in the rate of interest, to account for the fact that there 
has been a certain amount of fall in their profits. And surely, 
the Wage bill could not be used as a ground for urging that 
the banks have been sent into ruination by this Award. I 
therefore, submit that it is not possible to accept the argument 
that profits have gone down because of Wage bill. They have 
certainly not gone down on that account, although they may 
have gone down. Therefore, this argument certainly cannot 
be used for the modification of the Award in order to bring 
down the wage as fixed by the Tribunal. 

Then again, Sir, with regard to the second change, namely, 
the creation of a class IV area I do not quite undrestand 
why the Government felt the necessity of creating this new 
area. The cases were argued before three tribunals. There 
were innumerable lawyers representing the workers and 
representing the bankers. Surely, none of them ever thought 
that it was necessary, in the case of any class of banks, that 
this new area should be created. What led the Government 
to create this area, I do not quite understand. 

Then, Sir, the third change — the exemption of Part B and 
Part C States — seems to me to be one of the most difficult 
things to justify. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


891 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 891 

Mr. Chairman: It is getting time. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have just a few things to say 

Mr. Chairman: Yes, as briefly as possible. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Thank you, Sir. It is very difficult 
to understand on what ground these two areas of Part B and 
Part C States could be excluded from the operation of this 
Award. Now, Sir, what does this mean ? It means that the 
lowest scale which the Government has laid down for class 
IV area, namely, a minimum salary of Rs. 51, is not to be 
operative in Part B and Part C States, that is to say, the 
employees have been left at the mercy of the employer. 

They may pay them any wages they like. May be that 
banking is necessary and that banks should make profits. That 
also be a reasonable thing, but should we allow this kind of 
exploitation, complete exploitation ? No minimum standards 
have been fixed at all. It seems to me completely inexplicable 
and un-understandable. 

Now, again, the fourth modification made by the 
Government in respect of the exemption of the United Bank 
of India is also a very extraordinary thing. So far as I have 
been able to gather any information about this particular 
institution, originally there were four banks started by the 
refugees in Calcutta to help themselves, I believe, and to 
carry on the business of banking. 

The Deputy Minister for Finance (Shri A. C. Guha) : I 

am afraid the lion. Member is not quite correct. The banks were 
there long before the partition. Only, they were amalgamated 
into one bank after the partition. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am very glad to hear that. That 
supports me much more. I was taking a broken reed for my 
stand. I take it that this is a long-standing institution, but 
they were amalgamated. 

Shri A. C. Guha: May be long-standing but may not be 
sound-standing. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: This bank, according to the 
information I have, has a working capital of Rs. 33 crores. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


892 


892 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Let my friend deny it or let him correct me. He knows 
something about this bank evidently. The capital of this 
bank is somewhere near Rs. 33 crores. Now, according to 
the classification that has been adopted by the Sen Award, 
the Sastry Award and of the Appellate Tribunal, this bank 
ought to be placed under A class banks, because A class banks 
are banks whose working capital is Rs. 25 crores or above. 
Certainly this bank as I said, ought to be in the A class and 
the scale prescribed by Government ought to be applied to 
this bank. Apparently there seems to be no ground. Evidently 
this bank for some reason which I am unable to understand, 
was in troubled waters. It applied to the Sastry Committee 
and asked for some exemption. The Sastry Committee gave it 
exemption up to 31st December 1954. They said “After that 
date the Award will apply to you.” When the matter went 
to the Appellate Tribunal, this bank which was not satisfied 
with the concession given to it by the Sastry Committee, 
again applied for further exemption, and the Tribunal was 
pleased to extend the period of exemption up to December 
1955, and the Government in its notification specifying the 
modifications which they wanted to make said : “This Award 
shall not apply to this bank at all.” I hope that my friend 
does not say that it shall never apply to them. I hope it will 
apply to them some day. It requires some justification as to 
why the Government was so biased in favour of this particular 
bank as to set aside the limited concession that was given by 
the two previous tribunals and exempted it altogether. There 
is no justification whatsoever. 

Now, there are other points to which I wish to draw the 
attention of the house. I find that in certain respects the 
Government ought to have modified the Award but has not 
modified, and the first point which, I think the Government 
ought to have taken into consideration as a point requiring 
modification is the system of classification that was adopted 
from the very beginning, from the Sen Committee down to 
the labour Appellate Tribunnal. Now, Sir, I should like to 
give just one illustration to show how absurd has been the 
classification. Take Class A banks. Class A banks are banks 
with a working capital of Rs. 25 crores or more. It does not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


893 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 893 

set any upper limit. It just says Rs. 25 crores. That is to 
say, all other banks who have — may be — Rs. 100 crores as 
working capital or Rs. 200 crores as working capital, are to 
be on a par with a bank who has got just Rs. 25 crores as 
its working capital. As a flagrant illustration of this wrong 
classifiaction, I find that the case of the Imperial Bank is the 
most apposite. My friend there has given figures, but I would 
like to give the figures that I have for what they are worth. 
Its capital, I understand is somewhere about Rs. 218 crores, 
and it has deposits totalling 41 per cent, of the total deposits 
of all the Indian scheduled banks. Now, Sir, I should like to 
ask whether it is right to place a bank with Rs. 25 crores as 
working capital on the same footing, on the same par with 
a bank which has got Rs. 218 crores as working capital and 
whether it was not desirable and necessary for the government 
to create a special class of the Imperial Bank. 

Prof. G. Ranga (Andhara): Let them nationalise it. 

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: I have not got all the figures but there 
are many groups between Rs. 25 crores and Rs. 218 crores, 
and I am sure that, if there had been many classifications, 
many employees would have got larger benefits by way of 
wages and other emoluments, because they will all be related 
to profits, but the Finance Minister has very quietly accepted 
the classification proposed by these three bodies without 
proper investigation. 

Mr. Chairman : You must wind up. Dr. Ambedkar. There 
are other speakers. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, Sir, I would not take more 
than a minute or two. I do not know why my hon. friend, 
who made an exemption in the case of the United Bank, 
which was really an exemption which worked adversely to 
the working classes, did not make a different category of the 
Imperial Bank, so that it would have been a discrimination 
in favour of the working classes. Surely, one would have been 
on a par with the other. 

Then, there is another thing arising out of this point of 
classification. None of these three bodies, the Sen Committee, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


894 


894 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Sastry Committee and the Appellate Tribunal, had felt 
it necessary to make a distinction between Indian banks and 
foreign banks in this country. By foreign banks I mean the 
exchange banks. I find from the Sastry Award that there 
were twelve of these exchange banks which were a party to 
the dispute before the. Sen Committee, the Sastry Committee 
and the Appellate Tribunal. Now, Sir, each of these banks 
according to the Sastry Award, has more than Rs. 50 crores by 
way of deposits which are mostly gathered from the depositors 
in this country. Now, everyone knows that these foreign or 
exchange banks mainly engage themselves in supporting 
foreign investors or foreign commerce. 

They render, I suppose, very little help to the indigenous 
industry or to the indigenous trade. That is one point. Secondly, 
they import a large volume of their personnel from outside 
and Indians whom they employ are employed on the lowest 
rung of the ladder. The Europeans whom they employ are paid 
fabulous salaries. Surely, I ask whether it is not justifiable to 
make a distinction between the Indian banks and the foreign 
banks and to enable Indians at least to get some advantage 
from these foreign banks which is all going to the foreign 
employees. Sir, I have done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


895 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


895 


( 50 ) 

REPORT OF COMMISSIONER FOR SCHEDULED 
CASTES AND TRIBES FOR 1953 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
this is the third Report which the Commissioner for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes has submitted to 
the President. At the outset, going through the Report, one 
notices that the Commissioner makes a complaint against the 
Members of Parliament blaming him for not taking action 
on the various matters discussed by him in his Report. He 
says that the Members of Parliament have forgotten that 
he is not an executive authority, that his duty is merely 
to report. The executive departments are supposed to give 
effect to whatever recommendations of suggestions that he 
makes, I think his observations are very sound. He is not an 
executive authority and for the purpose of criticising what 
action has been taken, the criticism must be levelled either 
against the Home Minister or against the other departments 
of the Government of India. But, Sir, while one must admit 
the legitimacy of the criticism made by the Commissioner, I 
think there is one criticism that one can legitimately make 
against the Commissioner himself in the matter of drafting 
and presenting his Report. I was referring to his chapter 
dealing with complaints, because I thought that would be one 
of the most interesting and instructive chapters in that book. 
We are all aware of the fact that the Scheduled Castes in 
particular are subjected to all sorts of tyrannies, oppressions 
and maltreatment at the hands of the villagers in the midst 
of whom they live. And it would undoubtedly be a matter of 
great interest to know what are the tyrannies, maltreatments 
and oppressions to which they are being subjected almost 
every day, I have no doubt that the Commissioner’s report 
would be the proper place where such complaints would be 


* P. D., Vol. 7A, (R. S.), 6th September 1954, pp. 1447-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


896 


896 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

recorded, but I find the Commissioner absolutely silent over 
this matter of the gravest importance for the Scheduled 
Castes. I find, for instance, that from the complaints which 
have come to me — and I am sure that many more complaints 
must have gone to the Commissioner; they could not be less 
than a thousand, or certainly five hundred, but I mention 
one or two which have come to my notice and are of very 
recent occurrence — I am told on very reliable authority that 
in Rajasthan thirty Scheduled Caste people have been shot 
down by the so-called dacoits. The real fact is that the Rajputs 
and the high caste Hindus do not like the Scheduled Castes 
in Rajasthan to enjoy what are called the fundamental rights 
which give them equality of status with the other Hindus. 
In order to terrorise them and to make them nervous, in the 
matter of exercising these fundamental rights, the high caste 
Hindus have organised themselves into a band of dacoits and 
they go on shooting the Chamars, who are trying to exercise 
and derive the benefit of the fundamental rights. Police parties 
have been sent there in order to give protection to them, 
but my information is that the police are in league with the 
dacoits. Half a number of guns possessed by the police were 
handed over to the dacoits and the report is made that the 
guns have been snatched away from them by the dacoits. 
Half the number of bullets are again handed over to these 
dacoits by the police. Only half are fired, probably in the 
air without causing any effect. The result is that the dacoits 
are getting on merrily. The dacoits are really nothing else 
but what existed in the southern States of America known 
as the Ku-Klux-Klan, a band of Whites who were bent upon 
shooting down the Negroes if they tried to exercise the right 
of equality which was given to them after the Civil War. I 
do not find any mention of this incident in the Report of the 
Commissioner. 

I mention another incident, and that has occurred in 
Bombay. One Bhangi who was living in a village was supposed 
by the Hindus to have brought about a certain disease in 
the village. They thought the malignant influence which 
he possessed was the cause of a certain disease which was 
prevalent in the village. They caught hold of him and asked 
him to take a burning fire on his head and walk around the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


897 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 897 

village, so that the evil forces which brought about the disease 
may pass away. Fortunately, they forgot that he had a turban 
on the head, and he too forgot to remove the turban. And the 
burning fire and the pot in which the fire was placed were 
so hot that practically half his cranium was burnt. I find no 
mention of this in the Report of the Commission. I know of 
a case in the Hyderabad State, in the Aurangabad district, 
where a certain Scheduled Caste woman was declared by the 
villagers as a witch who was responsible for some kind of an 
epidemic that was prevalent in that village. They questioned 
her. She could hardly prove her innocence; there was no method 
of proving. The result was that not only she was belaboured, 
but her house was burnt, and the members of her family were 
subjected to ignominies of the worst sort. I do not find any 
mention of that in the Report of the Commissioner. 

My hon. friend, the Home Minister, I think, will admit that 
the Scheduled Caste people, for good reason or for bad reason, 
10-00 A M are the habit of sending their complaints to me as 
well as to the Government officers, and I too posses 
a long list of these tyrannies and oppressions. I thought that it 
would be right to expect some reference to these complaints in 
this public document. But there is none whatever. And I have 
been wondering whether this Report of the Commissioner, so 
far as the record of complaints is concerned, is a doctored and 
tutored document. The Commissioner seems to have completely 
forgotten one of the most important objectives that underline 
the creation of his office. The object was that public conscience 
should be energised by the presentation of the ugly treatment 
which the caste Hindus meted out to the Scheduled Castes, 
so that those who are enlightened enough may go among the 
public and tell them whether this is a behaviour worthy of 
a civilised people. But when you do not present these facts, 
when you suppress them for one reason or another, this 
important motive and object in the creation of this office, I 
think, is completely nullified. I do hope that in the next report 
which the Commissioner will prepare, he will bear this thing 
in mind, and not be ashamed to present facts as they are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


898 


898 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

presented to him by the suffering masses, the untouchables. 
That is the first comment that I have to make over the nature 
of the report submitted to us by the Commissioner. 

It is quite clear that in such cases as have been referred 
to by the Commissioner, there have been many violations of 
the law, and there have been an endless series of tyrannies 
and oppressions practised upon the Scheduled Castes. This 
is a matter which, I suppose, is a matter which is within 
the portfolio of the Home minister. To what extent are the 
laws made especially for the Scheduled Castes or the general 
laws made for all people respected, and to what extent are 
the breaches committed punished ? Sir, on the first day, 
when the Hon. Home Minister presented the Report to the 
House, I happened unfortunately to come a little late. But 
I did catch him towards the end of his speech. And the 
impression that was left upon me, of the speech that he had 
made, was that what he had said was said in a spirit not 
merely of lightheartedness, but — he will forgive me if I say 
this — with a certain amount of levity. He asked: What is the 
use of prosecuting people ? People will begin to do Satyagrah, 
people will begin to do all sorts of things. Therefore, let us 
not rely upon what might be called the vindication of the 
law. Well, if that is the attitude of the Home Ministry, then 
of course nothing can be expected. The lawlessness, which 
is being practised continously for thousands of years against 
the Scheduled Castes, has been lawful, and will continue to 
be lawful, because it is impossible for the Scheduled Caste 
people themselves to come forward to prosecute the breaker of 
the law. As the Commissioner has said, the Scheduled Caste 
people are economically so subservient to, so dominated by 
the caste Hindus, that it is quite impossible for them to come 
forward to challenge the very people on whom they depend 
for their economic livelihood. 

That is an admission which the Commissioner has been 
making from the very beginning. It occurs in his first report, 
it occurs in his second report and he repeats it in his third 
report that it is useless to depend upon the Scheduled Castes 
themselves to vindicate their rights. They have neither the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


899 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 899 

economic independence against their oppressors nor have they 
got the means to prosecute their oppressors. 

The second thing which the Commissioner does not seem 
to emphasise very much and which I know very well myself 
from my experience of twenty years is that in a large number 
of cases the police force is in league with the caste Hindus. 
Ninety per cent, of the police force is drawn from the caste 
Hindus. Only a few per cent, and a very small one is now 
being recruited from the Scheduled Castes but this only to 
the posts of police sepoys. There are no officers amongst 
them. The result is that the upper grade policemen are in 
league with the caste Hindus. More often they refuse to 
record the complaints of the Scheduled Castes when they go 
to the Thana, in their station diary even though the offence 
may be cognisable. They throw them out, turn them out 
and tell them to go away. They do not record the complaint 
and secondly if they do, they probably would conduct the 
investigation in such a slipshod manner that ultimately the 
case fails. In this situation I ask the Hon. the Home Minister 
whether he thinks that there is any duty upon him or not. 
I ask him whether the breaches of the law which are being 
reported and witnessed by Scheduled Castes or other people 
are not breaches of the fundamental law and the fundamental 
rights ? Are not fundamental rights part of the Constitution ? 
If you are allowing a large mass of bullies and hooligans to 
trample upon the fundamental rights, are you not bringing 
the Constitution to contempt ? Is it not your duty to create 
a special department either within the Home Ministry itself 
or separately for this purpose ? The United States has got 
a Judicial Department, the duty and the function of which 
is to see that the Constitution and the Federal laws are 
respected. I think it is high time that the Home Minister 
realises that if the Constitution is to function, if it is to be 
the law of the land, if all people are to recognise it, his duty 
is to see that it is enforced, and the only way in which he 
can enforce it is to take upon himself the duty of enforcing 
it and not leave it even to the State Governments who can 
never do it, not even to the Police who has no desire to do 
it, and not even to the Scheduled Castes who have no means 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


900 


900 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to do it. Therefore I hope that he will take the matter more 
seriously and attend to it in the manner in which a statesman 
ought to. 

Now, I come to the subject matter of education. It is quite 
satisfactory I must admit, that the Government has been 
spending annually more and more on the education of the 
Scheduled Castes. If my friend will forgive my mentioning 
myself., he will realise that it was for the first time in the 
year 1942 that the Government of India, at my instance when 
I was a Member of the Executive Council, accepted that they 
too had the responsibility for the education of the Scheduled 
Castes. Theretofore, education was purely a provincial subject. 
It was only so far as the Muslims and Hindus were concerned, 
that the Government of India had taken upon themselves the 
responsibility of supporting the Aligarh University and the 
Benares Hindu University by an annual grant of Rs. 3 lakhs. 
I raised the question whether the Government which had 
recognised its duty for the Muslim and the Hindus, had not 
also a duty for the Scheduled Castes, and the Government of 
India agreed that it was a legitimate question and that the 
answer to that question could not be except in the affirmative. 
They granted Rs. 3 lakhs as a grant for the education of 
the scheduled castes from the Central funds. While, I am 
satisfied with the progress that is being made year by year by 
the enlargement of the educational grants for the Scheduled 
Castes, there are two points with which I am greatly dis- 
satisfied. One is this: At the time in 1942 when this question 
was raised by me for the first time in the Government of 
India, it was agreed that the responsibility for the education 
of the Scheduled Castes up to the university standard 
in India was to be borne by the Provincial Governments 
and that whatever contributions the Government of India 
made towards the education of Scheduled Castes would be 
devoted for their education in foreign countries. According 
to that understanding, the first batch of Scheduled Caste 
students was sent to England, although there was great, 
difficulty in the matter of getting admission to English and 
American universities, because they were overflooded. Yet we 
here in the Government of India pressed upon the foreign 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


901 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 901 

universities that as it was for the first time that the lowest 
of the low people were being sent for higher education, the 
foreign universities should show them some consideration. The 
result was that we were able to get admission for about 30 
Scheduled Caste students. Thereafter, in 1945 the old regime 
ended, and the Congress regime came in 1946. I had hoped 
that a system which had been inaugurated in 1943 or so and 
which had been given effect to and in which the Government’s 
responsibility for the education of the Scheduled Castes in 
India and their education outside was accepted, would be 
continued, but to my great surprise, great chagrin almost I 
must say I found that Mr. Rajagopalchari who became the 
Education Minister in the Congress regime and who has a 
great knack for giving a pious look to an impious act abolished 
the system of sending Scheduled Caste students to foreign 
countries, and since that time there had hardly been any 
student belonging to the Scheduled Castes who has gone 
abroad for further studies. I think that this is — what shall 
I say ? — a most dangerous thing from one point of view. No 
doubt the Hindus do not like my criticism, but I am firmly 
convinced that my criticism is right, and I must repeat it 
notwithstanding the opposition with which it may be met. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar) : But the Scheduled Castes 
are also Hindus. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, if you call them so. I am 
statutorily a Hindu. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : Factually also. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, the point is this. In this country, 
for reasons into which I need not go now, the fact is quite 
clear that the higher classes receive the highest education. 
Their children go to Cambridge, their children go to Oxford, 
their children go to the Columbia University and to all the 
other foreign universities. 

Dr. K. N. Katju : Perhaps my hon. friend is probably not 
aware that Harijans or members of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes are being sent to the foreign countries. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You are repenting, I see. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


902 


902 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. K. N. Katju : They are benefited by it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot hear. 

Dr. K. N. Katju: May I just say a few words? I heard 
him complain just now that the system of awarding foreign 
scholarships to the members of the scheduled castes has been 
given up and was being given up in 1946 by Rajaji. I was 
only just saying that foreign scholarships are being given 
today and that scheme was tried last year for one year and 
that scheme has now been made permanent for five years. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You are reviving it because you 
have seen the folly of it. 

Dr. K. N. Katju : It has been renewed. The scholarships 
are now being given. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : After an abeyance of several years. 

Dr. K. N. Katju : I am not concerned with that point. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You should look into the history 
of your department. You cannot simply say, ‘I don’t know’ 
What I was saying was this. Notwithstanding what my hon. 
friend said, I think the criticism that I am making is very 
valid and very fundamental. Here in this country you find 
really two nations — a ruling nation and a nation which is a 
subject nation. 

An Hon. Member : Question. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The backward classes are all subject 
peoples. They have no authority in any place. None whatever. 
They have no place in Administration — they have no place 
in the Executive and the Executive and the Administration 
is entirely monopolised by the higher classes. They are 
monopolising it by reason of the fact that they have been 
able to get the highest education. Why not examine all the 
Secretaries of your Departments in the Government of India ? 
The son and daughter of every Secretary in the Government 
is to be found in Cambridge or Oxford. Twice and thrice they 
have made journeys in order to lodge their children there 
because they have the amplest means. The backward class 
man’s son cannot get even primary education. This sort of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


903 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 903 

revolution in the two different classes is going on for centuries — 
it is an intolerable business because we cannot allow one class 
to rule for ever. For some time they may but they must see 
that the other classes also become educationally qualified in 
order that they too may hold the reins of government. We 
are not going to be subject people all the time. 

Shri H. P. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh) : There are no classes 
in India. This is a classless country. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Therefore what I am saying is this, 
that if you really want to unify the people, to bring all the 
people on level, then it is not enough that you should get the 
highest education and others should get the lowest and not 
even the lowest. It is from that point of view that you must 
introduce the system of foreign education. It was with that 
aim that I struggled to get some quota from the Government 
of India and asked them to put the responsibility for university 
education upon the provinces. The States have been jolly glad 
to throw the responsibility upon you. What do they do ? They 
are having prohibition, making people sober. Personally for 
myself I think a sober man who is an ignoramus is not to 
be perferred to a man who is educated and who drink a bit. 
I prefer the latter. I am glad to hear that my hon. Friend is 
now reviving the system of sending scheduled caste boys to 
foreign countries. I congratulate him. 

Now, Sir, the other thing which has recently come to my 
notice is this, that the Education Department has issued a 
circular — I think a month or two ago — to the effect that those 
scheduled caste boys only who have secured 50 per cent, 
marks in the examination shall get scholarships. Others will 
not get. I am wondering whether a generous Government with 
a sympathetic heart desiring to elevate the scheduled castes 
would ever think of prescribing so hard a test as securing 
50 per cent. You must consider the condition in which the 
scheduled caste boy lives. Probably his father or mother has 
not got even a room set apart for his study. He probably has 
not got a lamp to sit by at night and study. He is living in 
the midst of a crowd. How do you expect him to secure 50 
per cent, marks in the examination ? It is an absurdity — 
utter absurdity. You must, for some time allow the ordinary 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


904 


904 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

standard viz., of 33 per cent, which has been recognized by all 
the universities and which is being recognised by you also for 
the purposes of employment in the Government of India. If a 
boy who merely passes is fit to be employed by the Government 
of India, why is he not fit for the grant of scholarship for 
further education unless you want deliberely to put some 
kind of an impediment in the growth of their education ? The 
difficulty is this. The admissions take place some time in the 
last week of June. Various colleges admitted scheduled caste 
students without asking for fees because they knew that the 
Government of India would give them the scholarship. After 
three months of the joining of the College, the Ministry comes 
out with a circular saying that only those who have secured 
50 per cent, will get scholarships. What are the colleges to 
do with the boys whom they have admitted on the assurance 
that the previous system will continue in operation ? What 
are the boys going to do who have got themselves admitted 
into the college ? I hope my hon. friend the Home Minister 
will look into this matter and take it up with the Education 
Minister and ask them to square up this difficulty, at any 
rate so far as this year is concerned. You may do what you 
like next year provided you give enough notice both to the 
students and to the colleges as to what you propose to do. 

Then I come to the question of services. The Commissioner 
has divided his figures with regard to the services under three 
groups — the Army, the All india services and the Central 
Services of the Government of India. With regard to Army, I 
find that in certain categories the position has deteriorated. 
In 1952 there were two Second Lieutenants belonging to the 
scheduled castes. In 1953, the position is “nil”. Of Junior 
Commissioned Officers, in 1952 there were 601. In 1953 the 
number is 435. Non-Commissioned Officers, in 1952 there 
were 3,273. In 1953, the figure has gone down to 2,533. 
Other ranks, in 1952, the number was 22,288. In 1953 it has 
gone down to 18,666. I am quite unable to understand this 
deterioration in the position of the scheduled castes in the 
Army. The Army, I thought, is the one place where not much 
intellectual calibre is necessary, I mean in the other ranks. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


905 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 905 

may be that in the higher staff it is required — much intellectual 
eminence. But we are not talking about them. But taking 
the other ranks, we find that the figure has gone down from 
22,000 to some 18,000. Why? The Army, I understand, has 
been expanding, and with the expansion of the Army one 
would naturally expect an increase in the number of scheduled 
caste men in the Army. In all other places, you say they are 
unsuitable. And that is a very ambiguous phrase. All public 
service commissions and appointing authorities have learnt 
that phrase by heart. You simply say the man is unsuitable, 
and there is an end of the matter. But in the Army what is 
there to be unsuitable? What is the unsuitability about? There 
you have certain measurement of the chest. There are very 
few people among the scheduled caste’s who would not fulfil 
that test. Then you have certain tests of height — some 5 ft. 4 
inches or so. Well, I think all scheduled caste candidates would 
fill up that height (Interruption). Very few, there may be, I 
admit, who may fail. But given these physical standards of 
health, chest measurements and height, I should have thought 
that almost every scheduled caste man was fit to be in the 
military service. And when you are denying them service in 
other departments of the Government of India, surely you 
ought to make some concession to them in departments like 
the Army and the Police where education is not a matter of 
any considerable moment- But there again you have been 
behaving in a stepmotherly fashion. I do not know whether 
the Home Department evertakes interest in these figures, or 
knows them and pursues the matter. Surely, the Commander- 
in-Chief ought to be asked by them as to why this deterioration 
has taken place. 

Then, Sir I come to the All-India Serviced There are what 
they call the Administrative Service and the Indian Police 
Service. Recruitment to these, I think, started through the 
Public Services Commission, in the year 1952. My hon. friend 
Shri Datar will correct me, if I am wrong. But I think that 
is the year. 

The Deputy Minister For Home Affairs (Shri B. N. 
Datar) : About 1946. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


906 


906 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, I am not counting those whom 
they recruited from the Provinces. No scheduled caste man 
was recruited except one or two; the rest they found to be 
utterly unfit, although the Provincial Governments thought 
them quite fit. The Central Public Service Commission 
found them utterly unfit. That is all past history and I am 
dealing with the present. Has there been any recruitment 
to the Indian Administrative Service since 1952 — when the 
new Constitution came into force ? I have not seen single 
scheduled caste candidate being chosen by the Public Service 
Commission for the Indian Administrative Service — not one. I 
have not seen a single candidate being chosen by the Public 
Service Commission for the Indian Police Service either. It 
is only last year that I struggled with the Public Service 
Commission and induced them to accept one for the Indian 
Police Service. I wonder whether the Home Department which 
is in charge of services look upon this matter as of no moment 
or looks upon this matter as a matter of high moment. These 
are executive services. My hon. friend knows very well the 
difference between an executive service and an administrative 
service. An administrative service is more or less a clerical 
thing. The executive service possesses the power of direction. 
It has directive authority. Now, I want to say and I want to 
say it quite fearlessly that 2,000 clerks are of no value as 
compared to one officer holding an executive post. In Hindi 
we call it “Maarneki Jagah”. What are these poor clerks ? You 
will see in fortresses — but you have none in U.P. — in my part 
of the country the place is full of Maratha fortresses. 

Shri B. N. Datar : “Maar Quilla” We call it. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: STPPTt ^R W ^R TPRTT t <|yrPT 

Now, these executive posts are posts from where direction 
can be given. The clerks need all kinds of protection. Any 
officer may spoil their character-roll by writing a bad remark 
or saying that the man is no good. The only way he can be 
protected is by having somebody in the executive service 
who might look into this matter and see no injustice is 
being done. Similarly with regard to the policy laid down by 
the Government. Whether that policy will fructify and yield 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


907 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 907 

results depends upon who are the people who are charged with 
the duties of executing that policy. If the executive authority 
is unsympathetic, is antagonistic, that policy, however good 
it may be, can never fructify. And let me add, that so far as 
my experience goes, the whole of the administration which 
is now composed of caste Hindus, is the most unsympathetic 
administration that the scheduled castes have to suffer 
under. This is because of the unsympathetic character of 
the administration. And when we have been shouting for 
representation in services, that claim is being maligned by 
calling it communalism. What we are trying to do is to reduce 
the communalism of the other people. We are not asking for 
communalism. I hope my hon. friend will remember this. Until 
and unless your administration and your executive becomes 
more sympathetic to the scheduled castes, none of your laws 
and none, of your administrative policies will bear any fruit. 

Then let us come to, what are called, the Central Services. 
Here I am taking only the figures of permanent posts, not 
the temporary ones, as they stood on 1st December, 1952. 
The Commissioner says that the Ministry of Railways, the 
Ministry of Communications, the Ministry of Finance, the 
Ministry of Information and other organisations under its 
control have not supplied information on this point. Therefore, 
these figures relate to those departments which have supplied 
the information. 

The figures are very telling. In class I the actual strength 
is 752 and the scheduled castes number 10; according to the 
proportion fixed by the Home Ministry that ought to have 
been 175. Class II (gazetted posts) total number is 642 while 
the scheduled castes number only seven; that ought to have 
been 107 according to the proportion; class I (non-gazetted) 
total number is 1123 and the scheduled castes number 44; 
that ought to have been 185. Class III total number is 10,372 
and the scheduled castes number 536 and this ought to have 
been 728. In class IV, the total number is 8807. 

Dr. P. C. Mitra (Bihar) : How many of them applied ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The scheduled castes number 1251 
but ought to have been 1478. Class IV servants, I think, are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


908 


908 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

chaprasis and there you find the number of scheduled castes 
people fairly large. There are the figures which must be 
within the ken of the Home Ministry. They have laid down 
a proportion and surely, it is their duty to see that that 
proportion is carried out by the different Ministeries. Why 
has there been this defalcation on the part of the various 
Ministeries and why has the Home Minister not taken any 
action ? If he had taken any action, what is the action that 
he took in order that the scheduled castes receive their quota 
which is fixed by him ? Sir, it is a very black picture, if I 
may say so, very black. It reminds me of a cartoon which 
was drawn by the Germans during the last War. The cartoon 
depicted an old negro gentleman in Washington. When war 
was declared, the negro — as everybody knows, negroes are 
not well disposed towards the whites in America; they are 
always very angry, quarrelling with them for not giving them 
equality of opportunity — suddenly felt very patriotic and he 
said that he must transfer some of his patriotism to the young 
boy who was his son. He went to the market and purchased 
an American National Flag — small one which the boy could 
hold — and gave it to the boy. He said, “My son, I want to 
show you today our capital, our capital”. The boy did not 
realise what it meant. Holding the boy by the right hand — 
and the boy holding the flag in his left hand — the old man 
took him round and round in Washington City, showed him 
the Supreme Court, the Congress House, the Senate and so 
on and so on and ultimately, after lunch, came down to the 
White House, stood there for a minute or two, and said to the 
young boy, “My dear boy, this is the House of our President”. 
But the boy said, “Father, what are you talking ? He is a 
white man and how do you praise him ?” The old man said, 
“Oh, shut up, that is only outward”. That is to say, inside 
he is quite black. I think that might well be applied to the 
Home Minister; notwithstanding the white dress, he is very 
black inside and the evidence is the neglect which has been 
shown in the matter of seeing that the Home Ministry’s own 
orders are carried out. Nothing has been done. 

I have dealt with services and I will deal now with the 
question of propaganda. I see that the Government of India 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


909 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 909 

has sanctioned about Rs. 50 lakhs for the year 1953-54 for the 
purposes of carrying on propaganda against untouchability. 
The scheme, I understand, is that a part of the money is 
given to private agencies choosen by the State Governments 
and part of the money is given to all-India or Organisations 
directly by the Government of India. That is the scheme. I 
have no idea what my hon. friend means by the abolition of 
untouchability. What is untouchability ? Let us understand 
it very carefully. Untouchability, so far as I understand it, is 
a kind of a mental disease of the Hindus. It is not a disease 
from which I am suffering, not any tumour which I have 
got, not a rheumatic pain or any of the physical disabilities 
which can be removed but it is a mental twist; every Hindu 
believes that to observe untouchability is the right thing. I do 
not understand how my friend is going to untwist the twist 
which the Hindus have got for thousands of years; unless 
they are all sent to some kind of a mental hospital, it is very 
difficult to cure them and I do not want them to be sent there. 
Therefore, let us understand what we talk and what we are 
doing. Besides, all must realise that untouchability is founded 
on religion. There is no doubt about it and let us not be 
ashamed of realising it. Manu, in his law book, very difinitely 
prescribes untouchability. He said that the untouchables shall 
live outside the village, that they shall have only earthen pots, 
that they shall not have clean clothes, that they shall beg 
for their food and so on and I canot see how you blame the 
Hindus. For thousands of years, by the teaching of this dirty 
law. they have got inculcated in their mind the doctrine that 
untouchability is a most sacred thing. The Hindu has been 
taught that the most pious and best of life is that of a rat 
who lives in a hole, unconnected with anyone, he must not 
touch this, he must not touch that, he must not eat this, he 
must not eat that, etc. and this is a kind of life which a rat 
observes by living in a hole. A rat would not allow another 
rat to come into its own house. That is the position and all 
that we can do is to see that untouchability which, as I said, 
is a mental twist of the Hindus does not protrude so much 
into public life as to involve the civil liberties of the people. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


910 


910 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. P. C. Mitra: Untouchability is only a custom and usage. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If you want to study that subject 
with me, I can spend a few hours with you. 

Therefore, Sir, this propaganda business is quite impossible 
for me to understand. I agree with my hon. friend Mr. Kunzru 
that it may result in nothing else but a waste of public money. 

Secondly, I do not undersand why this matter should be 
left to these what are called organisations of social workers. 
A social worker in this country is a professional, he has no 
such things as inner sympathy. He is a professional. If the 
Muslim league wants him, he will probably serve the Muslim 
League; if the Hindu Mahasabha wants him, he will serve the 
Hindu Mahasabha; if the Congress wants him, he will serve 
the Congress. He is a professional and there is no such thing 
as, for instance, an inner love. As Tolstoy has said — rightly 
said — before you serve, you must learn to love., No man can 
serve anybody unless he loves him. These professionals have 
no love; they are simply trying to make their livelihood and 
therefore, perhaps, I would not be suprised if they are getting 
remuneration from all the three. I do not wish to comment 
on it. The proper thing, if my hon. friend wants to do, seems 
to me to be to take hold of these unemployed graduates. 
There are plenty of them, intelligent educated boys, who can 
be said to have some kind of modern outlook in life or who 
might be said to have developed some public conscience in 
the matter. You employ them on some reasonable salary, give 
them a motor-bike or a cycle and give each man seven, ten 
or fifteen villages, an ask him to go round village by village, 
hold public meetings, address the people on the question of 
untouchability and tell them that this is something which 
is going to bring disgrace upon this country in the modern 
world. That way it would be far more fruitful and far more 
effective than the kind of thing that my hon. frined is 
doing. Why these social organisations have a fascination for 
the Congress Government, I do not know. In olden times, 
during the British regime, the Centre acted administratively 
through the Collector. Money was given to him and he was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


911 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 911 

asked to discharge certain functions in certain fields. He could 
be held accountable to the Government. Money was safe in his 
hands. If you do not like the Collector then employ the kind of 
agency that I have submitted, namely, a group of intelligent 
boys who would be longing to do this service. This kind of a 
thing, a motley crowd, calling itself by some kind of a name 
to attract people is of no consequence at all. 

Then , Sir, 

Shri K. B. Lall (Bihar) : Will they not be professional ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government servant is not a 
professional. Why ? You want to use them later for canvassing 
votes for you in the elections. That is the whole trouble about it. 

Now, Sir, regarding the other point, namely, selection of 
certain agencies by the Government of India and giving them 
funds to do this propaganda work, the Commissioner has 
made some observations on some communication that passed 
betwen me and the Home Department. He has said that other 
agencies have accepted the offer of the Government to receive 
money and to do propaganda. I was one naughty boy who 
refused and he thought that it might be well in bringing this 
default on my part to public notice. I wish he had given him 
the full letter which I had written to the Home Department. 
I think Mr. Datar dealt with the matter if I mistake not, and 
he will recall that what I said was this that the bodies that 
were chosen by the Government of India, were political parties 
like the Harijan League and some other League, something 
like that, were all political bodies. The Federation was also 
a political body. So I thnk it was wrong for Government to 
hand over public funds to political bodies who may use the 
funds for political propaganda and not for the elevation of 
the Scheduled Castes, and I told him that there was the 
Chairman of another body which was being built up in Bombay, 
which was a purely social welfare body. It had large funds, 
somewhere between two and three lakhs of rupees. They 
were going to build a hall and carry on activity. Of course 
I forgot to mention therein that that body, although it was 
formed in Bombay, was not confined in the matter of its social 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


912 


912 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

work either to the Bombay city or to the Bombay State. It 
was open to them to do any kind of social work in any other 
part of India. The only thing was that its centre and head 
office would be in Bombay. Mr. Datar rejected my suggestion 
and put this matter in the report. All that I want to say is 
this. If Mr. Datar had communicated to me that he did not 
accept my suggestion, I am sure within myself that I would 
have changed my mind and accepted the offer in the name of 
the Federation because beggars cannot be choosers if for no 
other reason, and I even now say that if he insists that the 
Federation is the only body which the Government of India 
would entrust the money with, well, I have no hesitation, 
but I still maintain my view that this work outhgt not to be 
entrusted to political bodies. 

Now, Sir, I come to the question of the economic 
emancipation of the Scheduled Castes. This, I think along 
with education and services is the most important thing for 
the raising of the status of the Scheduled Castes. Now what 
are the means of raising the economic status of the Scheduled 
Castes ? Obviously the economic emancipation of the Scheduled 
castes will depend upon the opportunity that they get for 
what might be called entry into gainful occupation. Unless 
and until doors are open to them where they can find gainful 
occupation, their economic emancipation is not going to take 
place. They are going to remain slaves, if not slaves, serfs of 
the land-owning classes in the villages. There can be no doubt 
on that point at all. Now, Sir, out of these gainful occupations 
I personally feel no doubt that the most important thing 
on which Government ought to concentrate is the giving of 
land to the Scheduled Castes. They must be settled on land 
so that they might obtain independent means of livelihood, 
cease to be afraid of anybody, walk with their heads erect 
and live fearlessly and courageously. I think this is a thing 
which all the Ministers are agreed upon. I take it that the 
one thing that Government ought to do is to provide land for 
the Scheduled Castes. Let us take that question. Firstly, is 
there land available to be given to the Scheduled Castes ? Has 
Government any power to sequester land from those who are 
owning land now, take it away and give it to the Scheduled 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


913 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 913 

Castes ? Is it possible for the Scheduled Castes to be financed 
by the Government in the matter of purchasing lands if land 
was to be sought ? These are the three ways by which land 
could be given to the Scheduled Castes. Government should 
by law limit the holding of those who hold land and take 
away the excess and hand it over to the Scheduled Castes. 
Secondly the Government may finance the purchase of land 
if any is to be sold. 

Sir, it is clear to everybody that land-holding in India is 
not merely a matter of economic livelihood. It is a matter 
of social status. A person holding land has a higher status 
than a person not holding land. Now it is quite clear that in 
the villages this matter of economic status is of the utmost 
importance to everybody. And no Hindu wishes that an 
untouchable should possess a piece of land so that he may 
reach a higher status than his community is entitled to under 
the social system. Sir, the question of a scheduled caste man 
getting a bit of land in the village seems to me to be utterly 
impossible. I do not know to what extent the Government 
will be able to make a law limiting the holdings. There might 
easily be a revolution. If the Government had, in passing 
land legislation, instead of giving the title of the property 
to the peasant, kept the title to themselves as paramount 
owners of land, they might have been able to pass a law that 
as the land belonged to the Government nobody would be 
allowed to hold more than a certain number of acres. But the 
Government has committed one of the greatest acts of folly in 
creating these peasant proprietors. Sir, once Talleyrand told 
Napolean. “Why do you want all this bother with Europe ? 
Why do you want to create all this enmity ? Why should you 
not be content with becoming the King of France with me 
as your Prime Minister?” There were a certain number of 
soldiers standing outside the palace of Napolean holding their 
guns with bayonets shining in the light of the sun. Napolean 
was a very abusive person. He told Talleyrand : “You were so 
much done in a silk stocking. Do you see my battalions ?” He 
said, “Yes, I see them”. Then Napolean asked, “Why should 
I not be an Emperor ?” To that Talleyrand replied and my 
friends will remember that reply : “You can do anything 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


914 


914 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with these bayonets except sit on them. “Now, you have 
created these peasant proprietors. You can’t sit on them : 
they will sit on you. You have bungled and bungled most 
wrongly notwithstanding the advice of many people not to 
do it. But just to win political elections, you did it and you 
are bearing the fruits of it now. However, this limitation of 
holdings therefore is an impossible thing. 

I happened to study the report of the United Provinces 
Tenancy Committee appointed by my friend Mr. Govind 
Vallabh Pant. I know every line of it and I wonder whether 
the people who raised the cry that holdings ought to be limited 
know anything about the facts of it. What is the average 
holding in Uttar Pradesh ? The lowest is about 1 acre and 
the highest is about four or five acres. That is all that there 
is and the further fact is that every inch of land in the U. 
P. has been under cultivation and in occupation. You can 
do nothing there and that I am sure, is the case in most of 
the other States. Therefore my submission to the Hon. the 
Home Minister is this that unless you want to go on fooling 
the Scheduled Castes by telling them, ‘Oh, keep quiet, we 
are going to give you a peice of land. Either we will have 
a ceiling ot we will finance your purchase. We will do this 
or do that, unless you want to go on fooling them like this, 
you ought to think of some other method of doing that. This 
is a problem which you must solve and if you do not solve 
it, you know what consequences there might be — most evil 
consequences. The fire is burning outside; it may easily come 
in and the Scheduled Castes may carry the banner and you 
and your Constitution will go under. Nothing will remain. 

Now, Sir, I am going to make one suggestion to my hon. 
friend and it is this. I find from the Planning Commission’s 
Report that a very large amount of what might be called 
cultivable waste is to be found in this country. According 
to the Planning Commission it is 98 million acres. Now, my 
suggestion to my friends is this. The Government is going, 
I understand, to amend the Constitution. They are fond of 
amending the Constitution. Why have a Constitution at all, 
I do not understand, if you are amending it every Saturday ? 
However, as you are amending it, I suggest that you amend 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


915 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 915 

it and put the cultivation of waste land in List No. 1 so that 
it will come within the purview of the Central Government. 
The State Governments have not got the means of developing 
that land. They are living like dog in the manger, neither 
developing it themselves nor allowing anybody else to do it. 
Therefore there can be nothing wrong in taking over the waste 
land by amending the Constitution in List No. 1. 

The second thing which I am going to suggest is one 
which many people may not find pleasant but I think there 
1100am is no harm in suggesting. It is this, you again 
levy the salt tax. The salt tax was the lightest 
tax that we had in our country. At the time it was abolished, 
the revenue was about Rs. 10 crores and it might easily go 
up to Rs. 20 crores now. No doubt, the abolition of salt tax 
was done in the memory of Mr. Gandhi. I respect him and 
I suggest to you that you levy the tax and create a Trust 
Fund in the name of Mr. Gandhi — Gandhi Trust Fund for 
the development or settlement of the untouchables. After all, 
the untouchables, according to all of us, were the nearest and 
dearest to him and there is no reason why Mr. Gandhi may 
not bless this project from Heaven, namely, levying the tax 
and using it for the development of waste land and settling 
the Scheduled Castes on this waste land. There is promise 
but a scope for performance. You know in the game of poker 
there is a difference between promise and performance. I give 
you a scheme where there is not only promise but there is 
also performance. I do not understand why the people of this 
country should not contribute through the means of the salt 
tax for the elevation of the Scheduled Castes. You may keep 
it quite outside the Budget just as a sort of a Gandhi Welfare 
Scheme which will perpetuate the name of Mr. Gandhi and 
which will give relief to the people whom he wanted to protect 
and whom he wanted to elevate. This is my suggestion to the 
Hon. the Home Minister and I hope he will give this matter 
his most serious consideration. 

Sir, I have done and I do not want to say anything more. 
The only thing that I would like to say is this that in all this 
effort which is being made by the Government, by the various 
social workers and the social agencies, there is one thing which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


916 


916 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

gives me a very sad thought and it is this that our Prime 
Minister has taken no interest in this matter at all. In fact, 
he seems to be not only apathetic but anti-untouchable. I 
happen to have read his biography and I find that he castigated 
Mr. Gandhi because Mr. Gandhi was prepared to die for the 
purpose of doing away with separate electorates which was 
given to the Scheduled Castes. He has said in his biography, 
‘Why on earth Mr. Gandhi is bothering with this trifling 
problem ? Sir, I was shocked and surprised to hear the Prime 
Minister — rather Mr. Nehru then in 1934 — uttering these 
words. I thought that since the responsibility of Government 
had fallen on his shoulder he may have changed his view 
and thought that he must now take the responsibility which 
Mr. Gandhi was prepared to take on his shoulder, but I do not 
find any kind of a change in his mind. Sir, in the year 1952 
a conference was held at Nagpur under the Presidentship of 
my hon. friend Babu Jagjivan Ram. 

I understood that there was a very big shamiana. Two 
silver chairs were placed on the dais, one for Mr. Jagjivan 
Ram and one for Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. There was an 
audience of two hundred to three hundred and one thousand 
police. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was supposed to inaugurate 
that conference. I have got his speech here, but I do not wish 
to trouble the House by reading it, but this is the gist of it. 
He was, I am told, in great anger against Babu Jagjivan 
Ram for having organised the conference. He said loudly “I 
do not recognize that there is such a problem as that of the 
untouchables. There is a general problem of the economically 
poor and the problem of the untouchables is a part of that 
problem. It will take its place and receive its attention along 
with the other problems. There is no occasion, no purpose 
in bestowing any special thought upon it.” Sir, if the Prime 
Minister is prepared to throw such cold water — not cold, 
water from the refrigerator, so to say — what enthusiasm can 
we expect from the rest of the workers who have taken upon 
themselves the duty or the responsibility or the interest in 
carrying on with this particular problem : I do not think that 
untouchabality will vanish. They believe ‘yes’. I think ‘no’, 
as I said, because it has a mental twist. It will take years 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


917 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 917 

and years. At the same time, there is no reason why we should 
not strongly agitate for seeing, whether untouchability goes 
or not, that the social, economic, political and constitutional 
right of the Scheduled Castes are fully protected. To that 
extent efforts must necessarily be directed. 

Sir, there is one other word I should like to say. People 
might say that I have taken most of the time with the 
Scheduled Castes. I have not said anything with regard to 
the tribes and I am not going to say anything, because there 
are many friends who are more qualified to speak about 
them than I am, I shall, therefore, not venture to enter that 
field, but there is one thing which, I think, one can say and 
should say, because I find there is a good deal of confusion 
in the minds of the people as regards the relative position 
of the Scheduled Castes, the tribal castes and the criminal 
tribes. Now, Sir, with regards to the Scheduled Castes, the 
position is this : they are prepared — in fact, not prepared — but 
they are already within the pale of civilization. They are not 
outside. Their struggle is to achieve equality of opportunity 
and equality of status. That is their problem. With regard 
to the tribal people, their problem is totally different. They 
are outside the Hindu civilization. And the question that has 
to be considered with regard to these tribal people is this ; 
do they want to come within the Hindu civilization and be 
assimilated and then acquire equality of status and equality 
of opportunity ? I was talking to many leaders of the tribal 
communities — many men and women of the tribal community — 
they seem to be most reluctant to come within the pale of 
Hindu civilization. 

Dr. Shrimati Seeta Parmanand : Question. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They prefer to live outside, they 
do not want to come in. 

With regard to the criminal tribes, theirs is a purely 
economic problem : how well can you give them the opportunity 
to earn a decent living ? If they can get the opportunity to 
earn a decent living, they will cease to be criminals. 

Now, Sir, one question asked is this. It seems to me a matter 
of great regret that the Hindu civilization which is so many 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


918 


918 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

years old, some say six thousand years old — many people 
will not be satisfied with that period probably they want 
to take it back — never mind about it, let it be six thousand 
years old — has produced five crores of untouchables, some 
two crores of tribal people; and some fifty thousand criminal 
tribes people. What can one say of this civilization ? With a 
civilization which has produced these results, there must be 
something very fundamentally wrong, and I think it is time 
the Hindus looked at it from this point of view — whether they 
can be proud of the civilization which has produced these 
communities like the untouchables, the criminal tribes and 
the tribal people. I think they ought to think twice — not twice 
a hundred times — they are conventionally called civilized — 
whether they could be called civilized with this kind of results 
produced by their civilization. 

Sir, I thank you very much for this opportunity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


919 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


919 


( 51 ) 

CONSTITUTION (THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954 

* Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
the Bill which is placed before this House raises two issues 
and it is desirable that the two issues should be considered 
separately. The first issue relates to the merits of the Bill, 
whether this Bill should be regarded as a good Bill on its 
own merits; and the second issue is, the manner in which 
this Bill is being carried through parliament. I shall say a 
few words on the merits of the Bill. 

It is quite obvious that there is nothing new in this Bill. 
What the Bill seeks to do is to drop entry No. 33 in the 
Concurrent List and to substitute in place of that entry, the 
provisions contained in Article 369 as they stand now, with a 
small addition that is export of jute; otherwise, there is really 
no fundamental change at all and it is a mere substitution. 
Looking at it from this point of view, I cannot see how there 
can be any objection to the Bill as proposed by the Hon. 
Minister in charge of it. The only kind of dispute that could 
arise would be whether the provisions of Article 369 should 
be in the State List — List II — so that the States will have 
exclusive power or whether they should be placed in List I 
so that the Centre would have an exclusive power in dealing 
with these goods. The present position is this : According to 
Article 369 these matters or these goods are treated as though 
they are entered in the Concurrent List. That is the present 
position. In the Concurrent List, both the Centre as well as 
the States have the power to legislate. Therefore, looking 
at the present position as defined in Article 369 and entry 
33, we find that both of them place these matters in the 
Concurrent List. It cannot be that the States can complain 
that any jurisdiction which was vested in them by the 
Constitution is being taken away by this amending Bill. The 


* P. D., (R. S.), Vol. 7-B, 15th September 1954, pp. 2297-2303. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


920 


920 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

position, as I say, remains exactly the same : the only question 
is whether the legislative control vested in the Centre by Article 
369 — which was vested only for five years and no more — should 
now be continued for an indefinite period. Speaking for myself, 
I feel that that is a patter for the Administration to judge, 
whether the circumstances m which they are living now are 
so altered that the period of five years which was given to 
parliament to legislate over these items should be abrogated. 
On that point, speaking again for myself, I am quite prepared 
to submit to the decision of the Administration because they 
know far better than a Member of parliament can hope to do. 
“Therefore, Sir, so far as the merits of the Bill are concerned, 
I give my support to it. 

The Hon. Minister in charge while speaking on the Bill, 
made some reference to consultations with the States. I heard 
him say that he consulted the opposite departments in the 
various States and that the consultation, so far as I was able 
to judge from the observation that he made, was, if I may say 
so, somewhat perfunctory. I think that this is a very grave 
matter for the simple reason that this Bill is not going to 
become law merely by the vote of the two Houses. The Bill 
will have to go through a further ceremony before it becomes 
law. In this connection, I would like to draw the attention 
of the Hon. Minister in charge to Article 368, particularly to 
clause (c) of the Proviso which says : “Provided that if such 
amendment seeks to make any change in — * * * (c) any 
of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule,* * * the amendment 
shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not 
less than one half of the States specified in Parts A and B 
of the first schedule by resolutions to that effect passed by 
those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such 
amendment is presented to the President for assent “Therefore, 
this is one of those amendments 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : On a point of information. 
The first letter dated the 12th September 1953 was addressed 
to all the State Governments and the second letter dated the 
20th August 1954 enclosing a copy of this letter was addressed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


921 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 921 

to the Chief Secretaries of all the States personally, not to 
the opposite departments of the Commerce Ministry. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, I am sorry; I perhaps made 
a wrong statement and I stand corrected, but all the same I 
want to urge that my argument is very sound, for whatever 
may be the preliminaries that might have been negotiated 
between the Minister-in-charge and the State Governments, 
the fact remains that the consent of the States by resolutions 
will be necessary in order that his amendment may become 
law, and if my hon. friend had by courtesy and by discussion 
and by consultation already obtained the goodwill of the 
State Governments, the subsequent action by the State 
Governments, namely passing of resolutions, would have been 
a mere matter of form. But if they have not been satisfied 
with such consultations as the Minister has had, he may find 
that there is a hurdle which he may not be able to overcome. 
That is all I want to say. 

Now I come to the manner in which the Government has 
been proceeding with the amendment of the Constitution. The 
Constitution is only about, I believe, four years old. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar) : Four years and seven months. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, not an adult yet — may 
not be a child, and in the four years and seven months of 
its life it has been amended three times; I believe this the 
third amendment of the Constitution. I do not know of any 
Constitution in the world which has been amended so rapidly 
and, if I may say so, so rashly, by the government in office. 

Now, Sir, I would like, in order to illustrate my point, 
to place before the House the provisions in the Constitution 
of the United States of America and the provisions in the 
Constitution of Australia for the purpose of amending the 
Constituton. Later on I will show what difference there is 
between our Constitution and these two Constitutions in the 
matter of the amendment of the Constitution. In the Australian 
constitution, Article 128 lays down this provision that the 
amending law shall be passed by both houses by an absolute 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


922 


922 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

majority in each House. That is the first condition Secondly 
it shall be submitted to the electors to obtain their decision 
upon the amending law passed by the two Houses by absolute 
majority. If the two Houses are not unanimous in the proposed 
amendment then the Governor-General is empowered to put 
the last proposed law for amendment to the electors for their 
decision. And then these are the conditions. If in a majority 
of the States a majority of the electors voting in favour of 
the proposed law and if a majority of all electors voting also 
approve of the proposed law, then and then only the proposed 
law shall become part of the Costitution on receiving the assent 
of the King. The conditions are that in the first place both 
Houses must pass the proposed law by absolute majority, and 
if they do not agree, or are not unanimous, then the power 
is given to the Governor-General to refer the matter to the 
electors. Even in the first case the matter must be referred 
to the electors and even then it is not merely by the majority 
of the electors voting in favour of the Bill but majority of 
the States, a majority of electors and a majority of all the 
electors voting must approve the Bill before the Constitution 
could be amended. 

Now let us take the Constitution of the United States. In 
the Constitution of the united States, article 5 which deals 
with the amendment of the Constitution provides thus : “When 
two-thirds of both houses propose an amendment, then and 
then alone further action could be taken.” The first condition is 
that two-thirds of both houses must pass the amending Bill or 
two-thirds of the States may call their conventions, that is to 
say, a meeting of the electors who may propose constitutional 
amendments as suggested by the State Government. Such 
amendments then will become law provided it is ratified by 
three-fourths of the States or by the Conventions in three- 
fourths of the States. I have taken these two Constitutions 
merely for the purpose of illustration. Many other provisions 
would be found in other constitutions. 

Now what is the basic principle underlying this provision 
relating to the amendment of the Constitution ? It seems to 
me that a student who scrutinises these two articles relating 
to the amendment of the Constitution in Australia and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


923 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 923 

America will find that there are two principles which underlie 
any action relating to the amendment of the Constitution. 
The first is this that there must be notice to the people. The 
people must know that the Government is going to undertake 
the amendment of the Constitution. The second principles is 
that there must be consent of the voters either directly as in 
America or indirectly by the States by ratifying resolution. 

Now, Sir, is our Government observing these fundamental 
rules ? It is quite true that our Constitution is a very fluid 
3 00 P M one - is n °t as rigid, not half as rigid as 
the American Constitution or the Australian 
Constitution, and those who were in charge of framing the 
Constitution were fully conscious of the fact that the situation 
must be left fluid because it may be that circumstances would 
arise which would require amendment of the Constitution, and 
you cannot allow the Constitution to hold up the solution of 
social problems which are emergent. It was because of that 
that it was proposed that the provisions contained in Article 
368 should suffice. We don’t require except in certain cases 
reference back to the States or reference back to the voters, 
but I have not the least doubt in my mind that no one who 
had anything to do with the drafting of the Constitution ever 
thought that the government would rush in on the spur of the 
moment to amend the Constitution without giving notice to 
the voters. Notice to the voters, if I may submit, is a general 
principle of political life and party life. Even in England no 
party would undertake any piece of legislation which did not 
form part of its political programme for the election. Every 
party must have a mandate to do a certain thing. Without 
a mandate a party cannot do anything. You cannot take the 
voters by surprise and you cannot assume absolute authority to 
amend even the Constitution simply because you are elected. 
This is exactly what our Government has been doing. Simply 
because they have obtained a majority they assume that 
they have not only the power to make any law whatsoever 
relating to any of the entries which give them the power to 
make laws but they have also got the power, merely by being 
elected, even without notifying their intention to the people 
as such, to even amend the Constitution. Is the Constitution 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


924 


924 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not different in any sense from an ordinary law ? Is it merely 
a scrap of paper to be amended at the whim of anybody ? 
There is a saying in Marathi — I do not know whether I can 
translate it into English properly — and that saying is a very 
good one and very appropriate. We say, if the old woman dies 
it really does not matter very much but what we are afraid 
of is that Yama gets habituated to coming often and often 
and what we want to prevent is the Yama’s invasion. It does 
not matter if the old woman is dead or snatched away. This 
is exactly what has been happening and I have been noticing 
the great contempt or the low regard or respect which the 
Government has for the Constitution. You may amend the 
Constitution; nobody has any objection to amending it but 
certainly you ought to treat the Constitution on a somewhat 
different footing, a better footing, a special footing. Tell the 
people what you are intending to do and then you may do it. 
Otherwise it might become necessary even to amend Article 
368 in a manner so as to prevent this facile invasion of the 
constitutional provisions. This is all that I wanted to say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


925 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


925 


( 52 ) 

UNTOUCHABILITY OFFENCES BILL 1954 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
I propose to speak on the Bill. I think it is impossible for me 
to remain silent during the discussion on this Bill, but I find 
that my hon. friend, the Minister-in-charge, has condescended 
to put me on the Select Committee on this Bill. There is a 
convention that a member who is on a Select Committee 
shall not speak or take part in the Debate on the motion for 
reference to a Select Committee. I do not know to what extent 
the rule has been observed in all its strictness. 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : It has not been violated. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think in the other house it is not 
strictly observed and I understand that a member in such a 
position could speak. However, if the convention is a rigid 
one here I beg permission to withdraw my name, and I hope 
the Hon. Minister will concede. 

Prof. G. Ranga (Andhra) : It is not a rigid one. 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : Yes, it is a rigid one; we have 
been opbserving it. 

Prof. G. Ranga: If either within the time 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : It will be setting a bad precedent. 

Prof. G. Ranga : There is no question of any bad precedent. 
What I understood always was that when other Members 
who are not Members of the Select Committee are anxious 
to speak, then the Members who are placed on the Select 
Committee are expected to give way, but it does not debar 
any Member of the Select Committee from exercising his 
privilege of speaking. Only if 


* P. D., (R. S.) Vol. 7-B, 16th September 1954, pp. 2417-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


926 


926 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : We have been observing the 
convention that the Members of the Select Committee 

Prof. G. Ranga : We have not observed it that way. It is 
not rule; it is a convention. 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : The convention should be 
interpreted in that manner because it has been observed 
that way. 

Prof. G. Ranga: There is no definite rule on this point 
but the convention we have been following is that generally 
Members who are Members of the Select Committee do not 
speak. 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : On two or three previous 
occasions I have refused the Members. 

Shri Biswanath Das (Orissa) : Because they have got the 
chance to place their views before the Select Committee, it is 
felt not desirable to give them the necessary 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : It will be setting a bad precedent. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Therefore the non-Members in the 
Select Committee are given the chance to place their views 
so that the Select Committee may have the advantage of 
considering those views as well. There is, I submit, no rule 
and we should not have any rigid convention to make it 
binding on the Members of the Select Committee not to speak. 
I would therefore appeal to my hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar 
not to consider it in that light and think of withdrawing his 
name from the Select Committee which I consider will be 
most useful and helpful. 


*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Deputy Chairman, before 
I actually deal with the provisions of this Bill, I think it is 
desirable that I should draw the attention of the House to the 
responsibility created by certain articles in the Constitution 
and the responsibility placed upon the Government to give 
effect to those provisions. 


* P. D. (R. S.), Vol. 7-B., 16th September 1954, pp. 2424-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


927 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 927 

I would first like to refer to article 13 of the Constitution. 
Article 13 says that all laws inconsistent with the Fundamental 
Rights are void from the date on which the Constitution 
comes into existence. That is a general provision which is 
laid down in article 13. It is, as a matter of fact, a general 
notice given to the public as well as to the Judges of the Court 
that if any question was raised before them which involved 
the adjudication of the Fundamental Rights, the court shall 
not give effect to any existing law that was in conflict with 
the Fundamental Rights. But the makers of the Constitution 
were not satisfied with the general declaration because they 
felt that it was too much to expect a common citizen to go 
to a court of law in order to get relief from the court for the 
invasion of his Fundamental Rights. That was too much of a 
burden on the common citizen. And, therefore, the Constitution 
enacted another article, which is article 372, sub-clause (2), 
which gives power to the Government to make modification 
and adaptation in existing laws in order that the laws may 
be brought in conformity with the Fundamental Rights. 

If my hon. Friend will allow me to make a personal 
reference, I would say that when I was in charge of law, 
I immediately took up this queston about adaptation and 
modification of the existing law in order to bring it in 
conformity with the Fundamental Rights. And I did succeed 
in getting repealed one of the most important pieces of 
legislation in the Punjab, called the Punjab Land Alienation 
Act, under which certain communities, or as the law speaks 
of them, certain tribes, were declared to be the only tribes 
which could hold property or acquire property in the Punjab. 
The law, in my judgement, was so iniquitous that a man who 
was actually an agriculturist, but whose community or tribe 
was not declared by the Government to be an agricultural 
tribe, was not entitled to get any land. But a person who 
was a barrister all his life, and never hoped to grow even 
two blades in a field, became entitled to acquire property, 
because the Government had chosen to declare his tribe to 
be an agricultural tribe. I succeeded in having the whole Act 
cancelled under the provisions of article 372, clause (2). There 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


928 


928 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

remained another law or a custom which went along with 
the Punjab Land Alienation Act, and which referred to what 
is called the shamilat land, that is to say, the land held in 
common by the villagers. Under the customary Punjab law, the 
shamilat land could be shared only by those communities which 
were called zamindars, hereditary land-owning communities. 
The others were non-zamindars. They were called kaminas, 
that is to say, they belonged to a low class, and they were 
not entitled to share in the land. Consequently, they could 
not build their houses in a pucca form on the land on which 
they stayed. They are always afraid lest the zamindars of 
Punjab may, at any time, turn them out. And the people did 
not venture to build permanently. I left a note in the Law 
Ministry, when I left, that this matter should be taken up and 
dealt with by the Government under the provisions of article 
372, sub-clause (2). I have no idea what the Law Ministry 
has done or what the Home Ministry has done. I believe, no 
action has been taken on that account so far. I had, for my 
own guidance; made a list of certain laws, which I felt it 
was absolutely essential to modify in order to bring them in 
conformity with the Constitution. The first that I would like to 
mention is Madras Regulation XI of 1816. This is a criminal 
law enacted by the East India Company. In that, there is a 
provision, I think, section 10, which says that if the offender 
belongs to the lower classes, then the punishment to be 
inflicted on him is to put him in the stocks. This punishment 
is not to be inflicted if the offender belongs to the higher 
classes. There can be no question, Sir, that this Regulation 
is a discriminatory Regulation, and should be repealed. Then 
the next item that I would refer to is the Bombay Municipal 
Servants Act V of 1890. Under that Act, it is provided — I 
think it is section 3 — that if a municipal servant, whose 
duties fall within the Schedule attached to the Act, absents 
himself from work without permission, or resigns his office 
without at least giving three months’ notice in writing, he 
shall be sentenced to imprisonment. It is a well-established 
principle now that a contract of employment is only a civil 
contract for which, if there is to be any punishment that 
punishment must be only damages and not imprisonment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


929 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 929 

But this Municipal Law still remains on the Statute Book. 
The result has been that under this Act — if my hon. friend 
will refer to the Schedule, he will find that the Schedule 
practically mentions, although in terms of duty, people who 
are doing scavenging work or street-cleaning work, and things 
of that sort, and who are mostly Scheduled Castes or the 
untouchables — it has become quite impossible for them even 
to go on strike, because the terms of resignation must be 
three months’ notice. Nothing has been done so far as that 
Act is concerned. I will take now another item, the U. P. 
Municipalities Act, II of 1916. I think it is section 85. Yes. 
There again, the provisions of that section are more or less 
similar to the provisions of the Bombay Municipal Servants 
Act. There again it is said that a sweeper employed by a 
Board who, except in accordance with the terms of a written 
contract of service, or without a reasonable cause, of which 
notice has been given, resigns or abandons his employment, 
shall be liable upon conviction, to imprisonment which may 
extend to two months. I think these laws, if I may say so, 
are absolutely uncivilised laws. No country in the world today 
regards breach of contract of service as an offence punishable 
with imprisonment or with fine. It is just damaging, but 
nothing has been done here. 

Then, I will refer to three other Acts, one is the Bombay 
Herediatary Village Officers Act of 1874. Those who work or 
officiate under this Act are divided into two classes. My friend, 
Mr. Dhage, must be quite familiar with it, although the Home 
Minister himself may not be. I do not know what the system 
is in his province, but there the servants are divided into two 
classes, one class are called officers and the other are called 
village servants, although both are paid in the ancient form 
of payment, viz., land assigned for service out of which they 
have to eke out their income. The land that has been assigned 
to them was in ancient times, probably during the time of 
Shivaji or during the time of the Peshwas. No addition has 
been made to the land then assigned. They have been cutting 
up and sharing their land into bits and bits, and probably 
no one individual owns more than one-hunredth of an acre 
of land, yet these poor people are sticking to that land. Now, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


930 


930 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

when the British came in they started a scheme of what is 
called commutation that is to say, releasing a person from the 
obligation of hereditary service and allowing him to retain the 
land provided he was prepared to pay what is called ‘Judi’ or 
land revenue, as the Government thought fit. That process has 
been going on for ever and many, many hereditary officers 
have been liquidated so far. Recently the Bombay Government 
took up on itself the responsibility of further commuting these 
village hereditary officers, but notwithstanding the incessant 
demand of the scheduled castes in the Bombay State that 
their workers and their hereditary officers should also be 
commuted so that they may be free from the obligation of 
service and be allowed to retain the land on payment of land 
revenue — they were very liberal and wanted to pay the full 
land revenue and did not want any concessions — the Bombay 
Government refused their requests. They confine their law to 
the commutation of officers other than the scheduled castes. 
This — I speak from experience — is one of the most cruellest 
pieces of legislation, because it is quite possible for the village 
who is an officer under this Act to require the whole body of the 
scheduled caste people to go and serve under him not merely 
for Government purposes but also for his private purposes. Any 
village patel, for instance, if there is a death in the family, 
would not sent a postcard to his relatives informing them of 
the death in the family, because it is a derogatory method. 
He must insist upon one of his village servants, as they are 
called, to walk miles and miles to convey the message that 
a death has occurred in the house of the patel. If a married 
girl comes to the house of the patel and wishes to go back, 
he must insist upon one or two of the village servants to 
go along with her, accompany her, chaperon her, and to see 
that she has safely arrived at her father-in-law’s house. If a 
marriage takes place, he must insist on the whole of people 
to go and break wood and do all services without paying them 
anything. If they refuse, he is competent to report to the 
Collector that his village servants are not doing their duty, 
and the Collector under the Act is able to fine them or to 
take away their land and dispossess them. I wonder whether 
this is not a piece of legislation which is fundamentally 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


931 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 931 

opposed to the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution, and 
whether such a piece of legislation does not require modification 
at the hands of the Law Department or the Home Department. 

There are two other Acts which are, so to say, correlative 
to this Bombay Hereditary Village Officers Act. One is the 
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, and the other is the Pensions 
Act. (Seeing the Home Minister rising from his seat) My hon. 
Friend finds it too hot perhaps. 

Dr. K. N. Katju : I find it too cool on the other hand. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It will be hotter as I go on. 

Both these Acts prevent access to the judiciary for any 
wrong that may have been done by the officers, the Director, 
or the Commissioner or the Minister. No relief can be had 
from the courts, because the Revenue Jurisdiction Act says 
that the courts shall not have any jurisdiction either to alter 
or to modify or to revise the decision of the Collector, who is 
an executive officer. The Pension Act says that no one who 
has any kind of inam shall be entitled to go to court and 
the court shall not exercise any jurisdiction unless it obtains 
a certificate from the Collector that the case may be tried 
by the court. It is quite impossible, therefore, for these poor 
people to have any kind of remedy against the many injustices 
which are being practised under the name of this particular 
Act. If I had remained as Law Minister, it was my intention 
to carry out these reforms, but I think it is the duty of any 
Law Minister and particularly of the Home Minister to look 
into our laws and to find out to what extent the laws are 
in conflict with the Fundamental Rights. I am sorry to say, 
Sir, that both these departments are the most laziest 
departments that I have ever seen. They have neither the zeal 
nor the urge or the conscience to move in this matter. They 
have no idealism either. I hope that, after what I have said, 
they will be spurred to some kind of action in this matter 
and to see that relief is given where relief seems necessary. 
Well, Sir, this is what I wanted to say by way of preliminary 
observations. I will now turn to the Bill itself. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


932 


932 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I would like to say a word about the title of the Bill. It 
is not a very important point, but I think the name does 
3 00 p m ma ff er - Shakespeare has said that rose smells as 
sweet whether it is called rose or by some other 
name. I disagree with that statement of Shakespeare. I think 
that name is a very important matter, and I think that a good 
law ought to have a good and succinct name. What is the name 
of this Bill ? ‘A bill to provide punishment for the practice of 
untouchability or the enforcement of any disability arising 
therefrom’. I personally think that it is a very clumsy name 
and very mouthful. What really should be the name of the Bill 
may be a matter of dispute but I personally think that it ought 
to have been called ‘The Civil Rights (Untouchables) Protection 
Act’ After all, what you are doing is nothing more than 
protecting their civil rights. The emphasis ought to have been 
therefore on civil rights. I venture to tell my friend incharge 
of the Bill if he had referred to the case of the Negroes in the 
United States or to the Civil War, he would have found that 
the Bill that he is now proposing to be passed by Parliament 
has had its predecessor in the United States and that Bill, if 
he will refer to it he will find, is simply styled Civil Rights 
Protection Bill. Even the word ‘negro’ is not mentioned in it. 
I don’t know why he should keep on repeating untouchability 
and untouchables all the time. In the body of the Bill he is 
often speaking of scheduled castes. The Constitution speaks 
of the scheduled castes and I don’t know why he should fight 
shy of using the word scheduled castes in the title of the Bill 
itself. Personally for myself, I would be quite happy with the 
name Untouchables Civil Rights Protection Bill or Scheduled 
Castes Civil Rights Protection Bill. I hope my friend will take 
this into consideration. 

Now, Sir, I find there are certain very grave omissions 
in the Bill and it is to these ommissions that I propose to 
draw the attention of the House. There is really, as a matter 
of fact, no provision for the removal of any bar against the 
exercise of civil and constitutional rights. No doubt the 
ultimate result of the Bill would be freedom to exercise civil 
and constitutional rights but I personally think that it would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


933 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 933 

have been much better if my friend had expressly stated that 
the Bill was intended to remove any kind of a bar against the 
exercise of any civil and constitutional rights. I would just like 
to read to him a provision from the Civil Rights Bill as they 
call it in the United States. This is how the provision reads. 
Don’t read the title page of the book — it will hurt you. It is 
the United States Constitution Amendment XIV taken from 
Government of Ireland Act, 1920 and also Professor Keith’s 
Command Paper. This is how that provision reads. I have of 
course converted it to make it applicable to the untouchables 
but the original is taken from the text of the Civil Rights Bill : 

“All subjects of the State are equal before the law and 
possess equal civil rights. Any existing enactment, regulation, 
order, customs or interpretation of law by which any penalty, 
disadvantage, disability is imposed upon or any discrimination is 
made against any subject of the State on account of untouchablity, 
shall, as from the day on which this Constitution comes into 
operation, cease to have any effect”. 

I think such a positive statement was necessary. It is no 
doubt contained in article 13 but there can be no harm in 
repeating the whole of that article 13 with such amendments 
as are necessary in this Bill. I don’t know why the Bill is 
silent. The Bill seems to give the appearance that it is a Bill 
of a very minor character, just a dhoby not washing the cloth, 
just a barber not shaving or just a mithaiwala not selling 
laddus and things of that sort. People would think that these 
are trifles and piffles and why has Parliament hothered and 
wasted its time in dealing with dhobies and barbers and 
ladduwalas. It is not a Bill of that sort. It is a Bill which is 
intended to give protection with regard to civil and fundamental 
rights and therefore, a positive clause, I submit, ought to 
have been introduced in this Bill, which the Bill does not 
have now in its present form. That is one ommission which I 
think requires to be made good. The other omission, which, I 
find, is of a very grave character, is that there is no provision 
against social boycott. Now I feel from my experience that 
one of the greatest and the heinous means which the village 
community applies in order to prevent the scheduled castes 
from exercising these rights is social boycott. They boycott 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


934 


934 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

them completely. It is a kind of non-co-operation. This is 
not merely my opinion but it is the opinion of a Committee 
that was appointed by the Bombay Government in order to 
investigate into the conditions of the scheduled castes and also 
of the depressed classes and aboriginal tribes. I might mention 
to the House that the late Thakkar Bapa was a member of 
this Committee and he had signed this report. I will just 
read only, one para from the report of that Committee which 
relates to the question of social boycott. It is paragraph 102. 
This is what the Committee said : 

“Although we have recommended various remedies to secure 
to the depressed classes their rights to all public utilities, we 
fear that there will be difficulties in the way of their exercising 
them for a long time to come. The first difficulty is the fear of 
open violence against them by the orthodox classes. It must be 
noted that the scheduled castes form a small minority in every 
village opposed to which is a great majority of the orthodox 
who are bent on protecting their interests and dignity from any 
supposed invasion of the depressed classes at any cost. The danger 
of prosecution by the police has put a limitation upon the use of 
violence by the orthodox classes and consequently such cases are 
rare. The second difficulty arises from the economic position in 
which the depressed classes are found today. The depressed classes 
have no economic independence in most parts of the presidency. 
Some cultivate the land of the orthodox classes as their tenants 
at will. Others live on their earnings as farm labourers employed 
by the orthodox classes, and the rest subsist on the food or grain 
given to them by the orthodox classes in lieu of service rendered 
to them as village servants. We have heard of numerous instances 
where the orthodox classes have used their economic power as a 
weapon against those depressed classes in the villages when the 
latter have dared to exercise these rights and have evicted them 
from their land and stopped their employment and discontinued 
their remuneration as village servants. This boycott is often 
planned on such an extensive scale as to include the prevention 
of the depressed classes from using the commonly used paths and 
the stoppage of the sale of the necessaries of life by the village 
bania. According to the evidence, sometimes small causes suffice 
for the proclamation of a social boycott against the depressed 
classes. Frequently it follows on the exercise by the depressed 
classes of their right to the use of the common well; but cases 
have been by no means rare where stringent boycot has been 
proclaimed simply because a depressed class man has put on the 
sacred thread, has bought a piece of land, has put on good clothes 
or ornaments, or has carried a marriage procession with the 
bridegroom on the horse through the public street. We do not know 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


935 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 935 

of any weapon more effective than this social boycott which could 
have been invented for supression of the depressed classes. The 
method of open violence pales away before it, for it has the most 
far-reaching and deadening effect. It is more dangerous because it 
passes as a lawful method consistent with the theory of freedom 
of. contract. We agree that this tyranny of the majority must be 
put down with a firm hand if we are to guarantee the depressed 
classes the freedom of speech and action necessary for their uplift.” 

This is the conclusion of a committee which was specially 
appointed to consider the condition of the scheduled castes. 
I do not find any provision to deal with this point of social 
boycott. 

I may draw the attention of the hon. Member to the Burma 
Anti-boycott Act of 1922, if he thinks that it is difficult to put 
the matter in express words which can be legally of use to 
the courts. I say he can copy the provisions contained in this 
Burma Anti-bycott Act of 1922. It gives us the most valuable 
definition of a difficult matter, namely, social boycott. That 
will be found in section 2 of that. Act. This Burma Act not 
only creates social boycott an offence, but it also creates the 
instigating of social boycott an offence. It also creates the 
threatening of social boycott an offence, in pharaseology as’ 
precise as any meticulous lawyer would want to have. My 
hon. Friend has tried, I think, in sub-section (2) of section 8, 
to have some kind of a garbled version of it for defending a 
Hindu who does not wish to practise untouchability but whose 
caste-fellows compel him to do so. I believe they can only 
do that in two ways, either by committing violence against 
him or by organising social boycott. As the Committee has 
said, the village communities most often prefer the social 
boycott because it is an act behind the curtain and appears 
to be perfectly in consonance with the terms of the law of 
contracts, to violence which, as I have said, becomes an offence 
under the Indian Penal Code. Therefore, instead’ of going 
round about and bringing about a haphazard result, why not 
proceed directly and recognise social boycott as an unlawful 
means of compelling the scheduled castes not to exercise their 
rights ? After all, what can be the objection to social boycott ? 
I say, in legal terms, social boycott is nothing else than a 
conspiracy, which is an offence recognised by the Indian Penal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


936 


936 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Code. If two people engage themselves in doing a wrong to 
a third person, well, that is conspiracy, This social boycott 
is brought about by the concurrence of the majority of the 
people and is also a conspiracy and could be recognised as an 
offence. I do not know why my hon. friend forgot that very 
important fact in this matter. 

The third omission — I do not know whether it is an omission 
or not, I speak subject to correction. I wish the Law Minister 
was here because it is purely a legal matter. But there is no 
doubt about it that our Home Minister was a Law Minister in 
the beginning and certainly has been a practising lawyer and 
he could not be unfamiliar with what I am saying. Now the 
question that I ask myself is, are these offences mentioned in 
this Bill compoundable or non-compoundable ? The Bill says 
nothing about it. It is completely silent. The other day when 
we were discussing the Report of the Commissioner for the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, hon. Members will 
recall that the Commissioner drew pointed attention to the 
fact that the untouchables were not able to prosecute then 
persecutors because of want of economic and financial means 
and consequently they .were ever ready to compromise with 
the offenders whenever the offenders wanted that the offence 
should be compromised. The fact was that the law remained 
a dead letter and those in whose favour it was enacted are 
unable to put it in action and those against whom it is to be 
put in action are able to silence the victim. That has been 
the conclusion of the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. Such a situation is not to be tolerated. The 
offences must not be made compoundable if the offence is to 
be brought home to the guilty party. If the guilty parties by 
compounding the offence either by payment of a small sum 
or something like that are able to get away they can continue 
their career of harassment of the untouchables until the moon 
and the sun are there and untouchability would never end. 

Therefore, compounding of the offence is a grave matter 
and a grave issue and it must have been expressly dealt with. 
I do not know what the intention of my hon. friend is but 
in order that we may be able to judge by reference to other 
provisions in other laws, I shall refer to section 345 of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


937 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 937 

Criminal Procedure Code which defines what offences are 
compoundable and what offences are non-compoundable. 
My hon. friend will remember that there are altogether 511 
sections in the Indian panel code, of them, 108 are taken up 
with purely declaratory matters, punishments, where the law 
would apply, general exceptions to the law, costs and so on 
and so forth. So, we shall cancel or deduct 106 out of 511. 
The sections which actually define offences are grossly about 
400. Four hundred offences, acts and omissions are made 
offences by the Indian Penal Code. Out of this 400, how many 
are compoundable ? That is a matter which we must consider 
because under that lies the principle which is of importance. 
As I said, the only provision which defines what offences are 
compoundable or not is section 345 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code. I have made a little calculation — I am rather weak 
in mathematics but I believe I cannot be very far wrong in 
saying — that only 44 offences are compoundable out of the 
400. The rest are non-compoundable. From this position, I 
deduce the conclusion that the principle of the criminal law 
is that an offence shall ordinarily not be compoundable and 
that these 44 are merely exceptions to the general rule. Out 
of the 44, 24 are compoundable without the permission of the 
magistrate and 20 are compoundable with the permission of 
the magistrate. So, really speaking, only 24 are compoundable 
offences. Now, are these offences indicated in this Bill 
compundable or not ? The Bill itself does not say so. I think 
there ought to be an express provision to this effect that any 
offence under this Bill, shall be non-compoundable. If my hon. 
friend does not propose to accept this suggestion, what would 
be the result ? The result would be this, that most of these 
offences will be offences in which hurt or grievous hurt would 
be caused. They could not be mere offences of show of force 
or anything less than that; they would be offences involving 
hurt, grievous hurt, violence and things of that sort. Now, if 
a magistrate were to apply sub-sections (1) or (2) of section 
345 — I do not want to weary my hon. friend by reading the 
two sub-sections of section 345 which define offences of this 
sort — he will find that the offences involve hurt. He will also 
see that a large majority of them which are made compoundable 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


938 


938 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

either with the permission of the magistrate or without the 
permission of the magistrate are offences which involve hurt, 
grievous hurt, confinement of a person or kidnapping his 
relation or something like that. All of them are compoundable, 
absolutly, every one of them. Therefore, it follows that unless 
you make a. specific and express provision in this Bill, all the 
offences, if they involve social boycott — this is not mentioned 
in the Penal Code at all and it is not an offence except 
conspiracy — and such other acts which involve hurt or violence, 
so far as section 345 is concerned, will become compoundable 
and the Bill will be reduced to a complete nullity. It would be 
a farce. Therefore, my hon. Friend will look into this matter 
and see — he would be entitled, of course, to take the advice 
of the Law Ministry — whether within the terms of section 
345 of the Criminal Procedure Code these offences would be 
compoundable, and if so, whether it is not necessary to make 
an express provision in this Bill to say that offences involving 
untouchability shall not be regarded as compoundable. 

Now, Sir, I come to the question of certain defective 
provisions. I have said about omissions and I want to say 
something about the defective provisions. The first such 
provision to which I shall refer is the clause relating to 
punishment, which is clause 8. The punishment prescribed 
in the Bill is six months’ imprisonment or fine which may 
extend to Rs. 500 or both. My hon. Friend was very eloquent 
on the question of punishment. He said that the punishment 
ought to be very very light and I was wondering whether he 
was pleading for a lighter punishment because he himself 
wanted to commit these offences. He said, “Let the punishment 
be very light so that no grievance shall be left in the heart 
of the offender”. I suppose his primary premise is that the 
offenders who offend the untouchables are really very kindly 
people, overwhelming with love and kindness and that this 
is merely an errant act which really ought to be forgiven. It 
is a matter of great solace to me that he has not prescribed 
the punishment of being warned and then discharged. 
That I think would be the best section 561 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code. Yes, that would be the best; if our object is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


939 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 939 

to make the offender a loving person; well, let him be warned 
and discharged. He will continue to love and no soreness will 
remain in his heart. Why should he have that ? Unfortunately, 
my hon. friend has thought that that could not be and therefore, 
he has suggested this punishment. 

Now, Sir, having had a little practice in criminal law, I 
think the rules on which punishment is based are two mainly. 
One is to deter the offender from repeating his offence. 
That, I think, is the primary rule of criminal jurisprudence. 
Punishment is necessary; otherwise the offender may go on 
repeating his offence. It is to prevent him that there must be 
a punishment. The second object of punishment is to prevent 
a man from adopting a criminal career. If a man once begins 
a criminal career then he may continue to do so unless there 
is some deterrent punishment to prevent him from adopting 
that career. 

Now, Sir, if you accept these two principles, is the 
punishment proposed by my hon. friend adequate for the 
purpose of the Bill ? In the first place the six months’ 
imprisonment is really the maximum and a magistrate may 
only inflict one day’s imprisonment and let the man be off. 
There is no minimum fixed that the imprisonment shall not be 
less than six months or three months or whatever it is. The 
whole matter is left in the hands of the magistrate. What sort 
of a magistrate he may be, it may be quite possible and I can 
quite imagine that he may be a Pandit from Kashi sitting in 
judgement in the magistrate’s chair. What conscience would 
he have in the matter of administering this law? 

Shri Basappa Shetty (Mysore) : Kashi or Kashmir ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Oh, Kashmir Brahmins are not 
true Brahmins, I understand. They are meat khao, machli 
khao, as they say. Therefore they are not Brahmins. 

Now, as I said, in this case if you want to see that 
the law is observed, there ought to have been a minimum 
punishment below which the magistrate could not go. Secondly 
the punishment is alternative, imprisonment or fine. The 
magistrate may very well inflict the alternative punishment 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


940 


940 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of fine and there might be an offender who might be prepared 
even to pay the five hundred rupees in order to escape the 
clutches of the law. What good can such punishment do ? 
The Indian Penal Code prescribes a variety of punishments, 
a variety of them in section 53 : death, transportation, 
imprisonment, forfeiture of property, fine, whipping, detention 
in reformatory. There are seven offences for which the Penal 
Code fixes death penalty; for 50 offences the punishment is 
transportation; for 21 offences — simple imprisonment; for 12 
offences — fine. In all other cases the imprisonment is rigorous. 
Why my friend has thought so little of this Bill as not to 
prescribe adequate punishment, it is very difficult for me to 
understand, I mean, the least that one can expect from him 
is to prescribe a minimum, may be three months, it does not 
matter, a minimum of three months’ imprisonment and fine 
if he wants to fix fine — I am not for inflicting a fine because 
that only benefits the treasury, but if you say that the fine 
will go to the victim, I am for fine also. Otherwise I do not 
want fine. 

Shri B. B. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) : Why not the 
maximum penalty of death ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, if you like it, have it — I am not 
so cruel as that and I do not think you are sincere in suggesting 
it, and, as I said, there are not cases in the Indian Penal 
Code where minimum punishment has not been prescribed 
or rigorous imprisonment has not been prescribed. There are 
three sections here which prescribe rigorous imprisonment, 
sections 194,226 and 449. Then the Penal Code has prescribed 
the minimum period of imprisonment in sections 397 and 398. 
I do not see why, when there is the precedent, the precedent 
should not be 

Dr. K. N. Katju : What is 397 ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Dacoity. That is worse than dacoity. 
I think, to starve a man and not to allow him to take water, 
I think, it is almost causing death. That is, I think, one 
drawback in the Bill. Then, Sir, the second drawback in the 
Bill is that there is no provision for taking security for good 
behaviour. The Criminal Procedure Code has got four sections, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


941 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 941 

sections 107, 108, 109 and 110, and they all enable the 
magistrate to demand security for good behaviour. I don’t 
understand why this Bill should not contain a provision to 
that effect. When for instance we find in Rajputana and 
other States the caste Hindus are agitating to harass the 
untouchables because they exercise civil and constitutional 
rights, why should you not take security for good behaviopur ? 

Shri J. S. Bisht (Uttar Pradesh) : These are all the 
provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is what exactly I am saying, 
that there is a precedent in the Criminal Procedure Code for 
taking security from persons who do not keep peace, for good 
behaviour, from persons disseminating seditious matter, from 
vagrants and from habitual offenders, for good behaviour. I 
am not certain that these provisions could be invoked for the 
purpose of taking security from persons offending against this 
law. It may be that specific provision dealing with the cases 
dealt with in this Bill has to be made, and that can only be 
made by a specific provision in this Bill. 

Then, Sir, there is another provision which finds a place in 
the Indian Police Act. Section 15 of the Act, under which when 
some people in the village or the villagers as a whole disturb 
the peace, the Government can quarter upon them additional 
police and recover the cost of the additional police from the 
inhabitants of that village. That is a general provision. I am 
not sure again whether that provision could be invoked by 
the Government for the purpose of enforcing this Act. That 
Act is a general Act, disturbance of peace and so on and so 
forth. This is quite a different case and I should have thought 
that a specific clause on the lines of section 15 of the Police 
Act should have found a place in this Bill if outlawing of 
untouchability is intended to be an effective thing. But that 
again is not there. 

Now, Sir, I come to another question about which I certainly 
feel a certain amount of doubt. Who is to administer this law, 
the Centre or the States ? And if the Centre is to administer 
the law, is it not better that this Bill should contain a clause 
to that effect, that it shall be administered by the Central 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


942 


942 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government ? I make this suggestion because I feel that the 
States might raise an objection that this is a concurrent piece 
of legislation and being a concurrent piece of legislation the 
States have the right ordinarily to administer these Acts. I 
do not think that this is a concurrent piece of legislation in 
which the States can claim to have a right to administer. 

I claim that this is a Central law although it does not fall 
in List I of the Seventh Schedule. The provisions contained 
in article 35 are quite clear. It has been stated in article 35 
that any law to be made for inflicting punishment for any 
infringement of a law made in pursuance of article 17 shall 
be by Parliament and not by the State. Those are the very 
express words. Therefore there can be no doubt in my mind 
that this law will have to be by virtue of the Constitution 
administered by the Centre and not by the States. I say this 
because my hon. friend might be saying that since we have 
made the offences under this Act cognisable, it does not matter 
if the law is administered by the States but that argument 
cannot stand at all in virtue of article 35 and I would suggest 
to him that he should introduce an express provision in the 
Bill that the Law shall be administered by the Centre. If 
my friend’s contention or the contention of the States is that 
this is also a concurrent piece of legislation, I would like to 
draw his attention to the proviso to article 73 which is a 
very important one and which relates to the administration 
of laws in the concurrent field. My hon. friend will remember 
that in the scheme of things in the Government of India Act 
of 1935 we had the same kind of classification of subjects — 
List I — Central subject, List II — State subject, and List III — 
Concurrent subject, but the Government of India Act contained 
an express provision that the power of the Centre to make 
law in the concurrent field was confined merely to lawmaking. 
It could not encroach upon the field of administration. The 
reasons why such a provision was made in the Government 
of India Act, 1935, are quite irrelevant to the times in which 
we find ourselves now, but when we made the Constitution 
we refused to accept such a provision. We said that although 
generally the Centre may leave a law in this concurrent field 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


943 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 943 

for administration to the States the choice must be given 
to the Centre to determine whether any particular law in 
the” concurrent field made by it shall be administered by it 
and not by the States. That intention has been carried out 
in the proviso to article 73. We said that if the Centre so 
determines that the law made in the concurrent field shall be 
administered by the Centre then the States cannot interfere 
in the matter at all. Therefore, I am strongly of the opinion 
that this contention is invalid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


944 


944 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 53 ) 

CONSTITUTION (FOURTH AMENDMENT) 

BILL, 1954 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay) : Mr. Chairman, those 
who are familiar with the British Parliamentary system will 
know that there is a dogma in the working of the British 
Constitution that all parties in England accept. That dogma 
is that the King can do no wrong. If any wrong is done in the 
working of the Constitution, the person responsible for the 
wrong is the Prime Minister and his colleagues. But the King 
can never be wrong and can never do wrong. We too in this 
country have adopted practically, with slight modifications, 
the British Constitution. But unfortunately the working of 
our Constitution is governed by a dogma, which is just the 
opposite of the dogma adopted by the British people. In our 
country the dogma on which we proceed is that the Prime 
Minister can do no wrong and that he will do no wrong. 
Therefore, anything that the Prime Minister proposes to 
do must be accepted as correct and without question. This 
devotion in politics to a personality may be excusable in 
some cases, but it does not seem to me excusable where 
the fundamental rights are being invaded. The fundamental 
rights are the very basis of the preamble to the Constitution. 
The Preamble says that this Constitution will have as its 
basis liberty, equality and fraternity. These objectives of the 
Constitution are carried out by the fundamental rights. And 
it is, therefore, the duty, I should have thought, of every 
Member of Parliament, apart from personal loyalty, to be 
critical when any invasion is made of the fundamental rights. 
Unfortunately, one does not find this kind of critical attitude. 
The history of fundamental rights in this country is very 
interesting. In olden times under the Hindu kings there were 
fundamental rights only for two — the Brahmin and the cow — 


* P. D., Vol. 9-B, 19th March 1955, pp. 2446-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


945 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 945 

and the Puranas described the king as “Go Brahmana 
Pratipalaka.” That was the duty of a king; whether the other 
sections of his subjects received any consideration at his 
hands or not, or whether animals other than the ‘Go’ had 
any consideration was a matter of no moment at all. So long 
as the Brahmin and the cow were protected, the king was 
destined to go to heaven. 

When the Muslims came, they took away these fundamental 
rights which the Hindu kings had granted to the Brahmin 
and the cow. The cow unfortunately not only lost its rights 
to live, but became the victim of everybody. So was the case 
of the Brahmin. What the Muslims did was to give privileges 
to the Mussalman and no rights to the non-Muslims. After 
the Muslim rule ended in this country, there came upon us 
the rule of the British. Anyone who examines the various 
Government of India Acts passed from 1772 to 1935 will find 
that there were no such thing as fundamental rights in any of 
the Government of India Acts that were passed by Parliament 
for the administration of this country. It is in 1947 or so 
when Swaraj became a fact in this country that this idea of 
fundamental rights emerged. It is our Constitution which for 
the first time contains the embodiment of what are called 
fundamental rights. It is a very strange thing that although 
the foreigners were ruling in this country, namely the British, 
no one ever agitated for the enactment of the fundamental 
rights. The Congress was in existence from 1886. Let anyone 
examine the annual resolutions passed by the Congress. They 
never asked for any fundamental rights. 

Babu Gopinath Singh (Uttar pradesh) : Did you read 
the Karachi Congress Resolution of 1931. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, I have no idea about that. 
They said that they would have fundamental rights when 
they enact a Constitution. I am coming to that now, it is as 
I say a very strange commentary that no Indian — and the 
Indians who ran the Congress in the earliest times were 
intellectual giants: they were not ordinary people, they were 
most learned, they were wide awake — not one of them to my 
knowledge asked for any fundamental rights. But as soon as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


946 


946 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Swaraj came, there was a demand for fundamental rights. It 
is a matter worth consideration why this happened ? Various 
people would no doubt give various replies, but my reply is 
very simple. My reply is very simple. My reply is this — the 
reason why Indians did not demand fundamental rights when 
the British were here is this. Although the British had their 
imperialism as one aspect of their rule, there cannot be any 
doubt that the administration of this country was governed by 
what was called the rule of justice, equity and good conscience. 
Sir, I remember, at least speaking for my own province, 
how independent was the judiciary which wholly consisted 
of Europeans. How independent it was of the executive. I 
remember a case 

Dewan Chaman Lall (Punjab) : Is it Tilak’s case ? 

Dr. B, R. Ambedkar : It is a very famous one, the case of 
a Mr. Justice Knight who was the Chief Justice of the Bombay 
High Court during the time of the East India Company. He 
had issued a writ against the Government of Bombay and 
the Government of Bombay refused to obey. They said that 
the Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court had no right 
to issue a writ against the Executive. When they informed 
him that they were not going to carry out that particular 
writ, what did Mr. Knight do ? He called the Chaprassi and 
said : “Bring the keys of the High Court”, and he asked him 
to lock up every room of the High Court, including his own, 
and next day booked a passage for himself and went back to 
London, saying: “If you are not going to obey my orders as 
the Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court, you will have 
no High Court, at all.” Subsequently, of course, his order 
was reversed by the Privy Council. But that is no matter at 
all. The point is that the British administered this country 
in a manner in which everybody felt that there was some 
sense of security. That is the reason why, in my judgement, 
nobody in this country clamoured for fundamental rights. But 
as soon as Swaraj presented itself, everybody thought — at 
least many of the minorities thought — that there was the 
prospect of political authority passing into the hands of a 
majority, which did not possess what might constitutionally 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


947 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 947 

be called constitutional morality. Their official doctrine was 
inequality of classes. Though there is inequality in every 
community, or whatever be the word, that inequality is a 
matter of practice. It is not an official dogma. But with a 
majority in this country, inequality, as embodied in their 
Chaturvarana is an official doctrine. Secondly, their caste 
system is a sword of political and administrative discrimination. 
The result was that the fundamental rights became inevitable. 
What I found — and I know this thing more than probably 
many do, because I had something, to do with it — was that 
the Congress Party was so jubilant over the fundamental 
rights. They wanted fundamental rights, and they thought 
that fundamental rights were so necessary that if the Indian 
people had a constitution which did not embody fundamental 
rights, they would appear nude to the world. That was the 
reason why they clamoured for fundamental rights. In the 
proceedings of the Constituent Assembly, I do not find a single 
Member who stood up and said “We do not want fundamental 
rights.” Fundamental rights were regarded as a kind of an 
ornament which the Indian people must have. Today, their 
attitude has undergone a complete change. Today, they look 
upon the fundamental rights as an iron chain which ought 
to be broken, whenever occasion arose for breaking it. This, 
I find, is a fundamental change. I am sorry to say that this 
attitude of treating the fundamental rights with contempt, as 
though they were of no consequence, that they could be trodden 
upon at any time with the convenience of the majority or the 
wishes of a Party chief, is an attitude that may easily lead to 
some dangerous consequences in the future. And I therefore 
feel very sorry that even a matter of this sort, namely, the 
infringement of, or the deviation from, fundamental rights, 
is being treated by the Party in power as though it was a 
matter of no moment at all. 

It seems to be suggested that those who made the 
Constitution had no sense, that fundamental rights must be 
elastic, that they must leave enough room for progressive 
changes. I must, Sir, as the Chairman of the Drafting 
Committee, repudiate any such suggestion. Any one, who 
reads the fundamental rights as they are enacted in the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


948 


948 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Constitution, will find that every fundamental right has got 
an exception. It says: Notwithstanding anything contained, the 
State may impose reasonable restrictions on them. We were 
quite aware of the fact that fundamental rights could not 
be rigid, that there must be elasticity. And we had provided 
enough elasticity. 

Article 31, with which we are dealing now in this amending 
Bill, is an article for which I, and the Drafting Committee, 
can take no responsibility whatsoever. We do not take any 
responsibility for that. That is not our draft. The result was 
that the Congress Party, at the time when Article 31 was 
being framed, was so divided within itself that we did not 
know what to do, what to put and what not to put. There were 
three sections in the Congress party. One section was led by 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, who stood for full compensation, 
full compensation in the sense in which full compensation 
is enacted in our Land Acquisition Act, namely, market 
price plus 15 per cent, solatium. That was his point of view. 
Our Prime Minister was against compensation. Our friend, 
Mr. Pant, who is here now — and I am glad to see him here — had 
conceived his Zamindari Abolition Bill before the Constitution 
was being actually framed. He wanted a very safe delivery for 
his baby. So he had his own proposition. There was thus this 
tripartite struggle, and we left the matter to them to decide 
in any way they liked. And they merely embodied what their 
decision was in article 31. This Article 31, in my judgement, 
is a very ugly thing, something which I do not like to look at. 
If I may say so, and I say it with a certain amount of pride 
the Constitution which has been given to this country is a 
wonderful document. It has been said so not by myself, but by 
many people, many other students of the Constitution. It is the 
simplest and the easiest. Many, many publishers have written 
to me asking me to write a commentary on the Constitution, 
promising a good sum. But I have always told them that to 
write a commentary on this Constitution is to admit that the 
Constitution is a bad one and an un-understandable one. It 
is not so. Anyone who can follow English can understand the 
Constitution. No commentary is necessary. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


949 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 949 

Dr. Anup Singh (Punjab) : Last time when you spoke, 
you said that you would burn the Constitution. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Do you want a reply to that ? I 
would give it to you right here. 

My friend says that the last time when I spoke, I said 
that I wanted to burn the Constitution. Well, in a hurry I 
did not explain the reason. Now that my friend has given me 
the opportunity, I think I shall give the reason. The reason 
is this : We built a temple for a god to come in and reside, 
but before the god could be installed, if the devil had taken 
possession of it, what else could we do except destroy the 
temple ? We did not intend that it should be occupied by the 
Asuras. We intended it to be occupied by the devas. That is 
the reason why I said I would rather like to burn it. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar) : Destroy the devil rather 
than the temple. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You cannot do it. We have not got 
the strength. If you will read the Brahmana, the Sathapatha 
Brahmana, you will see that the gods have always been 
defeated by the Asuras, and that the Asuras had the Amrit 
with them which the gods had to take away in order to survive 
in the battle. Now, Sir, I am being interrupted 

Mr. Chairman: You are being drawn into 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : into all sorts of things 

into which I do not wish to enter. 

I was saying that Article 31 was an article for which we 
were not responsible. Even then, we have made that article as 
elastic as we possibly could in the matter of compensation. If 
members of the House will refer to entry 42 of the Concurrent 
List, and compare it with Section 299 of the Government 
of India Act, 1935, they will find how elastic has been the 
provision made by the drafting Committee. Section 299 of 
the Government of India Act which governed the question 
of compensation described the following ingredients. One 
was that there must be full compensation by which they, no 
doubt, meant compensation in accordance with the terms of 
the Land Acquisition Act. Secondly, it said that compensation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


950 


950 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

must be paid and paid in cash before possession could be 
taken. That was the provision in the Government of India 
Act, 1935. Look at the provision that we have made in entry 
42 of the Concurrent List, by which I hope members will 
understand that the authority to determine compensation is 
given to both the State Legislatures as well as to Parliament, 
and the reason why we did this was simple. It was this : we 
thought that, if compensation was distributed in List I and 
List II, so that the Centre might be free to fix compensation 
for such acquisition as it might make, and the provinces or the 
States might fix such compensation as they might think fit, 
it would result in utter choas in this country and that there 
must be some sort of uniformity in this. Therefore, while giving 
authority to the States to lay down rules of compensation, we 
also gave authority to Parliament so that Parliament might 
enact a general law which would be applicable to the whole 
of India and which might supersede any State law which 
might be inequitous. That was the reason why we put it in 
the Concurrent List. What is the provision we have made ? 
We have said that it is not necessary that Government should 
actually pay compensation to acquire possession of property. 
We have not said that. We have said “compensation to be 
given” and not “paid” so that it is open to the Government 
at the Centre as well as in the States to acquire property 
without actually paying compensation. 

The second distinction that we have made between section 
299 of the Government of India Act, 1935 and entry 42 is that 
compensation may be in any form, that either Parliament or 
the State Legislature might decide by law to give compensation 
in the form of paper bonds, cash certificates or whatever 
they liked to give, or that they might pay it in cash if they 
liked it. We have also said that, although Parliament may 
not actually fix compensation, it may merely lay down the 
rules for compensation, so that, if a law was passed which 
did not contain a clause specifically saying what should 
be the compensation but merely laid down the rules and 
principles, that was enough for Government to take possession 
of the property and acquire it. Now, Sir, I would like to 
ask the Members of this House if they can point out any 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


951 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 951 

Constitution where the procedure for acquiring property is 
so easy as it is in our Constitution. Can anyone point out to 
me that there is some other Constitution which enables the 
Government with greater facility to acquire property for public 
purposes ? Now, with all this facility, is there any necessity 
for the Government to come out with a proposition that there 
are cases where they shall not give compensation ?They need 
not cast the whole burden, the entire burden, on the present 
generation. They are not asked to say that the bonds that 
they might issue must be redeemable. They may make them 
irredeemable. All that they need do is to give some interest on 
the bond as every borrower agrees to do and as every creditor 
gets. Why at all even the most hasty socialist should say, 
“well, we shall not pay compensation;”, I do not understand. 
There are in my judgement three cases or three paths that 
one might follow. The first path would be full compensation; 
the second, no compensation; and the third, compensation as 
determined by law. I am quite in agreement with those who 
think that it is not possible to accept full compensation in 
terms of the Land Acquisition Act. I am quite in agreement 
with that; if by full compensation is meant compensation as 
determined by the rules now prescribed by the Land Acquisition 
Act, I am quite prepared to side with the Government and 
say that that is an impossible proposition which we need not 
accept. I might at this stage draw the attention of the House 
to the fact that we are not the only people who are bringing 
about socialism. What socialism means, nobody is able to 
say. That is the socialism of the Prime Minister, which he 
himself said that he cannot define. There is the socialism of 
the Praja Socialist Party; they don’t know what it is. And 
even the Communists 

Shri S. N. Dwivedy (Orissa): You don’t know either. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am not a socialist. 

Shri S. N. Dwivedy: You want to criticise without knowing 
what it is. 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order, you may go on. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


952 


952 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Even the Communists say that theirs 
is socialism and I want to know why they call themselves 
Communists if they are only Socialists. It would lose all the 
terrors which the word ‘Communism’ has for many people 
and they might easily have won a victory in Andhra if they 
had made a change in name. What I wanted to tell my friend 
Mr. Pant is — I hope he is listening to me 

Mr. Chairman: Of course he is listening with the greatest 
attention. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: What I wanted to tell him was this, 
that this is quite interesting. Anyone who has studied the 
legislative programme of the British Labour Party, after the 
close of the War, will see that the Labour Party, in accordance 
with the report of the Trade Union Congress, published in 
1945, carried out nationalisation of various industries and 
various services including the Railways and even the Bank 
of England. I have not understood what changes have been 
made by the Labour Party in the working of the Bank of 
England by nationalisation. I am a student of currency and 
I know something about the Bank of England but there it 
is that they had it. But what I wanted to tell my friend 
Mr. Pant is this, that in everyone of those cases where the 
Labour Party has carried out nationalisation, they have 
paid full compensation — full. That is to say, they have paid 
the market value for the shares that they have acquired. 
Payment of compensation, therefore, cannot come in the way 
of nationalisation but as I said, I am quite prepared for that 
proposition because the values of the shares are not due 
merely to the share capital that is invested. It is due to a 
variety of social circumstances. It is social causes which have 
brought about the rise in the value of the shares and there 
is no reason why a private shareholder should be entitled to 
appropriate to himself the social values which have become 
part of the values of his shares. I don’t also understand how 
the theory of no-compensation can be supported. In Russia 
they paid no compensation, it is true. But it must not be 
forgotten that the Russian Government undertakes to give 
employment to people, to feed them, to clothe them, to house 
them, to scrub them and to provide for all the human needs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


953 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 953 

If the State can undertake to feed the population whom 
it has deprived of compensation, then of course, in those 
circumstances, the theory that no-compensation shall be paid is 
a valid one. Why do you want compensation ? Compensation is 
necessary simply because the State has deprived an individual 
of his instruments of earning a living. You cannot deprive a 
man of the instruments of his earnings and at the same time 
say, “Go and feed yourself’. That theory, in my judgement, is 
a very barbarous one. It is therefore not possible to accept it. 
But why can we not accept the theory that just compensation 
means compensation determined by the law of Parliament ? 
Why not ? It does not mean that Parliament shall make a 
law exactly in terms of the Land Acquisition Act. You can 
scrap the Land Acquisition Act. You have a right to do so 
because it is within the purview of both Parliament and the 
State Legislatures. It can enact a new Land Acquisition Act 
with a new set of principles. There is no harm in doing that 
and no difficulty for doing that. If you do that, well, nobody 
can have a right to complain because when you bring forth 
such a measure for determining compensation by law, all 
sections of the House will have a right to say what they have 
to say. It would be the result of common agreement. If one 
Parliament finds certain principles to be good and another 
Parliament finds that those principles are bad, Parliament 
may change but it should all be done and it can be done 
by Parliament. Therefore my suggestion to the Government 
is this, that rather than bring in this kind of a Bill, a bald 
one and, as I am going to show later, really a very trifling 
thing, its corpse ought to be carried unwept, and unsung 
and nobody ought to cry over it. I am not going to cry over 
it because it is not going to do any good or going to do 
any harm, as I will show. Therefore, my suggestion to the 
Government was this that rather than keep on encroaching 
upon these fundamental rights from time to time, it is much 
better to give Parliament once for all the power to determine 
compensation. This tampering with the Constitution from 
time to time is a bad thing. I said so last time but I don’t 
suppose the Government has cared to pay any heed. I would 
like to repeat the same caution again and I should like to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


954 


954 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

give some reasons why the Constitution should not be amended 
and tampered so easily. Anyone who is familiar with what 
is called the interpretation of law by courts — and there are 
well-set rules as to how Statutes are to be interpreted — will 
recall that there is a famous rule of interpretation which is 
called stare decisis which means this, that when the courts 
have given an interpretation for a long number of years in 
a very uniform sense, and if after a long number of years 
some lawyer gets up and convinces the court that the existing 
interpretation is wrong and ought to be changed, the courts 
say that they shall not do it, although they are convinced 
that the interpretation is wrong. The reason why the courts 
adopt this rule stare decisis is very important. The court says : 

“Whether the interpretation we have given is right or is 
wrong is now not a matter of moment, for the simple reason that 
a large number of people have acted upon our interpretation as 
being the correct law, have incurred obligations, have secured 
rights. Now to say that all these obligations and rights are 
founded upon a mistaken view of the law would be to unsettle 
the society altogether. Let, therefore, the wrong continue.” 

That is the attitude that the courts have taken. The same 
reason prevails, in my judgement, why the Constitution should 
not be constantly amended. People know that the Constitution 
contains certain rules, certain obligations, and in accordance 
with them, they make their contracts, they make their plans 
for the future. It is not right, therefore, to come in every year 
and to disturb these values. That is the reason why I say 
the Constitution should not be so lightly and so frequently 
amended. I do not know whether the Government would listen 
to it, perhaps not. 

Shri Tajamul Husain (Bihar): Why should they? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Well, Sir, it is a habit. Once a 
cow gets the habit of running into the fields of another, you 
cannot convert her by morality. It is a habit. 

Mr. Chairman: Go on, go on. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: In other countries wherever 
a clause of the Constitution has been interpreted by the 
judiciary in a way which the Government does not like, 
Government concurs in, it does not like to upset the decision 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


955 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 955 

of the court. Here, in our country, we have cultivated a different 
mentality. Our mentality is that if the Judges of the Supreme 
Court do not give a judgement which is to our liking, then we 
can throw it out. That is what it is. I am rather glad with 
regard to the behaviour of our Supreme Court. In the short 
time that it has been in existence, I see some different phases 
of the Supreme Court. Being a sick person I have not been 
attending the Supreme Court for the last two or three years, 
but I am in contact with what is happening. I remember 
that in the very first flush of its power, the Supreme Court 
declared or had the courage to declare that a certain section 
of the Indian Penal Code was ultra vires. Our Government at 
once reacted and brought in an amendment to declare that 
the interpretation of the Supreme Court was wrong. 

( Interruptions .) 

Mr. Chairman: Let us avoid comments upon the Supreme 
Court. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I hope that notwithstanding the 
constant amendments which the Government seems to be prone 
to bringing forth, the Supreme Court will continue to have its 
independent judgement, notwithstanding what the Government 
may have to say. I do not find that the Supreme Court has 
given any judgement which, any independent man can say, 
is not in consonance with the terms of the Constitution. 

Now Sir, I will proceed to deal with the different clauses 
in the Bill. The first clause is clause 2. This clause 2 of the 
Bill divides clause (2) of the original Article 31 into two parts, 
clause (2) and clause (2A). With regard to clause (2) one has 
nothing to say, because it is merely a reproduction, probably 
with a certain economy of words, of the terms, contained in 
the original colause (2). I have therefore nothing to say about 
it. But clause (2A) is a new thing and it must be examined 
carefully. In the first place, I cannot understand the meaning 
of this clause. It has not been explained by the Prime 
Minister, nor do I find any explanations from my hon. friend 
the Minister for Home Affairs. What exactly is it intended to 
convey ? It is a sort of mysterious clause; it has been shrouded 
in mystery. Now, let me analyse this clause (2A). What does 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


956 


956 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it say? To put it in plain language, quite different from the 
language that is used in the clause, as embodied in the 
amending Bill, it seems to say this. If Government buys up 
ownership of any property, it will amount to acquisition and 
Government will pay full compensation in accordance with 
article 31. If Government buys up ownership, that is the 
important point. If Government buys up ownership, then that 
is tantamount to acquisition and Government will be bound 
to pay compensation. Secondly, it means that if Government 
takes possession of the property, then the taking possession 
will also amount to acquisition and the Government will be 
bound to pay compensation in accordance with the terms of 
article 31. 

That is what the clause in the Bill says : What is it that 
will not amount to acquisition ? What is it that is left which 
12-00 Noon Government can do and wants to do and yet 
escape compensation ? If it acquires ownership, it 
is said, it will pay compensation; if it takes possession, it says, 
it will pay compensation because that would be tantamount 
to acquisition. 

Shri Tajamul Husain: What about the Sholapur Case? 
It was only temporary possession for improving matters. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have got the case here; I shall 
come to it. 

It seems that the only case which will be out of these two, 
acquisition of ownership and acquisition of possession, is the 
cancellation of a licence, because, when you cancel a licence 
you do not acquire ownership and you do not take possession 
and, therefore, by reason of the cancellation of the licence 
you do not become liable for paying compensation. That is 
what this clause means. I wish it had been stated in positive 
terms that in the following cases, Government shall not pay 
compensation but having been put the other way, the real 
meaning of this clause is very much concealed from the sight 
of the reader. If my interpretation is right, then, what the 
clause intends to do is to exempt Government from the liability 
for paying compensation whenever it cancels a licence. Is that 
a justifiable ground for not paying compensation ? I believe 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


957 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 957 

that the case which my hon. friend Mr. Pant has very much 
in mind and which I also have in mind, is the case of the 
bus owners. The bus owners, under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
have to obtain a licence for running their buses on a certain 
route. My friend Mr. Pant is a very covetous person and he 
likes to get the monopoly of running the buses in his own 
hand and he, therefore, does not like the bus owners. How 
can he prevent them from running the buses ? He has got 
the power of cancelling their licences. He therefore, cancels 
their licences and sets on Government buses on the route on 
which they were plying and he does not want to pay them 
any compensation at the same time. The question that I would 
like to ask is this ; Is this a just and fair proposition ? I have 
no objection to the Government running their own buses. I 
do not know how cheap the fares in U. P. are whether they 
are cheaper than in the case of the private buses. 

Shri H. P. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh): Yes. 

Shri Tajamul Husain: And better. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not saying anything; I do 
not know whether they give good service; probably they do. 

Shri Tajamul Husain: Yes, they do; the Government 
buses always do. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: But the point to be considered is 
this; here are a body of people engaged in this particular 
trade, who are earning their living by this trade. They have 
invested quite a lot of money in buying their stock-in-trade, 
namely the buses, the workshops and whatever other things 
are necessary. You suddenly come and say, “Stop your trade. 
We shall not allow you to carry on”. Even that I do not mind 
but the point that I would like to ask my friend is this; the 
least thing that my hon. friend could do is at least to buy 
their stock-in-trade because that very stock-in-trade would 
be useful to us running by the Government. If it did that 
and then said that it is not going to give them any more 
compensation because the stock-in-trade has been bought 
with which money they could go and practise any other trade 
they liked, that would be quite an equitable proposition from 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


958 


958 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

my point of view. But the Government does not want to do 
that. In running the Government buses they prefer to buy new 
buses. The Minister has yet to give an answer as to why he 
would not take the old buses from the people whose licences 
he has cancelled. No answer has been given for this thing. 

Mr. Chairman : Dr. Ambedkar, you have taken nearly 
an hour. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, Sir, that is quite true. 

Mr. Chairman: Please wind up as early as possible. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, Sir. What I was saying was this, 
that in such cases it would be wrong to deprive a man of his 
means of livelihood and not to compensate him for the loss of 
his stock-in-trade. I would like to hear some argument on this 
subject which would justify this kind of conduct. Therefore,, 
my submission is that clause (2A) is a most inequitous piece 
of legislation. It has no relation to justice, equity and good 
conduct. Unless my friend is going to give some satisfactory 
explanation I mean to oppose that clause. 

Now I will proceed to clause 3 of the amending Bill. I 
would like to say at the outset that the provisions contained 
in clause 3 are in my judgement, most insignificant, trivial 
and jejune and I do not know what the Government is going 
to achieve by incorporating this clause in the Constitution. 
Now, with regard to sub-clauses (g), (h) and (i) of proposed 
clasue (1), in clause 3 of the amending Bill, I have not the 
least objection because I do not see that by taking action under 
these clauses, there is going to be any injury to anybody. The 
essence of acquisition is that it causes injury to the interests 
of anybody. I do not see that these sub-clauses will cause any 
injury to anybody and, therefore, I support the proposition 
that there need be no compensation in these cases. 

But there is one thing that I would like to say with regard 
to these clauses and it is this that if any action is taken under 
these clauses (g), (h) and (i), it must only be on the ground 
that public purpose justifies it. It must not be merely an 
arbitary act on the part of the Government. It must not be 
a whim that Government wants to amalgamate one company 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


959 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 959 

with another or transfer the management of one to another. 
These clauses must be subject to the rule of public purpose. 
If that, is so, then there is no objection to them. 

Now going back to the other clauses, to (a) I have no 
objection; it may stand as it is. 

With regard to (b) I do not know whether the first part 
of (b) is very different from (a). It seems to me that both are 
alike, but I would like to have some explanation as to what is 
meant by “modification of any rights in agricultural holdings”. 
What does that mean ? There is no explanation. As far as 
I understand, an agriculturist requires four rights. First is 
security of tenure; he must not be liable to ejection by the 
landlord without proper cause. Secondly he would be liable to 
pay only what is called fair rent, as may be determined by a 
court if it is necessary. Thirdly he must have transferability 
of tenure. If he wants to sell his holding he should be free 
to sell it and the landlord should not stand in his way. And 
fourthly it must be hereditable, that is to say, if he dies, 
his descendants should have a right to claim the holding. 
Now these are the four things which I think a holder of an 
agricultural holding is interested in. Now Government would 
take power to modify these things. I do not know what is the 
nature of the modification and what are the rights which they 
propose to modify. I think some explanation is necessary. 

Then comes (c), the fixation of the maximum extent of 
agricultural land, etc. Well, all that I can say is this that 
whether this particular clause will have positive results 
depends upon what is the maximum that you are going to 
fix. This is the pet idea of the Socialist Party. They want that 
land should be distributed after fixing the maximum holding 
of a tenant. 

Mr. Chairman: Are not these matters to be taken up 
in the Joint Committee when it comes to discuss the thing? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It may be but the point is this that 
it is necessary to know whether these things are really good 
to be incorporated in the Constitution. My Friend Mr. Pant 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


960 


960 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

knows because he was the Chairman of the Committee on Land 
Tenures in U. P. which I have studied — that the maximum 
holding in U. P. is about two acres for a ryot and I do not 
know that there is any part of India where tyotwari prevails 
where the holding is larger than two acres. What maximum 
can you fix I do not understand. Therefore this seems to me 
quite a futile thing. 

The other thing about which I wish to make some reference 
is this. It says that the surplus land shall be transferred 
to the State or otherwise. I do not know what is meant 
by “otherwise”, whether it means that it may be given to 
other tenants; that might be the meaning. If so, I would 
like to utter a word of caution. I am of opinion that peasant 
proprietorship in this country is going to bring about complete 
ruination of the country. What we want is — although I am 
not a Communist — the Russain system of collective farming. 
That is the only way by which we can solve our agricultural 
problem. To create peasant proprietorship and to hand overland 
to peasants who have not got means of production is in my 
judgement 

Shri Tajamul Husain: Have they done it in Russia? 

Mr. Chairman: Don’t bother, he takes it as an illustration. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am prepared to pick and choose 
from everyone, Socialist, Communist or other. I do not claim 
infallibility and as Buddha says there is nothing infallible; 
there is nothing final and everything is liable to examination. 

Shri Tajamul Husain: That is why we are amending the 
Constitution framed by Dr. Ambedkar. 

Shri S. Mahanty (Orissa): And voted by you. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Now with regard to vacant and 
waste land. That proposition is of course a welcome proposition 
and I support it. But I have yet to see if you take vacant 
land without compensation, whether the municipality which 
would have to exercise this right would do so because I fear 
a large majority of municipal councillors are friends of the 
slum-owners and therefore probably they will not exercise 
this right unless some ting more is done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


961 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 961 

Now with regard to management, all that I want to say 
is this. Most people do not realise what is involved in this. If 
the Government wants to take up the management of a mill 
because it is badly managed, there is no harm in doing that. 
But the question is this. Suppose the Government management 
turns out to be worse than the previous management and 
losses are created, who is going to be responsible for those 
losses ? I think some provision must be made. Nationalised 
industries so far as India is concerned do not appear to be very 
profitable. Our Airways Corporation, as I see from papers, has 
brought to us a loss of one crore of rupees within one year. 

Shri S. Mahanty: And about Rs. 50 lakhs. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: What other corporations would do 
I do not know. 

But if you take the property of a man because it is 
mismanaged and because there is a social purpose in it, you 
must also make some provision that the losses that might 
be incurred are made good by somebody and are not put on 
the head of the old man who was the owner of the property. 

Now, Sir, one word with regard to clause 5. It seems to 
me very obnoxious. What are we asked to do by clause 5 ? By 
clause 5 we are asked to give constitutional validity to laws 
passed by State Letislatures. We have not seen those laws; 
they have not been circulated; they have not been debated 
here. And yet we are asked here to exercise the constituent 
powers of Parliament not only to validate them but to give 
them constitutional immunity from the other clauses of the 
Act. Sir, I think it is very derogatory to the dignity of the 
House that it should be called upon to validate laws passed 
by some other State which laws it has not seen, it has not 
considered. The proper thing for the Government to do is to 
put these subjects in the concurrent field so that Parliament 
may at least give them validity by the powers vested in it. 
But it is a very wrong thing. Because we did it in the case 
of the first amendment where we added the Ninth Schedule 
to the Constitution, that is no reason why we should widen 
this anomaly and this ugliness in the Constitution. 

That is all that I want to say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


962 


962 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 54 ) 

STATES REORGANISATION BILL, 1956 

*Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Bombay): Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
the storm centre of the debate on this Bill as I see it from 
the papers is the position assigned to the City of Bombay. As 
is obvious from the Bill this City which was a premier city 
in the civic affairs of this country has been brought down 
to the level of Adaman and Nicobar Islands — what has been 
described in our Constitution as the territories of India. That 
means that these territories and now the City of Bombay 
will not have any Legislature or Executive. Nobody in his 
widest dreams could have conceived of such a madness. A city 
which has been in the forefront of India, which has taught 
politics of India, is now placed on the level of the Laccadive 
and Maidive Islands and the Nicobar Islands. I am sure that 
the Government which has fostered this proposal must have 
the strongest reasons, incontrovertible reasons, in order to 
justify the decision that they have taken. There have been 
contestants to the claim for the City of Bombay. There are 
the Maharashtrians who claim that the city belongs to them. 
There are our Gujarati friends; I do not know on what basis 
they lay their claim, but they claim a kind of an easement 
over the city. They say that they will not allow the city to 
go into the possession of the Maharashtrians and the quarrel 
is going on. It has been admitted by no less a person than 
Mr. Morarji Desai that Bombay belongs to Maharashtra. 
I have read his speech which he delivered to the Gujarat 
Maha Pradesh Congress, or something like that, in which 
he categorically made this statement that Bombay belongs to 
Maharashtra. If that is so, I am quite unable to understand 
what objection there can be for the city of Bombay to be given 
to Maharashtra. Under the British regime when citizenship 
was common, any man could go anywhere and reside and the 


*P. D., (R. SO, Vol. 12-A of 1956, 1st May 1956, pp. 834-46. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


963 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 963 

local people could not object. Under those circumstances various 
people from various Provinces have gone to cities located in 
other Provinces. They built up their interests and have lived 
there for generations. But in the redistribution that we are 
now making, I have not seen anybody — Non-Madrasi living 
in Madras — raising objection to Madras being given to the 
Tamilian. Calcutta is equally a cosmopolitan city. When I was 
the Labour Member, I had often to visit Calcutta in order to 
see the labour conditions there and I found that the Bengal 
people did not call the people living in Calcutta as ‘Bengali’. 
Their word was “Calcuttiya” These are “Calcuttiyas” That 
shows that they were not part of Bengali population, and it 
is a huge population. Notwithstanding this, our friends, the 
Congress Party people, have never raised any objection; nor the 
Calcuttiyas” have ever raised any objection to Calcutta being 
handed over to the Bengali. My first question to my Friend, 
Mr. Pant, is this. If Calcutta can go to Bengali and Madras 
can go to Tamilian, what objection is there for Bombay to go to 
Maharashtra ? That, I think, is a fundamental question which 
he must satisfy the Maharashtrians about. Yes, it is said that 
there is in Bombay a Gujarati population which amounts to 
not more than 15 per cent, and that the Maharashtrians do 
not form a majority of the population. It is said that that is 
the reason which vitiates the claim of the Maharashtrians over 
Bombay. I wonder whether there are any cities in this country 
where the foreign population in the city is not 15 per cent, 
and the position of Bombay, it is said, by reason of the fact 
that 15 per cent, are Gujaratis is in a sense peculiar. How is 
it peculiar ? One can give any number of illustrations to show 
that our cities are always a mixed quarter. No city can claim to 
have a uniform population of its own. And if notwithstanding 
this fact the other city can claim to belong to West Bengal, 
I am quite unable to understand why Bombay City should 
not make a similar claim. There are some people who have 
said that Bombay never belonged to Maharashtra. Well, I am 
surprised at the knowledge of those who made the statement, 
I am very much surprised. Who were the first inhabitants of 
Bombay ? They were the kolis — the fishermen — and do the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


964 


964 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

fishermen say that they are not Maharashtrians ? I would 
like any one to go and make enquiries and find out what is 
the opinion of the kolis who were the original inhabitants of 
Maharashtra. If those ladies and gentlemen who have indulged 
in these wild allegations want to know a little bit of its 
characteristics, I should like to tell them that even before the 
Portuguese acquired Bombay, Bombay belonged to a dowager 
queen called Lakshmi Bai and the Portuguese took it as a 
tenancy from her. It did not even belong to the Portuguese. The 
Portuguese never conquered it. They took it. The poor queen 
subsequently could do nothing. Ultimately, it was transferred 
to the British as a dowry to the wife of Charles II. It was 
so small that the dowry was not more than £10. That was 
because Bombay was what I shall call a place occupied by a 
few kolis. I have got with me the original print of the original 
Bombay when it transferred itself from the Portuguese to the 
British. Therefore, historically, geographically and logically — 
the logic which we have applied to other cities — I cannot see 
how anybody can dispute the claim of the Maharashtrians to 
have the city to themselves. 

Of course, there is a wide d iff erence of opinion between 
myself and the rest of the Maharashtrians. The rest of the 
Maharashtrians want Bombay as part of a United Maharashtra. 
Now, I am very much against this United Maharashtra. I do 
not understand why Maharashtrians should want a United 
Maharashtra and I am sure about it that in the course of 
future history, we are not going to war with U. P. nor are 
we going to war with any of the northern territories like 
-Rajasthan. Why do you want a United Maharashtra ? I 
am at one with Maharashtrians that Bombay belongs to 
Maharashtra. On that, I will fight tooth and nail. There can 
be no doubt on that point at all. And therefore I had suggested 
that the Government might give Bombay a separate status 
as a City State and call it the “Maharashtra City State” so 
that it will be part of Maharashtra and at the same time, 
it will enjoy the status of an ‘A’ class State. But since the 
Government, for some reason which it is very difficult for me 
to understand, is going to reduce the status of Bombay City 
to that of the Nicobar Islands, I tell them right now that I 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


965 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 965 

reverse my position and fight with them along with the rest 
of the Maharashstrians. Now that is what I want to say about 
Maharashtra. 

With regard to the question that the Maharashtrians in 
Bombay City do not form a majority, I like to clear that idea. 
I think that there is a lot of misunderstanding. Some census 
figure has been dug out which said that the population of 
Maharashtrians in Bombay is 46 per “cent, or something 
like that. Therefore they are not in a majority. Sir, it is a 
complete misunderstanding. Any man who knows the census 
operation, who knows statistics and who knows the peculiar 
statistics of Bombay City would pay no attention to that figure. 
The census figure records the state of affairs on a particular 
day on which the census is taken. It does not indicate the 
common state of affairs. What happened on a particular day 
is taken as the typical example, but it is not typical at all. 
Secondly, the important point to be noticed is that Bombay 
City is one of the cities which is most subjected to immigration 
and emigration. Unfortunately, in the year 1941 when the 
new census was taken, the Government of India, in order 
to shorten their labour, did not repeal the immigration and 
emigration report figures for the year 1931. But if one were 
to go into the figures given on immigration and emigration in 
the census of 1931, he will find what violent changes there 
are in the immigration and emigration position. I do not think 
that even the non-Maharashtrian population which appears 
to be in a majority is permanently there in a majority. Most 
of them come for seasonal labour. If they happen to be there 
on the day of census, their existence is recorded as ‘residents 
of Bombay’. On the next day, they might as well leave for 
their native places, because they have made enough money 
for their living. In these circumstances, can anybody accept 
the census figures as true figures of the citizens of Bombay? 
I deny that conclusion altogether. I have been a student of 
the census statistics. I have studied them considerably. I 
know what they mean. Therefore, the claim that these figures 
show that the population of the Maharashtrians is less is 
absolutely ambiguous, if not bogus. It has no value. It only 
indicates what happened to be on a particular day on which 
the census was recorded. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


966 


966 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now, I have said that I did not agree with the majority 
of the Maharashtrians, if I may say so, that there should be 
a united Maharashtra. My contention is that there should 
not be. I am going to say the same thing about U. P., about 
Rajasthan and about these huge Hindi reptile provinces, 
which have been looming large before us. I shudder to see 
U. P. standing before me in that shape. 

Shri H. P. Saksena (Uttar Pradesh): God save your soul. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Do not pray for my soul. I have 
no soul. I am a Buddhist. Nobody need take the trouble of 
praying for my soul. I do not believe in God. I have no soul. 
I have spared you that trouble. 

Now, I am surprised, I must say, that the Commission 
should have retained U.P. as it is, should have retained 
Rajasthan as it is, and should have linked up the two provinces 
of Vindhya Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh into one. 

Shri K. S. Hedge (Madras): Madhya Bharat. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: What does this mean ? I have made 
a little calculation. The area of U.P. is 1,14,323 sq. miles. 
Its population is 6,32,54,118. Bihar : The area is 70,368 sq. 
miles; its population is 4,02,18,916. Madhya Pradesh: Area is 
2,01,633 sq. miles; its population is 3,28,46,971.1 know I have 
to deduct something here for Vidarbha. Rajasthan : Area is 
1,28,424 sq. miles; population is 1,52,97,979. The total area 
is 10 crore sq. miles and population is about 15 crores. 

Shri T. Pande (Uttar Pradesh): Ten lakh sq. miles. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That does not matter very much 
to my argument. 

The question that requires to be dealt with in my judgement 
is a very serious question. Are we to have one State for one 
language, or are we to have one language for one State ? If 
this question had no political consequences, nobody would 
bother about it, but the trouble is that this question has 
very serious political consequences. In the United States, 
the population of the various States differs. In some States 
it is small, and in some States it is big. But the Americans 
do not mind it on account of the fact that the States have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


967 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 967 

equal powers. The Lower House has the same power as the 
Upper House, and all the States have equal representation 
in the Upper House without reference to population. In 
the Senate they have equal representation. Here, what 
is the position ? Under our Constitution, there is no such 
equality at all. Every State has not the same power, and the 
Upper Chamber has no powers at all, so far as finance is 
concerned. It may happen — it is very likely — that the States 
in the northern area may combine together on an issue on 
which the southern States of India do not agree. What is 
likely to happen in that event ? In that event, the north, if 
I may say so, will over-ride every proposition in which the 
southern States are interested. If that happens, I fear that 
there maybe civil war. I may be using some exaggerated 
sentiment, but such a thing has happened. It has happened 
in the United States. In the United States the origin of the 
Civil War was this inequality of power. In the earlier stages 
it was agreed that up to a certain latitude the slave States 
might exist but that there would be no slavery above that 
latitude. It happened, I believe, that California was at one 
time a territory; it was not a State. It was later on decided 
to make it a State. The Southern States quarrelled, because 
they felt that if California became a State, it would acquire 
the power of voting and that it would change the balance of 
voting. Notwithstanding that, the Northern States decided to 
convert California into a State. Thereby they got a majority 
of voting, and then with this majority of voting, they decided 
not to have slavery in the United States at all, which affected 
the political and economic interests of the Southern States. 
At once, the Southern States resisted. They said, We would 
not remain part of the Union, if you are going to exercise 
that power for the abolition of slavery.” Then, there was 
the Civil War. There are people here who fear the influence 
of the northern people. One important example yon could 
recently see was 

Shri Kailasb. Bihari Lall (Bihar): Because the Southern 
States wanted slavery. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


968 


968 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The hon. Member is right. 
Mr. Rajagopalachari had long been expressing this fear that 
this Union will break down. 

Hon. Members: No. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There are plenty of slaves who 
keep it up. 

Shri R. U. Agnibhoj (Madhya Pradesh): Independence 
is kept by the united people, not by slaves. Therefore this 
country will have its independence through unity and not 
through slavery. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am very glad to have your 
assurance. 

Shri R. U. Agnibhoj : Thank you. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Now there are plenty of things 
one can imagine on which the issue may be between the 
north and the south and if that happens and if the matter 
is taken to bloody conclusions, well, all the efforts that we 
have made in order to bring about unity will have been in 
vain. I therefore suggest that the United Provinces should be 
cut down into three provinces, Bihar should be cut down into 
two and Madhya Pradesh also should be cut down into two. 

Shri R. U. Agnibhoj : You should have 600 States. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Nothing is lost. It does not affect the 
linguistic principle at all. They all have the same language. 
What does it matter if U. P. is divided into three States, or 
if Madhya Pradesh is divided into two ? I see no difference 
at all. My friend Mr. Pant, I remember to have read once 
his statement, had stated that he would have no objection 
to dividing the U. P. but he has never said a word about it 
in the course of the debate nor has he voluntarily suggested 
this self-sacrifice on his part. But I give a warning, I know 
the house is not going to listen to me, but it is my duty to 
say what I feel. With regard to Marathwada, I have very 
strong feelings and I very vehemently resist the United 
Maharashtra. I can speak more authoritatively about the 
Maharashtra than I can speak about other areas. What has 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


969 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 969 

been the state of affairs of ths United Maharashtra ? In 
Maharashtra I find that only that Marathas from the Satara 
district or that area are able to capture political offices. The 
rest of the people are just where they are. I do not understand 
how a Minister drawn from Satara can have any interest in 
for instance, the Ratnagiri district. I do not think any Minister 
has ever visited the Ratnagiri district. 

An Hon. Member: So many have. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: For the sake of drawing allowances, 
I think. Not for doing service. 

An Hon. Member: Still they have visited. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Areas and areas are completely 
neglected, what interest has a Maratha from the Satara district 
in the Ratnagiri district? What interest can a Brahmin for 
instance from Mahavidarbha have in the Satara district ? I do 
not quite understand this mentality of huddling together. Is 
it like Bharat Milap ? When Ram came from Lanka, Bharat 
embraced him. What for — for brotherly love and affection. 
Nothing more than that. Why not allow such areas to develop 
their own interests, to pay attention to their own interests ? 
Besides, as my friend Mr. Pant knows — I may be wrong — I 
suppose he is the last of the veterans. Who will succeed him — 
can he tell me ? Who will succeed him as a Minister ? I don’t 
see anybody. Certainly I don’t see anybody in the rank and file 
of the Congress. If any Minister of the towering personality 
of my friend Mr. Pant has to be looked for, it would have to 
be someone outside the Congress ranks. I am sure of that. 

Shri H. P. Saksena: You, for instance. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall die pretty soon. Don’t enrol 
me. This country, by this kind of thing, is going to dogs. Our 
primary concern is to raise and train politicians so that they, 
can learn to take responsibility upon their own shoulders. We 
ought not to sit tight oh one thing for ever. We ought to allow 
other people to take responsiblity while we are alive so that 
if they commit any mistake, we may rectify it in time. If you 
have U. P. divided into three provinces, you will have probably 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


970 


970 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

30 ministers trained in the art of administration, while if you 
have one, you will have just 10 ministers — nothing more than 
that. The same thing will happen in Bihar and the same thing 
will happen in these big provinces. Therefore, in my judgement, 
there is a great disadvantage to this country in keeping 
these large provinces as they are. My Friend may perhaps 
listen to this argument if he does not listen to the other. 
His argument, if I have heard correctly, is’ Oh ! in a country 
where Ram and Krishna were both born, do not divide it.’ 
That is the argument. I think, he used sometimes. But that 
is not an argument of a statesman. Now Sir, I was saying 
about the Marathwada people, I mean the Maharashstrians, 
that the same thing is true of this Maharashtra. Maharashtra, 
except for a few Brahmins, is politically not upto the mark, I 
am sorry to say. I am not speaking with any personal venom 
of any kind. I know very well that I have had my full share 
of public life and I do not desire to compete with any one for 
more. But I like that my State should be well administered 
and in order that it may be well administered, it must have 
competent people. Now in a united Maharashtra you will not 
have more than five or six ministers. Some of them may be 
Brahmins and some of them may be non-Brahmins. Is that 
going to be enough for the future of Maharashstra ? Here 
you have a territory called Marathwada which has just been 
released from the reins of the Nizam. But you have only to 
just go and see the area in order to see its wretchedness, 
the condition of the people, with no clothes, hardly any food, 
no education. There is no primary school even there. I was 
told that there was one primary shcool in which there was 
only one chair and all the teachers ran early in the morning 
in order to capture that chair so as not to allow any other 
teacher to sit on it. I like to know whether this most backward 
area which has no irrigation, no food, no clothes, no school 
or anything of that kind, will fare better ? For some reason 
or other, the Nizam spent all his love and affection on other 
people, not on Marathwada. I like to know whether my friend 
Kaka Gadgil, if he become the Chief Minister of United 
Maharashtra would pay attention to the condition of the 
people of Marathwada or whether he would pay his attention 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


971 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 971 

to Poona and its inhabitants. Let us not talk nonsense. Let 
us see plain things as they are. Why not allow Marathwada 
to have a separate province or State and let Marathwada 
rule itself? It knows its interests best. I have been connected 
with Marathwada for the simple reason that I established 
a college there. But it is not a flourishing college and I am 
every year bearing a huge loss. I know that the Marathwada 
people would look after themselves much better than any 
of the Bombay people who talk about them. Particularly 
there is no education there at all. There is the danger that 
Marathwada may be attached to the Poona University. God 
only knows what will happen. 

Shri B. B. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): So you believe in 
God? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot hear what you say. If 
you want a reply from me, you must talk audibly. 

Shri B. B. Sharma: Whose God is that ? 

Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): Don’t hear 
inconvenient questions. 

Shri B. B. Sharma: Who is your God ? 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: To me the people are God. 

Sir, in the case of Marathwada it is absolutely necessary 
that they should have a separate autonomous body to look 
after their education and they should not be tied down hand 
and foot to the Poona University. We won’t have that at all. 

There is one other point to which I would like to refer. As 
I have said, I may be wrong, but I have a feeling that there 
are many holes in this federation and it may crack. We are 
a cracking society. We have no union. We have no unity and 
any time this whole thing may crack. Therefore, we should, 
in time, take steps to see that it does not crack. I suggested 
one way and that was to reduce the northern provinces to 
smaller areas so that the southern people may not suffer 
any heavy pressure. I also suggest another remedy and that 
remedy is to have two capitals for this country. I suggest that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


972 


972 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Hyderabad should be made the second capital of India. You 
can have your Delhi and for some seasons it may be good. But 
you must have a capital in Southern India, where people may 
feel that their Government is nearer to them. I suggested at 
one time that Hyderabad should be made the second capital 
of india. It is one of the most beautiful towns that I have ever 
seen in India. It has got all the necessities and amenities which 
a capital may require. All that may be necessary would be to 
have a sort of Legislative Assembly and Council of State. If 
that is done, then the people in the South with whom I have 
had many talks, would feel that their Government is nearer, 
that it is not so far away as Delhi. Delhi to the Southern 
people is a kind of a foreign territory. It is hot and they do 
not want to stay for long. I hope my hon. friend will take 
these points into consideration. 

Sir, I am not in a condition to speak very long, nor have I 
got many other points to urge. But there is one thing that I 
would like to say. I had hoped that this Report of the S.R.C.f 
would have been placed before, not merely the party people, 
but generally before all, and they should have obtained the 
common advice of all the citizens of India and should have 
given effect to their decision. Sir, it was my hope that what 
we would settle now, we would settle for ever, because it is 
a very foolish thing for a gardener to plant a tree today and 
to uproot it tomorrow, to see whether it has taken root. That 
way the plant will never live. I cannot help reminding my 
hon. friend of the statement of Tom Paine that whatever is 
wrongly, settled is never permanently settled; it has to be 
resettled. If you are going to settle these things with the help 
of your party, remember that your party is not perpetual. 
You can seethe signs of waning even now before your eyes. 

If whatever you do you do without the consent of the 
Opposition, I have not the least doubt about it that when 
the Opposition would come into power, they would uproot the 
thing and replant it. Such a thing would be most dangerous 
for us. Sir, I have done. 


t State Reorganisation Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


973 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 973 

Shri C. P. Parikh (Bombay): The hon. Member made an 
incorrect statement when he said that Shri Morarji said at 
any time categorically that Bombay belongs to Maharashstra. 
I think the hon. Member should make such statement with 
a sense of responsibility. 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is in the ‘Times of India’. 


*LEAVE OF ABSENCE TO DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 

Mr. Deputy Chairman: I have to inform the hon. 
Members that the following letter has been received from 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. 

“I came to Bombay for treatment and had hoped to be able 
to return to Delhi in time. Unfortunately, I have not recovered. 
I am therefores, unable to attend and apply to you for leave 
of absence. I hope the Rajya Sabha will grant my request.” 

Is it the pleasure of the House that permission be granted 
to Dr. B. R. Ambedkar for remaining absent from meetings 
of the House from 29th March 1955, till the end of the Ninth 
Session and from all meetings of the House during the current 
Session ? 

(No hon. Member dissented.) 

Permission to remain absent is granted. 


* P. D., Vol. 10-C, 1st October 1955, pp. 5529-30. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


974 


974 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


( 55 ) 

*OBITUARY REFERENCE— DEMISE OF 
DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, I deeply regret to inform the House 
that a Member of this House who had played a very leading 
part in many matters passed away a short while ago. I refer 
to Dr. Ambedkar. Dr. Ambedkar for many, many years had 
been a very controversial figure in Indian public affairs, but 
there can be no doubt about his outstanding quality, his 
scholarship, and the intensity with which he pursued his 
convictions, sometimes rather with greater intensity than 
perhaps required by the particular subject, which sometimes 
reacted in a contrary way. But he was the symbol of that 
intense feeling which we must always remember, the intense 
feeling of the supressed classes in India who have suffered for 
ages past under our previous social systems, and it is as well 
that we recognise this bidden that all of us should carry and 
should always remember, It may be that some of us thought, 
as I have just said, that he overdid the expression of that 
feeling, but I do not think that, apart from the manner of 
utterance or language, anybody should challenge the rightness 
of the inetnsity of his feeling in that matter which should be 
felt by all of us and perhaps even more so by those who have 
not in themselves or in their groups or classes had to suffer 
from that. He was that. Therefore he became this symbol. 
But we in Parliament remember him for many other things 
and more particularly for the very prominent part he played 
in the making of our Conbstitution, and perhaps that fact 
will be remembered even longer than his other activities. I 
am quite sure that every Member of this House will want 


* P. D., Vol. 10-C, 6th December 1956, pp. 1769-70. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


975 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 975 

us to send our deep condolences and message of sympathy 
to his family and to express our deep sorrow at his demise. 

It is the custom of this House. I believe, Sir, that when 
a Member dies in Delhi, the House adjourns for the rest of 
the day. I leave it to you, Sir, and to the House, but I would 
suggest that it is right and proper for us to follow that custom. 

Mr. Deputy Chairman : I would like to associate myself 
with the sentiments expressed by the Prime Minister. I am 
sure every Member of this House shares the same sentiments. 
We have all heard with profound sorrow and a sense of 
shock of the sudden death of Dr. Ambedkar. He was present 
in the House only the day before yesterday and was in his 
usual mood, talking and joking with his friends. Many may 
not agree with him and his political philosophy but he was 
one of our prominent Members and he was always listened 
to with respect. His speeches were marked by scholarship, 
erudition and deep study. He will, however, be remembered 
as one of the great architects of our Constitution. He was 
also very anxious to see that the Hindu Law was enacted and 
most of it has been enacted. It is a great loss to this House 
Particularly, and, as a mark of respect, I request the House 
to stand up for two minutes. 

{The House stood in silence for two minutes.) 

Mr. Deputy Chairman: The House stands adjourned till 
11-00 a.m. tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned at fifty three minutes past 
eleven of the clock till eleven of the clock on Friday, the 7th 
December 1956. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


976 


976 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


LOK SABHA 

Thursday, 6th December, 1956 

The Lok Sabha met at Eleven of the Clock 

12-00 hrs. 

DEATH OF DR. AMBEDKAR 

*The Prime Minister and Leader of the House (Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru): Mr. Speaker, Sir, I have to convey to 
the House the sad news of the death of Dr. Ambedkar. Only 
two days ago, I believe, the day before yesterday, he was 
present in the other House of which he was a Member. The 
news, therefore, of his death today came as a shock to all of 
us who had no inkling of such a thing happening so soon. 

Dr. Ambedkar, as every Member of this House knows, 
played a very important part in the making of the Constitution 
of India, subsequently in the Legislative Part of the Constituent 
Assembly and later in the Provisional Parliament. After that, 
he was not a Member of Parliament for some time. Then, 
he came back to the Rajya Sabha of which he was a sitting 
Member. 

He is often spoken of as one of the architects of our 
Constitution. There is no doubt that no one took greater care 
and trouble over Constitution making than Dr. Ambedkar. He 
will be remembered also for the great interest he took and 
the trouble he took over the question of Hindu Law reform. 
I am happy that he saw that reform in a very large measure 
carried out, perhaps not in the form of that monumental 
tome that he had himself drafted, but in separate bits. 
But, I imagine that the way he will be remembered most 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part II, 6th December 1956, pp. 2059-68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


977 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 977 

will be as a symbol of the revolt against all the oppressive 
features of Hindu society. He used language sometimes which 
hurt people. He sometimes said things which were perhaps not 
wholly justified. But, let us forget that. The main thing was 
that he rebelled against something against which all ought 
to rebel and we have, in fact, rebelled in various degrees. 
This Parliament itself represents in the legislation which it 
has framed, its repudiation of those customs or legacies from 
the past which kept down a large section of our people from 
enjoying their normal rights. 

When I think of Dr. Ambedkar, many things come to my 
mind, because he was a highly controversial figure. He was 
not a person of soft speech. But, behind all that was this 
powerful reaction and an act of rebellion against something 
that repressed our society for so long. Fortunately, that 
rebellion had the support, not perhaps in the exact way he 
wanted it, but in a large measure, the principle underlaying 
that rebellion had the support of Parliament, and, I believe, 
every group and party represented here. Both in our public 
activities and in our legislative activities, we did out utmost 
to remove that stigma on Hindu society. One cannot remove 
it completely by law, because custom is more deep-rooted and, 
I am afraid, it still continue in many parts of the country 
even though it may be considered illegal. That is true. But, 
I have no doubt that it is something that is in its last stages 
and may take a little time to vanish away. When both law 
and public opinion become more and more determined to put 
an end to state of affairs, it cannot last long. Anyhow, Dr. 
Ambedkar, as I said, became prominent in his own way and 
a most prominent symbol of that rebellion. I have no doubt 
that, whether we agree with him or not in many matters, 
that perseverance, that persistence and that, if I may use the 
word, sometime virulence of his opposition to all this did keep 
the people’s mind awake and did not allow them to become 
complacent about matters which could not be forgotten, and 
helped in rousing up those groups in our country which had 
suffered for so long in the past. It is, therefore, sad that such 
a prominent champion of the oppressed and depressed in India 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


978 


978 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and one who took such an important part in our activities, 
has passed away, 

As the House knows, he was a Minister, a member of our 
Cabinet, for many years, and I had the privilege of co-operating 
with him in our Governmental work. I had heard of him and, 
of course, met him previously on various occasions. But, I had 
hot come into any intimate contact with him. It was at the time 
of the Constituent Assembly that I got to know him a little 
better. I invited him to join the Government. Some people were 
surprised that I should do so, because, it was thought that his 
normal activities were of the opposition type rather than of 
the governmental type. Nevertheless, I felt at that time that 
he had played an important and very constructive role in the 
making of the Constitution and that he could continue to play 
a constructive role in governmental activities. Indeed, he did. 
In spite of some minor differences here and there, chiefly, if 
I may say so, not due to any matters of principle, but rather 
linguistic matters and language used, we co-operated in the 
Government for several years to our mutual advantage, I think. 
Anyhow, a very leaning and prominent personality, who has 
left his mark in our public affairs and on the Indian scene, 
has passed away, a personality who was known to nearly all 
of us here, I suppose, and I feel sure that all of us feel very 
sad. We know him well. He had been unwell for a long time. 
Nevertheless, the passing of a person is painful. I am sure 
that you, Sir and the House will be pleased to convey our 
deep condolences and sympathy to his family. 

There are various rules laid down in our Rules of Procedure 
in regard to such occurrences, in regard to adjournment of the 
House. Normally speaking, those rules apply to Members of 
the House. Dr. Ambedkar was not a Member of this House. 
He was a Member of the Rajya Sabha. He was an ex-Member 
of this House. The rule says that in such cases, a reference 
may be made in the House, but there may be no adjournment 
unless he comes in the category of outstanding personalities, 
in which case, total adjournment may be made. There can 
be no doubt that he comes under the category of outstanding 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


979 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 979 

personalities. According to the strict rule, it says, token 
adjournment may be made. I submit that, without doing any 
violence to this rule or to the spirit underlying this rule, the 
present case deserves for some reasons which I have mentioned 
and others which I have not mentioned that the House do 
adjourn for the day. That is subject to your wishes and the 
wishes of the House. 

Shrimati Renu Chakravartty: Sir, I join the Leader 
of the House in requesting you to convey to the members of 
the family of Dr. Ambedkar the condolences of our party and 
our colleagues. 

We, younger Members, never had the privilege of working 
with him. We had also our difference. But, to-day, we all of us 
cannot forget how he brought to the forefront of our people’s 
conscience the disabilities suffered by a section of our people 
owing to our oppressive social system. Personally I feel that, 
although we have passed the Hindu Code Bill in parts, the 
principles which Dr. Ambedkar had embodied in his original 
draft were wiser in many aspects. We also pay our tribute to 
his outstanding intellect which rose against social inequality 
and narrow prejudices, and he became one of those who were 
known as the architects of our Constitution, and I am sure 
the country will remember him embodied in that constitution. 
I also join with the leader of the House in requesting you to 
adjourn this House as a mark of respect to his memory. 

Shri Asoka Mehta (Bhandara): I wish to associate 
myself with the tribute that has been paid to Dr. Ambedkar. 

I was privileged to be associated with him on more than 
one occasion and in his remarkable and fascinating career, 
there were many facets. We who come from Bombay remember 
him as a teacher, we remember him as an economist, we 
remember him as a labour leader, we remember him as political 
leader. Apart from the great work that he did in this House 
and as a Member of the Government, as far as my part of 
the country is concerned, he brought a new awakening. It 
was because of him the large sections of people on our side 
were given a sense of social significance, they were given a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


980 


980 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sense of confidence. I believe if he had not been there, perhaps 
my part of the country would not have been what it is today. 

I am sure in paying our respect to his memory and in 
trying to do honour to him by adjourning to day, we only 
pay the great debt that many of us owe to him for the great 
services that he has rendered to our society. 

aft fR. ■sr. Ryrqfl ( ?prr ) : nskd, R tww RfR^T. 

Ro fRRR HHWK R diRcrl 'H'H'y if Rt Rif «<icrR> -H*4 rI <|t*i RT R R^F 
rR RFFT Rwf ^RpRfF I RP 3H^ob< R RTTR RR fRRPT RRTRT RT Rk RTTrR 
rFRTT RTTR R R^jR 3#IR7 'qft^R RfT RfrRRT RR RftRR fRRT I ^FpR STPdRdd 
RP 3TfRsRTT TTRPR R' R=P RRTR RcTT R wfe ^T. 3H^4=h< R 
TTRTR RT RR WR fRRR #R RR RTRR WR fRR, RfRPT R RH^dl \ 1% 
RTFRR RF RcR RRRR RT fR, ^T. 3pRteR7T RR ^3PR fRTT RTfcT R ?PRT RT 
3-Hd^ RfcT -Hccjf %^3ff R R|[R RTR fRR R 3ffT RR Mini RtF R^ H^Rld 
RP 3TcfeFR RR RtRF ^RRT #TT TTR^T R 3R TTRRTT R RR RR Rt RrR 
RTR 1' RR W R RTFT R RTRRT \ I 

RT. 3Tf^gRR RTF RHdl RtR RTfRcR RTRT RT 3Tk ^RRT RRTR RT 
% R TIH^dl \ % ^tR fRRFT RRTRT R R# eft ^FlRdU, fR RRRR c^Pddcd 
^cPTT RRPT RT fR fRTT rR Rt RR R^RF aTP^Rdl R7 fRTR£ RtT TTITTR 
fRTRT, 'RT. 3RRRRTT rR RTR RrT 3RRTRRRR7 RT I UT. 3TtRrRTT R 3H^<ddl 
fRRPRT R7 fppr Rt RfRR rRrT RRRT fRR RR R7Rt ^PFTR RRf RT TFRRt 3 tR 
RMffRF RRRt RRR R 3TRJRRRT fRRPRT RR RPRtcPT fRRFTt R fRRFTt RR R fR 
-Rr R RPFRT 3RRT t RT 3PF^RR RRIRT Rtl R RF R^T ^ RT^ RrR FI RR RTR% 
3jR ^PTR% RR RRR 3RR fRRTF R RRRTRT Rl RR ^RT. 3TfRRRR R ftRlPR 
3fFt R^RfR fR^RRPR # RR RRRfpFR rR rR RRTRT 3TR RRrR RRPTT IRt R 

Rt ^ftR rR rfr ?rrr t 3fh fR rtR 3rf^t cRtR' R- RfR rR r^ rrrR 
RrtsR rR Rrt rfrF rRI , fjpft r^rt i 3rr rrtR rRr "R r^f hsm Rrt rr 

RRT t 3rk R RTR^FRT \ fR RRRR TJc^ R Rl RRTR ftRd -|3R R RPTrR -^fR 

IRrfs qfR^r R RRF, ^Irrwf rrt 3rRF R i tppt Rrt R RF rrrR 

RT rRRr fRTRT R RTfR R 1 jR RT?' RRRR TRR RcTT \ I 

Shri Frank Anthony (Nominated Ango-Indian): I would 
like to associate the Independent Group with the sentiments 
that have fallen from the Leader of the House. 

It has been my privilege to know Dr. Ambedkar for many 
years, and I feel that no adequate tribute can be paid to him 
in the course of a few minutes. He was a versatile mind. He 
was not only a deep, but a profound scholar, and, as the Leader 
of the House said, he was a controversial figure. But what 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


981 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 981 

I believe was the dominant characteristic of the complex 
personality was the characteristic of being an indomitable 
fighter, and it was that indomitable spirit which enable him 
to triumph over personal disabilities which perhaps would 
have crushed persons of less tenacious character. 

We may not have agreed with his politics. Perhaps we did 
not agree sometimes with the way that things were said by 
him, but having heard from him the bitter personal disabilities 
with which he was confronted from his earliest life, I would 
not presume to judge the fact that perhaps in some respects 
the iron had entered his soul and his bitterness to that 
extent, if not justified, at least was understandable. There 
is no doubt that Dr. Ambedkar started from the humblest 
beginning, but his name will be writ large on the scroll of 
Indian history, and I believe not only his community, but 
that the country has reason to be proud of a very great son. 
I would ask you to convey our condolences to his family. 

aft cFFsrfrvTcFT (rir^ RTfciRT) : r^rsr 

Hskd, srr rr f^r TFT°f w R^ fvrd 3rk fbyfR rtr£ rr ^RrhT 

Rt ftR* rrj 3TR 3tRRRT RR Rrt t I RT. RTRT 

Ri H6M "%cTT 3^R RRTR fjyT Rfl R7^ RRf ff ‘fjRT Rff i? I ^RT Ro 

R w ^rt sf r! rHrrt rr ^PnhY rY eft 3 m r! $ 3tR rrt 
rrrY rrrY RibY i f^FRRj ■rp -gir^Fff Rtf rrt rrtY rY %r; rrrt 

fRTRT 3 tR 3RR Rt fRR £pNdY Rft rY 3RRFRT 4' ^JRR 1[3R t 3^R RR 
RT^ RRR t, RRRR ?Yr RTRTRTRR Rtl Rt t I RTRTRTRR RR RR 

R=R RtlR 3R|R RTtY |T3R RT 3?R RRij 3 RrY rYrr 3rYrT RtIYjRTRrY 
RR RTRRT RRRT RRT cYPRH R^rY% RRf RrY 3rk R^rY% tl d d I ^ =h 

RTtY ebPriHI^Y RR RTRRT fRTRT 3Th RR RT fRRR RT^ I RYRR RT 

RR RRJRRRT RY Rvd'oh RtY RTfcT rY RT?Y RT ^ RRtY RR RRRT fRTRT 
3TR 3RFjyRRT fRRlRR RY fRPY rYt RRTR fRvRT I 3Rfet RR fRyRR 

fRtRT Irt hn r^r rY ur ftF^ rR R itrt rYIrtr ^ tYtY rR rtY rY 

fRT RRjyRRT Rtf RTRRT t, 3RTRT Rrf R#Y RPJRT 3?R RR^f ^TRT fR7 
3RTRY RR RfRRT ^ rY Rtf I RRRTR ^ Rfl RT^hR t % RRRTl 3 RcRT Rtj 
yTffR fRRl 3Th ^ RR^TRT ^ fR7 RRRTf 3 RtRT rR Rr5Rl 3Th RTRdfRRT yTlfR 
RRt fR#Rf RR fR7 RR 3TPjyRRT RR R7RTR7 RTfR ^ fRR RT^RT I 

Shri Gadgil (Poona Central): Normally after the Leader 
of the house and my party has spoken, there is no justification 
for me to speak, but I plead this justification that I had the 
privilege of Dr. Ambedkar’s friendship for over 35 years. He was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


982 


982 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ten times dearer to us Maharashtrians than what he was to 
India as a whole. It was he who created a sense of self-respect 
and importance in the most down-trodden community in our 
area. Undoubtedly he was very bitter in his tongue, but his 
heart was sweet. His faults we all know, but his virtues out 
weighed them. 

What he did in the matter of framing our Constitution 
is sufficiently well known. But, essentially, he was a rebel 
against the injustice in the status quo, whether the sphere 
was social or economic. 

Lastly, he was thinking on much more progressive lines. 
Very recently, I had some discussion with him, and he said, 
‘No more privileges to the Scheduled Castes. Now, they must 
come into their own and fight against the injustice that is still 
there, along with the rest of the members of the whole Indian 
community.’ Such a man has passed away; but, everything in 
this world must pass away. 

Let us, therefore, remember what good he did, and deserve 
by what he did and progressively achieved — the objects for 
which he stood. 

I associate myself with the sentiments expressed by other 
Members of this House. 

Mr. Speaker: I fully associate myself with all the sentiments 
expressed on the floor of the house by the Leader of the House 
and the leaders of various groups, and I am sure the House 
will equally associate itself with those sentiments. 

Dr. Ambedkar was a great and dynamic personality. He 
rose from humble beginnings and became a leader of the 
Scheduled Castes. He was a great scholar and writer, and, 
more than all, he was a powerful speaker. 

He piloted our Constitution. In the field of social reform, 
he initiated many wholesome measures. In his death, India 
has lost one of her great sons. I shall convey the sentiments 
of this House and the condolences to the members of the 
bereaved family. 

As a mark of respect, I am sure the House would like 
to adjourn today. In sorrow, we shall stand for a minute in 
silence. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


983 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 983 

The Members then stood in silence for a minute. 

Mr. Speaker: The House will now stand adjourned as a 
mark of respect to him, and meet again at 11-00 a.m. tomorrow. 

12-23 hrs. 


The Lok Sabha then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock on 
Friday, the 7th December, 1956. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


984 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


985 


SECTION VIII 

ANSWERS BY 
DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 
LAW MINISTER 

TO THE QUESTIONS ASKED BY 
THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 

18th November 1947 

TO 

28th September 1951 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


986 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


987 


SECTION VII 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
18th November 1947 to 28th September 1951 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Serial 

No. 

List of Titles of Questions 

Page 

No. 

(1) 

Appeals from the High Courts in India 

... 991 

(2) 

Jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee of 
the Privy Council to decide Pending 



appeals 

... 993 

(3) 

Number of Cases tried by the Federal 



Court and Privy Council 

... 994 

(4) 

Constitution of the Federal Court 

... 995 

(5) 

Report of Hindu Law Codification 



Committee 

... 996 

(6) 

Misappropriation of Income by Hindu 



Charitable and Religious Trusts 

... 997 

(7) 

Number and Names of Tribunals 



appointed by Ministry of Home Affairs. 

... 997 

(8) 

Proposal for Reconstitution or Modifica- 



tion of Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal 

999 

(9) 

General Elections 

... 1000 

(10) 

List of Schedule Castes 

... 1003 

(ID 

Central Woolen Technological Institute 

1005 

(12) 

Income-Tax Appellate Tribunals 

... 1008 

(13) 

Scheduled Caste Employees in Ministry 



of Law 

... 1009 

(14) 

Advisory Committee on Hindu Code Bill 

1010 

(15) 

Salary and Allowances of the Members 



of Parliament 

... 1012 

(16) 

General Elections 

... 1012 

(17) 

General Elections 

... 1015 

(18) 

Government agents for Supreme Court ... 

... 1019 

(19) 

Muslim Personal Laws 

... 1021 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


988 


988 

Serial Page 

No. List of Titles of Questions No. 

(20) Engagements of Lawyers in cases 

against the Union ... 1023 

(21) Scheduled Caste Representatives ... 1024 

(22) Delimitation of Committee Reports ... 1024 

(23) General Elections ... 1025 

(24) Electoral Rolls for Rural Areas in Delhi 1027 

(25) Scrutiny of Central and State Law ... 1029 

(26) Electoral Rolls ... 1030 

(27) Lawyers in Supreme Court ... 1032 

(28) Cooch Behar (Population) ... 1034 

(29) Electoral Rolls ... 1035 

(30) Manufacture of Ballot Boxes ... 1036 

(31) Dissolution of Parliament ... 1038 

(32) Electoral Rolls ... 1038 

(33) West Bengal Legislature (Vacancies) ... 1039 

(34) General Elections in Madras ... 1040 

(35) General Elections in Orissa ... 1042 

(36) Regional Commissioners ... 1043 

(37) Fixing of Election Dates ... 1044 

(38) Dates of General Election in States ... 1045 

(39) Symbols for Political Parties ... 1048 

(40) Electoral Rolls for General Elections ... 1049 

(41) Women Voters and Electoral Rolls ... 1050 

(42) Central Grants for Backward Classes ... 1050 

(43) Grants for Promoting National Language 1052 

(44) Mode of Voting at General Elections ... 1055 

(45) Statutory and Non-Statutory Bodies ... 1056 

(46) Elections in Snow-Clad Areas of Punjab 1057 

(47) Manufacture of Ballot Boxes ... 1058 

(48) Hindi Translation of Acts ... 1058 

(49) Mock Elections ... 1061 

(50) Objections to Electoral Rolls ... 1063 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


989 


989 



Serial 

No. 

List of Titles of Questions 

Page 

No. 


(51) 

Election Commissioners in States 

... 1066 

(52) 

Electoral Rolls 

... 1067 

(53) 

Mock Elections 

... 1068 

(54) 

Article 171(b) of the Constitution 

... 1068 

(55) 

Maps of Constituencies 

... 1069 

(56) 

Tribal Christians and General Elections 

1071 

(57) 

Officers in the Ministry of Law 

... 1072 

(58) 

List of Polling Stations 

... 1072 

(59) 

Leprosy 

... 1075 

(60) 

Lady Hardinge Medical College 

... 1076 

(61) 

Training of Midwives and Nurses 

... 1078 

(62) 

Emetine 

... 1078 

(63) 

Ayurvedic Research Institute 

... 1079 

(64) 

Directorate of Housing 

... 1080 

(65) 

Lepers 

... 1081 

(66) 

Hartal of Refugee Stall Holders 

... 1083 

(67) 

Petition of Mahila Samiti, Jaipur regard- 



ing Women Voters of Rajasthan. 

... 1085 

(68) 

Hindu Divorce 

... 1086 

(69) 

Prevention of Hindu Bigamous Marriages 



Act 

... 1087 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


990 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


991 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 991 

(QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS) 

( 1 ) 

* APPEALS FROM THE HIGH COURTS IN INDIA. 

4. Shri R. R. Diwakar : (a) Will the Honourable Minister of 
Law be pleased to state whether appeals from the High Court 
in India still he to His Majesty in Council ? 

(b) If the answer to part (a) above be in the affirmative, 
are they governed by the same laws and regulations and rules 
as before ? 

(c) If the answer to part (a) above be in the negative, what is 
the form to which appeals are to be preferred from the decisions 
of the High Courts in different provinces ? 

(d) Are the appeals now pending before the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council to be heard and disposed of 
by them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Does not arise. 

(d) Yes, unless a provision to the contrary is made in the 
new Constitution. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : What sort of Court 
do the present Government propose to set up for appeals from 
the High Court ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That is not a matter 
for the Government to decide but for the Constituent Assembly. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Is the Honourable 
the Law Member aware that in the new set up under the present 
Government of India Act and the Dominion Independence Act 
that with regard to appeals to the Privy Council the jurisdiction 
of the Privy Council may be abolished and vested in the Supreme 
Court ? . 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know 
if the Government can take a decision when the Constituent 
Assembly is sitting for the purpose of defining the Constitution. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 18th November 1947 pp. 70-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


992 


992 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Did not the 
previous Law Member want to bring about a resolution to take 
action under section 299 and other sections of the Government 
of India Act to avoid appeals going to the Privy Council in 
certain matters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know if 
that position remains as it was I admit that the Law Member 
then was proposing action as referred to by my honourable 
friend but there was nothing in contemplation with reference 
to the making of the new Constitution. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. Will the honourable Member, 
Mr. Ayyangar, ask for the information ? This seems to be 
going into an argument. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : I did ask for the 
information. But the honourable Member does not appear to 
know what has gone on before ! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I said I am 
aware of it ! 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Does the 
honourable Member propose to take action under the present 
Government of India Act ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think 
such an action can be taken when we know that within a few 
months the new Constitution will be framed. 

Shri K. Santhanam : Is the honuorable Member aware 
that if the establishment of a Supreme Court is delayed till 
the new Constituent Assembly there will be great transitional 
difficulties when the Constitution comes into force ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. It is a question of opinion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


993 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 993 

( 2 ) 

* JURISDICTION OF THE 
JUDICIAL COMMITTEE OF THE 
PRIVY COUNCIL TO DECIDE PENDING APPEALS. 

5. Shri R. R. Diwakar : (a) Will the Honuorable Minister 
of Law be pleased to state whether it is a fact that the Judicial 
Committeee of the Privy Council will have jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear and finally decide the appeals now pending 
before them and those that will be filed hereafter, so long 
as no changes are made in the existing enactments like the 
Civil Procedure Code ? 

(b) What is going to be the future policy of the Dominion 
Government with regard to the Privy Council ? 

(c) Do Government propose to consider the advisability 
of the early establishment of a Supreme Court with the 
jurisdiction of the Privy Council ? 

(d) If so, what is the approximate time required for the 
establishment of such a Court ? 

The Honourable Dr, B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The future policy of Government in regard to Privy 
Council appeals will generally be in accordance with the 
decision of the Constituent Assembly incorporated in the new 
Constitution. 

(c) No, not until the new Constitution is brought into force. 

(d) It is not possible to give an estimate at present. 

Seth Govind Das : May I know if the Constituent 
Assembly decides that no appeals should be made to the Privy 
Council, what is going to happen to the appeal which have 
already been sent to the Privy Council before that decision 
is reached ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure the 
Constituent Assembly will make appropriate provision to cover 
such cases when coming to its decision. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 18th November 1947 p. 71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


994 


994 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 3 ) 

* NUMBER OF CASES TRIED BY THE FEDERAL 
COURT AND PRIVY COUNCIL. 

8. Shri S. Nagappa : Will the Honourable Minister of Law 
be pleased to state : 

(a) the total number of cases tried by the Federal court during 
the last three years — yearwise ; and 

(b) the total number of the cases that have gone to the privy 
Council ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : (a) The total number 
of the cases heard by the Federal Court during the three years 
1944, 1945 and 1946 was 34, 16 and respectively. 

(b) The total number of Indian appeals filed in the Privy Council 
during the same three years was 58, 69 and 61 respectively. 

Shri B. M. Gupte : May I know how many cases of appeals 
were reserved by the Privy Council ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That does not arise. 

Shri Biswanath Das : In view of the fact that none of the 
Commonwealth countries are allowing their litigant public to 
prefer appeals to the Privy Council, will the Honourable Minister 
please state whether this Government is thinking of making any 
interim arrangement between the decision of the Constituent 
Assembly on this question and the present day ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not quite 
follow my Honourable friend’s question but I can tell that the 
Government is examining the matter and if they find it feasible 
they may take interim action. 

Shri Biswanath Das : May I know what is the specific 
question that is being examined ? My question is very clear and 
specific. What I said was that no Commonwealth country is 
allowing its litigant public to prefer appeals to the Privy Council. 
In view of the fact that India is one of the Common-wealth 
countries, will the Government please consider the question or 
have they considered this aspect of the question of making any 
interim arrangement between the decision of the Constituent 
Assembly and the present day ? 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 18th November 1947 pp. 75-76. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


995 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 995 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said that the 
Government is considering the matter and before any action 
could be taken Government have to see that the Federal Court 
becomes a Supreme Court and has got the full complement of 
judges to discharge the functions that will devolve on them if 
they were to discharge the functions of the Privy Council. 

Mr. B. Poker Sahib Bahadur : Is the Honourable Minister 
aware that the previous Government was contemplating the 
question of providing appeals to the Federal Court, according to 
the option of the party, in addition to appeal lying to the Privy 
Council, in view of the fact that the Federal Court Judges had not 
sufficient work to do and this measure could afford to facilitate 
the litigant public to pursue their appeals from the High Courts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The whole question 
is being considered. 


( 4 ) 

♦CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL COURT. 

25. Shri Phulan Prasad Varma : (a) Will the Honourable 
Minister of Law be pleased to state whether Government are 
aware that the Constituent Assembly of India has passed certain 
transitional provisions by which the Federal Court will be deemed 
to be the Supreme Court, and will be the ultimate appellate 
authority and new appeals will lie to the Supreme Court instead 
of to the Privy Council ? 

(b) If the answer to part (a) above be in the affirmative, what 
steps have Government taken or are going to take to implement 
these provisions ? 

(c) Are Government aware that in the traditional provision 
it has been laid down that the cases pending before the Privy 
Council will be disposed of by the Privy Council ? 

(d) If the answer to part (c) above be in the affirmative, do 
Government propose to clarify as to what exactly is meant by 
the expression ‘p en chng’ ? 

(e) Are Government aware that there is a great deal of 
uncertainty in the mind of the litigant public, Advocates and 
High Court Judges regarding the precise position in the matter ? 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 18th November 1947, p. 88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


996 


996 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(f) If the answer to part (e) be in the affirmative, do Government 
propose to issue a statement on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
have seen the relevant portions of the memorandum embodying 
the recommendations of the Union Constitution Committee, which 
were subsequently adopted by the Constituent Assembly. 

(b) Government cannot take any steps to implement these 
recommendations until a provision is included in the Constitution 
which is now being framed by the Constituent Assembly. 

(c) No, Sir. The memorandum referred to above does not 
contain any such recommendation. 

(d) Does not arise. 

(e) Government are not aware of any uncertainty in the mind 
of the litigant public. They have received certain enquiries on the 
subject from members of the bar but these do not suggest that 
there is a great deal of uncertainty. 

(f) The resolution adopted by the Constituent Assembly is 
clear enough and Government do not consider it necessary to 
issue any statement in regard to it at this stage. 


( 5 ) 

^REPORT OF HINDU LAW CODIFICATION 
COMMITTEE 

236. Shri K. Santhanam : Will the Honourable Minister of 
Law please state — 

(a) Whether the Committee on the Codification of Hindu Law 
has submitted its final report; and 

(b) whether and, if so, when it is proposed to introduce the 
Bill as recommended by the Committee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) A Government Bill in exactly the same terms as the draft 
Hindu Code prepared by the Hindu Law Committee was introduced 
in the last Indian Legislative Assembly on the 11th April 1947. 
A motion for the continuance of the Bill has also been adopted 
by this House on the 17th November, 1947. 


* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 1st November 1947 p. 453. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


997 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 997 

( 6 ) 

^MISAPPROPRIATION OF INCOME BY HINDU 
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS TRUSTS 

397. Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : (a) Will the Honourable 
Minister of Law be pleased to state whether Government 
are aware of the extent of waste and misappropriation of the 
income from Hindu Charitable and Religious Trusts ? 

(b) Do Government propose to consider the advisability of 
introducing legislation for abolishing all these Trusts so as to 
utilize the properties for nation-building purposes ? 

The Honourble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No, Sir. 

(b) No, Sir. Quite apart from the question whether legis- 
lation abolishing all Hindu religious and charitable trusts is 
necessary or even desirable, such legislation falls within the 
provincial field under entry 34 of the Provincial Legislative 
List and the Central Government cannot, therefore, initiate 
the suggested legislation. 


( 7 ) 

**NUMBER AND NAMES OF TRIBUNALS 
APPOINTED BY MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 

167. Shri Mohan Lai Saksena: (a) Will the Honourable 
Minister of Law be pleased to state how many tribunals 
appointed by the Ministry of Home Affairs are still functioning ? 

(b) Is it a fact that many of the members of these tribunals 
now belong to Pakistan ? 

(c) If so, what is the position of such members and have 
any substitutes been appointed in their place ? 

(d) Do Government propose to lay on the table of the House 
a statement giving the following information : 

(i) the names of the different tribunals ; 

(ii) the number of cases tried as well as of those disposed 
of ; and 

* C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 1, Part I, 27th November 1947, p. 781 . 

** Ibid., p. 391-92. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


998 


998 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(iii) the period for which each of the tribunals has worked 
and the costs incurred by Government in each case ? 

The Honourble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is presumed 
that the honourable Member is referring to the Special Tribunals 
constituted under the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 
1943. The number of such Tribunals still functioning is four. 

(b) and (c) There were three Special Tribunals with 
headquarters at Lahore, some members of which now belong 
to Pakistan. Under the Indian Independence (Special Tribu- 
nals) Order, 1947, these Tribunls and the cases pending before 
them were reshuffled and one of the Tribunals was assigned 
to West Punjab with members belonging to Pakistan and the 
pending cases relating to Pakistan. The other two Tribunals 
with members belonging to India and pending cases relating 
to India were transferred to India and redesignated as the 
East Punjab and the Bombay Special Tribunals. One new 
member who is required to complete the composition of the 
East Punjab Tribunal has already been appointed by the East 
Punjab Government and the two new members required to 
complete the Composition of the Bombay Special Tribunal are 
being appointed by the Bombay Government. 

(d) A statement giving the information asked for is laid on 
the table. 


STATEMENT 


Name of the different 

Date from 

No. of cases 

No. of 

Cost 

Tribunals 

which each 

tried and 

cases 

incurred 


Tribunal is 

disposed of 

pending 

in each case 


working 


disposal 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

First Tribunal, Calcutta 

September, 

66 

12 

Information 


1943 



not available 

Second Special Tribunal, 

July, 

Nil 

1 

Ditto. 

Calcutta. 

1945 




East Punjab Special Tribunal 

May, 

54* 

79 

Ditto. 

(late third Special Tribunal, 
Lahore). 

1945 




Bombay Secial Tribunal 

February, 

6 

2 

Ditto. 

(late second Specal Tribunal, 
Lahore) 

1945 





including cases disposed of by the First Lahore Special Tribunal set up in 
September, 1943 which is now designated as the West Punjab Special Tribunal. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


999 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 999 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Sir, how long will 
the Tribunals take to dispose of the pending cases ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am quite unable 
to give any definite reply. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Is it a fact that a number of 
cases are pending before these tribunals ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I believe it is true. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Is the Honourable Minister for 
Law taking any steps to expedite their disposal ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, it is very 
difficult for a Minister of Government to expedite disposal of 
cases before the Tribunals. The main reason for the delay in 
the disposal of cases is the adjournment obtained by parties on 
various grounds. It is very difficult to prescribe any hard and 
fast rules for the grant of adjournments. 

Mr. R. K. Sidhva : Are there legitimate grounds for these 
grant of adjournments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Is there any definite periods for 
which these tribunals have been appointed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, Sir. 


( 8 ) 

* PROPOSAL FOR RECONSTITUTION OR 
MODIFICATION OF INCOME-TAX 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 

287. Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable Minister of Law be pleased to state whether there 
are any proposals for the reconstitution or modification of the 
Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal and, if so, what are the proposals ? 

(b) Do Government propose to consider introducing Legislation 
for abolishing references from the Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal 
to the Provincial High Courts, and subsituting instead references 
direct to the Federal Court in all cases under the Income-Tax 
Act, where a reference is provided ? 


*C.A. (Leg.), Vol. 1, Part I, 14th February 1948, p. 719. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1000 


1000 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Do Government propose to consider raising the status 
of the Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal, by appointing as its 
chairman a person who has held office as Judge of a High 
Court ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) The suggestion for making the Federal Court an original 
Court for References under the Indian Income-Tax Act was 
fully considered in 1945-46 in connection with the proposal 
for enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Federal Court and 
in pursuance of Legislative Department Resolution dated 
15th January, 1945 public opinion was consulted. The opinion 
was overwhelmingly against the suggestion, and the late 
Mr. Bhulabhai Desai characterised it as highly objection able 
in principle and unjust to the assessees. Now that the Federal 
Court is the Supreme Court for civil appeals, it would be 
inappropriate and anomalous to make it an original Court 
for Income-Tax References. 

(c) References on points of law lie from the Income-Tax 
Appellate Tribunal to the High Court and it is not necessary 
to raise its status by appointing as its President a person 
who has been Judge of a High Court. The existing status of 
the Tribunal is sufficiently high and care is always taken 
to appoint as President or Judicial Member either a senior 
member of the Bar or a senior District Judge, who is due to 
be promoted to the Bench. In fact both the previous Presidents 
are now serving as High Court Judges. 


( 9 ) 

‘GENERAL ELECTIONS 

96. Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : (a) Will the Minister of 
Law be pleased to state whether any definite dates have been 
fixed for the first general elections to the House of the People ? 

(6) What progress has been made in the preparation of 
the electoral rolls and what steps have been taken to set up 
the electoral machinery ? 

* Parliamentary Debates (Hereinafter called P.D.), Vol 1, Part I, 6th 
February 1950, p. 79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1001 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1001 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar ) : (a) No definite 
dates have been fixed for the first general elections to the 
House of the People. It is obviously too early to do so. 

(b) As regards the preparation of electoral rolls, attention 
is invited to the reply given on the 9th December last to 
Starred Question No. 469 in the last section of the Constituent 
Assembly (Legislative). Some further progress has been 
made by the States during the last two months. The office 
of the Chief Election Commissioner has been set up, and 
that authority is expected to be appointed by the President 
in the near future. The preparation of a comprehensive Bill 
covering various matters relating to elections has also been 
taken in hand. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : Has the Minister’s attention 
been drawn to the statement made by the Prime Minister 
recently that elections would be held by the end of 1950 ? 
May I know if that is the decision of the Government and, if 
so, whether the progress made in the preparation of electoral 
rolls, etc., is sufficient for holding the elections in 1950 ? 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru) : My 

statement was “during the next winter”, not by the end of 
this year : but 1950-51 winter. 

Shri Tyagi : What arrangements are being made to hold 
bye-elections in the various States for seats which have fallen 
vacant during the last six or seven months ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is a matter which is left to the 
Governors of the Provinces and they are also under such 
orders as the President is authorised by the Constitution to 
give in this behalf. 

Shri Vyas : Have Government given any special attention 
to get the electoral rolls prepared in the case of such States 
where there are no Legislatures at present ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Certainly. 

Shri Bharati: May I know if it is a fact that the Government 
of India have asked the Provinces and States to give their opinion 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1002 


1002 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regarding the desirability of holding the elections after the 
1951 census so as to have a breathing time ? I understood 
from the papers that the Government of India have asked 
various States as to their opinion regarding the advisability 
of holding the general elections after the 1951 census. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not aware of any such proposal. 

Shri Tyagi: Have instances come to the notice of the 
Government of seats which had fallen vacant months ago in 
various States and which have not yet been filled up ? 

Dr, Ambedkar : That is a matter for the Provinces. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : Is the Hon. Minister aware 
of the fact that assurances were given by the Deputy Prime 
Minister to the Constituent Assembly that in certain areas 
like East Punjab, Delhi and perhaps Bombay or West Bengal 
fresh elections will be based on a fresh census ? If so, what 
steps are being taken by the Government to have a census 
in these areas before the electoral rolls for the new elections 
are prepared. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think that is a correct statement 
of facts. 

Shri Dashbandhu Gupta : May I draw the Prime 
Minister’s attention to the question and the reply of the Hon. 
Law Minister and ask him whether it is a fact or not that 
the Deputy Prime Minister had given an assurance ? 

Mr. Speaker : The Hon. Minister has already replied to 
the question. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : He says that it is not a fact. 
I want the Prime Minister to say whether it is a fact or not. 
The assurance is on record. 

Shri Kamath : Has the Hon. Minister’s attention been 
drawn to a United Press of India report from Madras that 
the Government of India in a communication addressed to 
the State Governments have asked them whether it would be 
convenient for them if the elections to the Legislatures of the 
States are held a few months after the 1951 census is over ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1003 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1003 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not aware of it. 


( 10 ) 

‘LIST OF SCHEDULE CASTES 

806. Prof. Yashwant Rai : Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to refer to Article 341 of the Constitution and state : 

(a) Whether it is a fact that many castes are anxious to 
know their inclusion in the list of the Scheduled Castes ; and 

(b) if so, what steps have been taken by Government in 
this direction and when the list of the Castes included in the 
Scheduled Castes will be announced ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) and (b) As 

required under article 341 of the Constitution, the Governors 
and Rajpramukhs of States have been consulted with regard 
to the castes, races or tribes etc., which are to be specified as 
Schedule Castes for the purposes of the Constitution and their 
views and suggestions are at present being examined. This 
examination is expected to be completed soon, and thereafter 
the Notification specifying the Scheduled Castes will be issued. 

Prof. Yashwant Rai : May I know, Sir, how long will the 
Government take to announce the list ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have said ‘soon’. I am sure it will not 
take very long. 

Shri Rathnaswamy : May I know the basis on which the 
Government comes to a decision in regard to the inclusion 
of castes ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The question is not clear. We have got 
the schedule under the Government of India Act, 1935; In 
addition to that, we have addressed queries to Provincial 
Governments as to their opinion regarding the inclusion of 
certain other castes. After their opinions are received, the 
lists will be finalised. 

Dr. M. M. Das : May I know whether in the coming census 
the Scheduled Castes will be marked as Scheduled Castes ? 


*P. D., Vol. 1, Part I, 13th March 1950 p. 791. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1004 


1004 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : I suppose so. 

Sardar B. S. Man : I want to know whether the lists 
proposed to be compiled will be uniformly applicable to all 
the States in the country or whether they will differ from 
State to State ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It cannot be. It is always a provincial list. 

Shri Buragohain : May I know whether the list of 
Scheduled Tribes is also under examination ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Oh, Yes. 

Shri Tyagi : Is it the intention of Government to exclude 
from the list castes that have progressed to the level of the 
so-called Caste Hindus ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Scheduled Castes have been always 
untouchables. Nothing less. 

Shri Tyagi : Is it the intention of Government to revise 
the lists so as to exclude those castes that do not have the 
disability of untouchability after the progress they have 
made ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The procedure for revising the Schedules 
is provided in the Constitution. It can be done by parliamen- 
tary legislation. 

Shri Naik : May I know whether any steps have been 
taken by the Government to implement article 340 of the 
Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The appointment of a Commission is a 
separate matter. That is also under consideration. 

Shrimati Durgabai : Since untouchability has been 
banned by the Constitution, can it still form the basis of 
exclusion or inclusion ? 

Shri Barman : Is it contemplated to publish a provisional 
list before the final list is published ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is not contemplated, because the 
power is given to the President to issue the list. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 

(ll) 

^CENTRAL WOOLLEN TECHNOLOGICAL 
INSTITUTE 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) It is too 

early to estimate what will be the total cost of the general 
elections under the Constitution. On the basis of information 
available so far, the Central is to pay to Part A and Part B 
States a sum of Rs. 1.18 crores for expenditure during 1949-50 
and Rs. 1.34 crores during 1950-51. These amounts mostly 
relate to expenditure on the printing and preparation of the 
electoral rolls. 

( b ) The extra cost incurred by the States Governments in 
connection with the preparation and printing of the electoral 
rolls, will be borne by the Central Government and the State 
Governments on a half and half basis. The extra costs incurred 
by the State Governments in connection with the actual conduct 
of elections to the House of the People will be met entirely by 
the Central Government if the elections to the House of the 
People are held independently of the elections to the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States, but such extra costs will be borne by 
the Central Government and the State Governments on a half 
and half basis if the elections to the House of the People and 
the State Assemblies are held simultaneously. The term “extra 
costs” means the expenditure incurred by the State Government 
in the preparation and printing of the electoral rolls or in the 
conduct of elections, but not including any share of the existing 
State establishments. In other words, in computing the extra 
costs, no share of the salaries of the existing officials of the 
State Governments will be taken into account. 

Shri Nandkishore Das : May I know if the printing of 
the electoral rolls has been finished ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. They are different stages in different 
States. 

Shri Nandkishore Das : May I know if the expenditure 
in connection with the elections to the Central Parliament 
will include the expenditure in connection with the Election 
Commissioner and his office ? 


1005 

1005 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part I, 21st March 1950, p. 964. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1006 


1006 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. This is a separate charge. 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I know whether the Election 
Commission that is contemplated under the Constitution has 
been set up ; if not, when is it likely to be set up ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think the Election Commissioner has 
been appointed. He is probably either taking charge today or 
has already taken charge yesterday. 

Shri Tyagi : May I know what is the position with regard 
to by-elections to State Legislature today — will they be held 
on the previous electoral rolls or on the fresh ones ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : On the existing rolls which will be in 
operation on the date of the election. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : May I ask if the Election 
Commissioner who has been appointed and who is going to 
take charge in a few days’ time is designated as the “Chief 
Election Commissioner” ? If that is so, are other Election 
Commissioners going to be appointed ; if so, how many ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Government have not come to any decision 
on the latter part of the question. 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I know what is the precise 
scope of work of this Commissioner ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That has already been defined in the 
Constitution. 

Shri Kamath: Is the Law Minister in a position to state 
whether the General Elections will be held before or after the 
completion of the decennial census ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not want to commit myself, but 
I suppose the position is that the decennial census may in 
some cases have a very crucial effect on the preparation of 
the electoral rolls and also in the matter of assigning seats. 
So it may precede. 

Shri A. P. Jain : May I know when the last electoral roll 
in any State is expected to be printed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : What is the question ? I want to know 
what my friend means by “printed” — printed as the provisional 
list or revised, list or final list ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1007 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1007 

Shri A. P. Jain : As the final list. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is very difficult really to give any 
precise date, but we hope that it will be ready sometime in 
January next or February. 

Seth Govind Das : By what time is the election budget 
expected to be ready ? Will it be placed before the Parliament ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I could not follow. 

Mr. Speaker : Whether it would be possible to have the 
estimate of the election expenditure prepared by the time the 
next Budget is presented and whether that estimate will be 
placed before Parliament. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It will be part of the Appropriation Act. 

Seth Govind Das : By what time is it expected to be 
ready ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Prof. Ranga: Are Government placing before themselves 
as well as the State Governments any target date by which 
these lists should be prepared, scrutinised and finalised ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Prof. Ranga : What is that date ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not informed about it, but as I said 
we hope that the final electoral rolls will be ready somewhere 
about the early part of next year. 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I know whether matters 
connected with the elections such as those of delimitation of 
constituencies and the question of bilingual areas also would 
fall within the scope of this Election Commissioner’s work ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Bilingual areas ? 

Shrimati Durgabai : Delimitation of constituencies ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Certainly, they will be dealt with. But I 
may say that I am proposing to introduce a Bill in this Session 
to be called the “Representation of the People Bill”, which 
will make provision for the exercise of the powers which are 
vested in the Election Commissioner, so that he can proceed 
with the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1008 


1008 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri A. P. Jain : May I know, according to the programme 
at the moment under contemplation of Government, how much 
time will it take for the final elections to be held after the 
electoral rolls have been completed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not like to speculate. 


( 12 ) 

* INCOME-TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNALS 

1106. Lala Raj Kanwar : Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to lay on the Table a statement showing : 

(а) The number of Income-Tax Appellate Tribunals functioning 
in the country and the personnel of each such Tribunal ? 

(б) How many cases have been instituted and disposed of 
by these Tribunals during each of the last three years ? 

(c) What is the number of cases now pending before each 
of these Tribunals ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : A statement is 
placed on the Table. (See Appendix V, Annexure No. 55). (not 
produced hered) 

Lala Raj Kanwar : What steps do Government propose to 
take to expedite disposal of the pending cases ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think the disposal is more or less 
satisfactory. If it is not satisfactory, Government will institute 
more Tribunals. 

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari : May I ask if the salary to 
be paid for the Members of the Tribunal has been reduced or 
re-graded recently ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I require notice. 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I know how appointments to 
these Tribunals are made ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : They are made by the Public Service 
Commission. 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part I, 24th March 1950, p. 1059. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1009 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1009 

( 13 ) 

* SCHEDULED CASTE EMPLOYEES IN 
MINISTRY OF LAW 

123. Prof. Yashwant Rai: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state : 

(a) the number of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes in 
each of the following categories in the Ministry of Law : 

(i) Gazetted Officer (ii) Superintendents and Assistants and (iii) 
Senior Grade and Junior Grade clerks and Stenographers ; 

(b) whether the number is not as reserved for scheduled castes ; 

and 

(c) what special steps Government propose to take to fill in 
the reserved quota in the spirit of Articles 335 of the Constitution 
of India ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) The number 
of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes in the Ministry 
of Law is as follows : 

Gazetted Officers ... ... ... Nil 

Superintendents ... ... ... Nil 

Assistants ... ... ... 2 

Senior Grade Clerks ... ... ... Nil 

Junior Grade Clerks ... ... ... 3 

Stenographers ... ... ... 1 

(b) The number is not up to the percentage reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes in the categories to which the reser- 
vation, rules apply. 

(c) Attention is invited to paragraph 5 and the second and 
third sub-paragraphs of paragraph 7 of section II of the Review 
of the Activities of the Home Ministry for the year 1949. 


* P. D., Vol. 4, Part I, 24th March 1950, p. 1067. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1010 


1010 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 14 ) 

* ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HINDU CODE BILL 

1352. Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan: Will the Minister 
of Law be pleased to state whether any representatives of 
women’s Organisations have been taken or are proposed to 
be taken on the non-official Advisory Committee to advise on 
the Hindu Code Bill ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I take it that 
the reference is to the informal Conference proposed to be 
held for the ascertainment of representative public opinion 
both in and outside Parliament, on the Hindu Code Bill, in 
accordance with the announcement made by the Hon. the 
Prime Minister on the floor of the House on 19th December 
1949 during the discussion on the Bill. It is the intention 
of Government to make the Conference as representative in 
character, as possible and the Conference will certainly include 
representatives of women’s organisations. 

Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan : In view of the fact that 
the Hindu Code affects the women of the country more than 
the men (Laughter), Sir, I would like to ask for your protection 
in this matter. Every time that any question of women’s rights 
comes up in that House, there is general laughter, as if it is 
a joke. I do not mean it as a joke. I would like the Hon. the 
Law Minister to tell us whether in view of the fact that the 
Hindu Code really affects women very largely and there are 
several women’s organisations in India, they have been asked 
to send representatives to this Advisory Committee that is 
going to be called very soon. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is what the answer says. 

Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan : May I ask him for 

the names of the women’s organisations from which he has 
invited representatives to come to this Advisory Committee ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am afraid I do not carry the names 
in my head but my intention was really to call women’s 
organisations which were, so far as our information went, 
not very favourable to the Code. 


* P. D., Vol. 1, Part I, 3rd April 1950, p. 1267. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1011 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1011 

Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan : May I ask when this 
Conference is going to be held ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I believe on the 14th of this month. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : May I know whether, such 
Members of the House have also been invited, as are opposed 
to the Code ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Conference is divided into three 
parts. There are members who represent the Select Committee 
and members who represent the House. There are others 
who neither represent the House for the Committee ; they 
are outsiders. 

Shri B. Das : May I know whether the Hon. the Law 
Minister will advise the Government to hold a special Session 
of this House to pass the Hindu Code Bill ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is not necessary to anticipate it.... 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. I will not allow that question. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : May, I know whether the Hon. 
Minister has received representations from several quarters 
suggesting that the conference should be postponed for a few 
days in view of the Kumbha Mela to enable those who may 
be going there at the time to attend ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have not received any representations 
but I have seen some statements in the newspapers. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : May I ask the Hon. Minister as 
to what principle he adopted in choosing Members from the 
Select Committee ? Did he try to eschew those people who 
said anything against the Code ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think I had any prediliection in 
my mind one way or the others. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : May I know how many of those 
whom he selected from the Select Committee are in favour 
of the Bill, how many against it, and how many doubtful ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think some were in favour, some were 
doubtful and some were opposed to it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1012 


1012 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(15) 

* SALARY AND ALLOWANCES OF THE 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 

726. Maulvi Wajed Ali : Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to state whether in view of Article 106 of the 
Constitution, Government propose to bring forward a Bill 
to provide for the salary and allowances of the Members of 
Parliament in the near future ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): No, Sir. In 
view of the latter half of the Article referred to by the Hon. 
Member, Government do not see any need for bringing forward 
a Bill to provide for the salary and allowances of Members of 
Parliament. The existing position appears to be satisfactory. 

Maulvi Wajed Ali: Is it not a fact that the article does not 
specify anything about the present Parliament ? My question 
is also about the future House of the people which the Hon. 
Minister contemplate in his proposed Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have not seen any formal expression 
from this House that the present practice is unsatisfactory. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad: Is there any proposal before 
the Government to substitute I class railway pass for the 
present railway travelling allowance ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is a suggestion which may be considered. 


(16) 

“GENERAL ELECTIONS 

5. Shri Kamath : Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state: 

(a) the progress so far made in respect of the preparation 
of electoral rolls and delimitation of constituencies in each 
of the Part A, Part B and Part C States ; and 

(b) the firm date for the holding of general elections 
under the new Constitution ? 


* P. D., Vol. 1, Part II, 15th April 1950, p. 1557. 
**P. D., Vol. 6, Part II, 15th November 1950, p. 12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1013 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1013 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) A statement 
is laid on the Table (See Appendix I, Annexure No. 4). 

(b) This question has been dealt with yesterday in the 
Presidents opening address. 

Shri Kamath : Is it a fact, Sir, that in the President’s 
Order issued some time in October the total population of 
Scheduled tribes in Part A and Part B States of the Indian 
Union has been given as 179 lakhs or so while according to 
the Census of 1941 the total population of Scheduled tribes 
in those States is about 248 lakhs ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : This question should be addressed to the 
hon. the Home Member. 

Dr. Deshmukh : May I know if the Hon. Minister of Law is 
aware that according to the present arrangement, considerable 
hardship would be caused to a Scheduled Caste candidate 
and whether he is intending to take any steps by which this 
double constituency which is likely to fall to the share of the 
Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribes candidates would 
be reduced to a single constituency. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is a matter which undoubtedly will 
be dealt with by the House when the Order dealing with 
constituencies will be placed before the House. 

Prof. Ranga: Is it absolutely incumbent according to the 
Constitution to have the elections for the Parliament — the 
House of the People and also for the State Legislatures — 
simultaneously ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That would be a matter which would 
be dealt with on the basis of convenience by the Election 
Commissioner. 

Sardar B. S. Man: May I know for the purposes of 
delimitation of constituencies whether the results of Census 
which is shortly to be taken in 51 will be taken into 
consideration or the present figures of 1941 will be considered ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think under the Constitution, the 
provision is that the election is to take place within three years 
from the date of the provisional Parliament. The old Census 
may be taken, subject to the fact that in certain Provinces 
like the Punjab and West Bengal the population may be 
estimated by the President on the basis of the voting strength. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1014 


1014 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kesava Rao : May I know whether the Government 
has received any representations from the minority 
communities for having plural Member constituencies for 
them ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I know what complaints have been 
received by the Election Commission, but I may say that I 
have received various representations relating to that matter. 

Dr. Deshmukh : May I know if the complaints of castes 
which have been omitted from the President’s Order for the 
first time are going to be considered by Government ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It cannot be considered now. The provision 
in the Constitution is that whereas the Order is made by 
the President enumerating the various castes and tribes, the 
Government is excluded from any further action. The matter 
is left for Parliament to be death with. 

Shri Tyagi: When does the Hon. Minister propose to 
introduce the People’s Representation Bill in its final shape 
and place the electoral rules before this House ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Bill certainly I am placing before the 
House during the course of this session, but I do not know 
what my hon. Friend means by “rules”. 

Shri Tyagi: I mean rules of election. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Well, I do not know whether the rules of 
election would be framed unless and until we pass this Act. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: Is it a fact, Sir, that the population 
as determined by the hon. the President has been open to 
very serious objection on the ground that the determined 
population has been less in some instances than the census of 
1941 and as it was determined on the number of voters as on 
the voting list which has been found to be defective, is there 
any likelihood of the revision of the determined population ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That question ought to be addressed to 
the Hon. the Home Minister. 

Shri Chandrika Ram : May I know how many States 
have been able to delimit the constituencies for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1015 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1015 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think the delimitation of 
constituencies for the Scheduled Castes is a matter which 
is dealt with separately from the delimitation of the general 
constituency. 

Shri Kamath : In view of the fact that the date of the 
General Elections has now been postponed from April-May to 
November-December, 1951, will there be any change in the 
qualifying date and qualifying period for the voters ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Unless the Act that has already been 
passed is amended, we could make no change. 

Mr. Speaker: I think we will go to the next question. 


( 17 ) 

‘GENERAL ELECTIONS 

134. Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: (a) Will the Minister of 
Law be pleased to state whether Government have finally 
fixed the month for the next General elections and if so, what 
is the month ? 

(b) Will the elections be held simultaneously for the 
Parliament and Legislature of States ? 

(c) What opinions have been expressed by each State 
Government on the subject ? 

(d) What is the total number of voters for the House of 
the People, the Council of States and States Legislatures 
respectively enrolled and when will the electoral rolls be 
finally published ? 

(e) What is the estimated expenditure which will be incurred 
on the elections ? 

(f) How many officers will be employed for the purpose 
and for what period ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) This part of 
the question has been dealt with in the President’s opening 
address on the 14th November, 1950. 

(b) Elections are proposed to be held simultaneously for 
the House of the People, Constituencies in a State and the 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 20th November 1950, p. 138. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1016 


1016 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Legislative Assembly constituencies, if any, of that State. 
Elections to the State Legislative Councils will also be held 
about the same time, but it may not be exactly at the same 
time. 

(c) The States are all in favour of holding the elections to 
the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies 
simultaneously. 

(d) The electorate for the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States are the same. A statement 
is laid on the Table giving the total number of voters for 
the House of the People so far enumerated. (See Appendix I, 
Annexure No. 29). 

Figures in respect of supplementary voters are still awaited 
from Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Bhopal, Bilaspur, Coorg and 
Himachal Pradesh, the electorate for the seats allotted to Part 
A States and Part B States (except Jammu and Kashmir) in 
the Council of States is 3,055. The method of election to fill 
the seats in the Council of States allotted to Part C States is 
to be determined by Parliament and it is proposed to introduce 
during the current session a Bill to amend the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950 for this purpose. The electoral rolls for 
the Legislative Councils in Part A States and in Mysore are 
still under preparation and it is not possible to give any idea 
as to that electorate. Electoral rolls will be finally published 
as soon as constituencies have been delimited and claims and 
objections to the preliminary rolls have been disposed of. This 
is expected to be late in January, or early in February, next. 

(e) On a rough estimate, the total expenditure that has 
so far been incurred, and may hereafter be incurred by the 
Government of India in connection with the elections may be 
about 520 lakhs; and the total expenditure for all the State 
Governments may be about 490 lakhs. 

(f) If the hon. Member is referring to officers who will be 
employed for the actual conduct of elections, it is not possible 
at present to estimate their number or the period for which 
they will have to be employed for the purpose. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1017 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1017 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: May I know whether complaints 
have been received from various States as to omissions or 
incorrect entries — a large number of them — in the electoral 
rolls, and if so what steps have been taken by Government 
to remove these defects ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Well, really speaking, that is a matter 
which must be within the cognizance of the Election 
Commissioner, and I am sure if any irregularities have been 
reported to the Election Commissioner, he will exercise his 
powers to set them right. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Has it come to the notice of the 
Election Commissioner or the Government that in the State 
of Delhi itself as many as 40,000 women are required to file 
objections to get themselves enrolled as voters for the simple 
reason that they have been enrolled as “Mrs. so-and-so” or 
“Miss so-and-so”? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is possible. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Sir, in view of the fact that the 
elections have now been postponed, will Government consider 
the desirability of getting such incorrect entries corrected of its 
own accord, rather than require the objectors to file objections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I shall convey the suggestion to the 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. It is a suggestion for action. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : In view of the fact that the 
Constitution lays down that there is to be adult franchise, 
will Government please state whether they shall take into 
consideration the results of the next census in the matter of 
drawing up the electoral rolls ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is not necessary, as it is provided in 
the Constitution that if the elections take place within three 
years of the inauguration of the Constitution, the population 
of 1941 census may be taken into account, or in certain other 
cases the population may be determined by the President by 
order. 

Mr. Deshmukh : Is the Hon. Minister aware that in some 
States the price proposed for the voters’ list is exorbitant and 
may I know whether Government would issue any orders to 
the effect that these lists should not be so very costly ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1018 


1018 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have heard that this matter has been 
agitated in some of the local Assemblies, and I hear some 
State Governments have already reduced the price of the 
electoral rolls. 

Shri T. N. Singh: May I know whether the word 
“simultaneously” used by the Hon. Minister in his reply 
means that all the elections will be held on one day in all 
the different States or whether it will be spread over three 
or four days ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It should take place on the same day for 
expenditure to be economised. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: May I know if, any final date has 
been fixed for the Delimitation Committees to submit their 
reports ? 

Mr. Ambedkar: I think the date was at one time fixed, 
as it was the intention of the Election Commission to submit 
the Election Constituency Order to the President and place 
it before this House in this Session. But in view of the fact 
that the date of the election has been postponed, probably he 
desires to have more time in order to enable him to prepare 
the constituencies more in consonance with the facts of the 
case. 

Shri K. Vaidya: Sir, should not the elections take place 
in April in the case of States where there is no legislature 
at all ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: If my friend will resume his seat I will 
give the reply. So far as the House of the People is concerned, 
the Legislature of the State is not involved, because the 
election is by the people. Where there are Upper Chambers, 
there, by the Bill which I am presenting to the House to-day 
they are making provisions for election in such States where 
Legislatures do not exist. 

Shri Dwivedi: Sir, may I know whether any minimum 
qualifications are to be fixed for persons standing for elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That matter is under debate by a 
Resolution moved by Prof. K. T. Shah. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas: In view of the fact that the general 
elections have been postponed by one year, will the qualifying date 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1019 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1019 

and the qualifying period also be changed by suitable 
amendments to the People’s Representation Act ? 

Mr. Speaker: It is to be the subject of discussion in this 
House. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Sir, may I know whether, 
it is correct that some device has been found out to detect 
impersonation ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, I hear our scientific laboratories are 
finding out some kind of device. 


( 18 ) 

‘GOVERNMENT AGENTS FOR SUPREME COURT 

442. Shri Raj Bahadur: (a) Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to state whether any agency or machinery has 
been set up under the auspices of the Government to act as 
solicitors or agents for or on behalf of the Central and the 
State Governments for the Supreme Court of India ? 

(b) If so, what were the reasons and necessity for creating 
such agency or machinery ? 

(c) What is the amount of money to be spent by the 
Government of India and the State Governments respectively on 
the creation and maintenance of the said agency or machinery ? 

(d) How has the creation of such an agency or machinery 
affected the efficiency or execution of work ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Yes. 

(b) With the abolition of the jurisdiction for the Privy Council 
over Indian cases and the establishment of the Supreme Court 
on the commencement of the new Constitution, the volume of 
work in connection with cases coming up before the Supreme 
Court concerning the Central and State. Governments increased 
enormously. Novel and intricate problems of law arose in such 
cases by reason of the great constitutional changes that had 
taken place. It was considered that, in order to achieve best 
results before the highest 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 28th November 1950, p. 410. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1020 


1020 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

tribunal in the land, all matters before the Supreme Court, 
civil and criminal, in which the Government of India or any 
of the State Governments were interested, should be handled 
by a central agency, composed of personnel experience in 
Federal Court practice and procedure, conversant with 
Government administration, and familiar with the new 
Constitution. When the proposal was put to the Governments 
of Part A and part B States, it was accepted by 10 of them. 

(c) The approximate expenditure on the Central Agency 
is estimated to be Rs. 47,600 for the current financial year 
and Rs. 87,400 for the next financial year. The expenditure 
is to be shared between the Government of India and the 
Governments of the participating States in proportion to 
the number and nature of the cases handled on behalf of 
each Government. The amounts payable by the participating 
Governments for the current year can only be estimated at 
the end of the year. 

(d) Before the Central Agency section was created, the 
Agency work of the Central Government was done by one of 
the Government Solicitors in addition to his normal advisory 
work in the Solicitor’s Branch, and each Provincial or State 
Government made its own arrangements. The setting up 
of a centralised agency will naturally lead to economy and 
efficiency, particularly from the point of view of the State 
Governments. It also secures greater co-ordination between 
the States inter se and the Central Government on various 
constitutional questions coming up before the Supreme 
Court. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: May I know whether any of the 
States disapproved or rejected the proposals ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Well, I do not know which States 
expressly disapproved, but, as I said, ten have agreed; 
Assam, West Bengal, Madras, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh 
have not joined the scheme. They might join hereafter. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: May I know the number of States 
which have not given specific acceptance of the proposal ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1021 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1021 

Dr. Ambedkar : As I said, evidently those who have hot 
joined the scheme have either expressly said that they do not 
want to join or have merely postponed their decision — I am 
unable to say at this stage. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: So far as the financial side is concerned, 
how does the expenditure which is to be incurred now compare 
with the expenditure which was being incurred up to now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no basis for comparison because 
such an agency did not exit before. 

Shri Raj Bahadur: Why I know whether the opinion of 
local solicitors and agents was taken or not? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no necessity. We took the opinion 
of the Governments. 


( 19 ) 

‘MUSLIM PERSONAL LAWS 

561. Dr. M. M. Das : (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state the States of the Indian Union where the 
Muslim Personal Laws (Shariat) Application Act of 1937 is 
not in force ? 

(b) Is it a fact that Muslims of the Indian Union are 
governed by the same Personal Laws viz., the Shariat? 

(c) Did Government receive any representation from the 
Muslims of Coach-Behar or ascertain their opinion before the 
Government of West Bengal replaced their existing Personal 
Laws by Shariat ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (b). The 
Muslims Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act of 1937 is 
not in force in Part B States and in the merged territory 
of Cooch-Behar in West Bengal. It is in force in the rest of 
India. So far as Cooch-Behar is concerned, provision has been 
made in clause 3 of the Cooch-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) 
Bill which is pending before this House, for bringing the Act 
of 1937 into force in that area. The position in Part B States 
appears to be that Muslims are in the main governed by 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 1st December 1950, p. 536. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1022 


1022 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shariat, but subject to variations introduced by established 
custom or usage or by local laws. 

(c) So far as I am aware, the Government of West Bengal 
have done nothing to alter the personal law applicable to 
Muslims in Cooch-Behar. After the Cooch-Behar (Assimilation 
of Laws) Bill is passed by this House and is brought into 
force, that Government will, in due course and after due 
consideration, bring the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) 
Application Act of 1937 into force in Cooch-Behar under clause 
3(2) of the Bill. 

Dr. N. M. Das : May I know whether the Hon. Minister 
of Law thinks it necessary and advisable to ascertain the 
opinion of the Cooch-Behar Muslims about the change that 
will be introduced by the West Bengal Government ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That matter is left to the West Bengal 
Government. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Is there any proposal pending 
the consideration of the Government for bringing before this 
Parliament a Muslim Code also? 

Dr, Ambedkar: No. 

Shri Tyagi : Is it the intention of Government to bring a 
law to regulate the Muslim Law in India also and to effect 
reforms in respect of the system of polygamy that is prevalent 
amongst Muslims ? 

Mr. Speaker: That question was put and answered. 

Shri Tyagi: I want to know whether it is the intention of 
Government to effect reforms in the previous Muslim Law ? 

Mr. Speaker: There is no intention of bringing a Muslim 
Code. That is what the Minister said and it covers all points. 

Shri A. C. Guha: Have Government under contemplation 
any proposal to bring a uniform civil law for all Commuinities, 
according to our Constitution ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have very much the matter at heart; 
but I have no time. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1023 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1023 

( 20 ) 

* ENGAGEMENTS OF LAWYERS IN CASES 
AGAINST THE UNION 

709. Shri Kazmi: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(a) the procedure for the engagement of legal practitioners 
in the procedings in Courts of the cases against the Union 
of India; 

(b) whether the remuneration; and 

(c) whether the Attorney General for India, the Advocate 
General of State or Government Pleader of locality is consulted 
on such appointments, and if not, what are the reasons 
therefor ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) In all Part 
A States, the legal business of the Central Government is 
generally undertaken by the State Governments, by mutual 
agreement, and is conducted by the Legal Remembrancer of 
the State and other law officers under his control such as 
the District Government Pleaders. In the Presidency towns of 
Bombay and Culcutta we have our own Solicitors to attend to 
this work. Certain departments like the Railway and Incom- 
tax Departments also make their own arrangements for 
conducting their cases in the courts. The Central Government 
have appointed all District Government Pleaders in Part A 
States as Government Pleaders in relation to any suit by or 
against the Central Government, excluding cases relating to 
railways. No standing arrangements have yet been made in 
Part B States, while in Part C States, the Chief Commissioners 
are authorised to make the necessary arrangements. 

(b) Except where special rates are agreed upon, the 
Government Pleaders conducting the Central Government 
cases are paid fees at the same rates as are admissible to 
them for conducting cases on behalf of the State Governments 
which employ them. 

(c) As stated in the reply to part (a) of the question, as 
a general rule, the District Government Pleaders also act as 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 6th December 1950, p. 694. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1024 


1024 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government Pleaders in cases against the Government of 
India in Part A States and hence the question of consultation 
in making the appointment of such Pleaders does not arise. 


( 21 ) 

‘SCHEDULED CASTE REPRESENTATIVES 

814. Shri Jangde : Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state whether the number of Scheduled Caste Members 
to the House of the People from Madhya Pradesh is being 
determined on the basis of the 1941 census ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The number of 
seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes from Madhya 
Pradesh, or for the matter of that, any Part A State or Part 
B State, in the House of the People will be determined on 
the basis of their population as estimated by the Census 
Commissioner under the provisions of the Constitution 
(Determination of Populations) Order, 1950, made by the 
President under article 387 of the Constitution. The population 
has been estimated by the Census Commissioner as on the 
1st March 1950, and has already been notified vide Home 
Ministry’s Notification in a Gazette Extraordinary dated the 
14th September 1950. 


( 22 ) 

"DELIMITATION OF COMMITTEE REPORTS 

817. Shri Deogirikar: (a) Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to state how many States have submitted the 
Delimitation Committee reports so far ? 

(b) Will those Constituencies be accepted as final or will 
they undergo changes and if so, when and who will make 
the changes ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Proposals for 
the delimitation of constituencies for the House of the People 
and the Legislative Assemblies of States have been received 

*P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 11th December 1950, p. 804. 

**Ibid., p. 805. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1025 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1025 

by the Election Commission from all States except that West 
Bengal’s proposals for the Legislative Assembly of the State 
have not yet been received. The Parliamentary Advisory 
Committee for the following States have sent their reports : 

Assam, Bombay, Orissa, Hyderabad, Travancore-Cochin, 
Saurashtra, Delhi, Vindhya Pradesh, Bhopal, Tripura and 
Manipur. 

(b) The procedure for making the Order delimiting the 
constituencies is contained in section 13 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950. the Election Commission shall, in 
consultation with the Delimitation Advisory Committee set 
up in respect of each State, formulate proposals as to the 
delimitation of constituencies in that State and submit such 
proposals to the President for making the Order as to such 
delimitation. It is open to the Election Commission to amend 
or vary the proposals of the Delimitation Advisory Committees. 
The President also can amend or vary the proposals submitted 
by the Election Commission, and every such Order made by the 
President shall be subject to such modification as Parliament 
may make when it is laid before it. 


( 23 ) 

‘GENERAL ELECTIONS 

1052. Prof. S. N. Mishra: (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state the approximate expenditure to be incurred 
by the Government in the next elections ? 

(b) How many representations have been made to the 
Government for holding elections in April-May and how many 
against it ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Attention is 
invited to my reply given on the 20th November, 1950, to part 
(e) of starred question No. 134 asked by Shri Deshbandhu 
Gupta. 

(b) According to information available, in all eleven 
representations have been received, out of which ten are 
against holding elections in April-May 1951, and one 


* P. D., Vol. 6, Part I, 19th December 1950, p. 1034. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1026 


1026 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

against the postponement of the elections to November- 
December 1951. 

Prof. S. N. Mishra : May I know what were the main 
reasons for postponing the elections to November-December 
1951? 

Shri Dwivedi: May I know whether Government are 
going to ban party and religious flags during the elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I suppose that everything that is necessary 
to ensure fair elections will be done. 

Shri Joachim Alva: Is Government devising any 
machinery of propaganda by which elections may be run on 
proper lines and malpractices may be avoided ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think that it had better be left to the 
political parties themselves. 

Shri Jainarain Vyas : Will Government impose any levy 
on the different States to meet the election expenditure ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. There has already been an agreement 
between the Centre and the various States as to the proportion 
in which the election expenses would be borne. 

Dr. M. M. Das: May I know whether any State Government 
has sent any deputation and if so, what is the result ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Deputation for what ? 

Dr. M. M. Das: For postponing the elections. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. I do not remember to have received 
any deputation. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: Which is the single State which has 
protested against the postponement of the elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I did not say that the representations 
were from the States. They may have been from individuals 
and not necessarily from the States. I have not got the name 
of the particular representative who sent the representation 
against the postponement of elections. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : Is it a fact that certain parties 
which were nervous at the approach of the elections are now 
passing resolutions to the effect that Government have done 
a great harm by postponing the elections ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1027 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1027 

Dr. Ambedkar : I feel that my hon. Friend knows more than 
I do. 


( 24 ) 

*SHORT NOTICE QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR RURAL AREAS IN DELHI 

Shri J. R. Kamble: Will the Minister of Law be pleased to 
state : — 

(a) Whether the attention of Government has been drawn to 
the news appearing in the Evening News of the Hindustan Times 
dated the 20th March 1951 and in the Indian News Chronicle 
dated the 21st March 1951 that the Chief Commissioner of Delhi 
has ordered that the electoral rolls for the rural areas of Delhi 
State for the next general elections will be published only in Urdu ; 

(b) Whether the above news item is a correct statement of 
fact, and if so, what are the reasons for the aforesaid rolls not 
being published in Hindi which is the official language of the 
Union ; and 

(c) What is the policy of the Government with regard to the 
language of the electoral rolls for the next general elections in 
Part ‘C’ States ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (b) The two 

news items referred to in the question relate to elections to the 
District Board of Delhi and have nothing to do with the general 
elections to Parliament. The electoral rolls for Delhi for the 
ensuing general elections to the House of the People have in fact 
been published in three languages, viz. English, Hindi and Urdu. 

(c) Under Rule 6 of the Representation of the People 
(Preparation of Electoral Rolls) Rules, 1950, the language in. 
which the electoral rolls in respect of State are to be prepared 
is to be decided by the Election Commission. Generally, the 
rolls have been prepared throughout the country in the regional 
languages only, but in certain bi-lingual areas in some of the 
States the Commission has directed the preparation of the rolls 
in an additional language also. 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 2nd April 1950, p. 2788. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1028 


1028 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Do I take it that the electoral rolls of 
rural areas of Delhi with regard to the next General Elections 
are being published also in English ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Which rural area and for what purpose ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : For the General Elections in the 
rural areas of Delhi. 

Dr. Ambedkar : For the General Elections to Parliament 
they are printed in the regional language, as I just now said. 
Where the area is a composite area it is published also in 
some additional language. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : May, I know whether with regard to 
the electoral rolls for the next General Election to Parliament 
the electoral rolls relating to the rural areas of Delhi State 
are going to be published in English also in addition to Hindi 
and Urdu ? If so, will the Hon. Minister be pleased to state 
how many people are there in the rural areas of Delhi State 
who know English only ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is not published in English only. It is 
published in three languages. As I said, the electoral rolls in 
Delhi for the ensuing General Elections to the House of the 
People have in fact been published in three languages English, 
Hindi and Urdu. Any voter may pick up any particular roll 
with which he is familiar. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: What was the language of the electoral 
rolls of the Delhi State in the last General Elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It must be the regional language and so 
far as I remember the old rule was also the same as now. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: What was considered to be the regional 
language at the time of the last General Election in the Delhi 
Rural Area? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not quite familiar; probably it might 
have been Urdu. There is now an improvement. 

Shri Hussain Imam : Is it a fact that there are no rural 
and urban constituencies separately in the State of Delhi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not sure. I have not seen the 
constituencies as framed by the various committees that were 
appointed by this House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1029 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1029 

Seth Govind Das : What are the languages other than 
the local languages in which these lists would be published 
at different places ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I must have notice of it. So far as I 
remember when I was answering a question by Mr. Anthony 
similar to the one now put, I think, I said that so far as 
Bombay was concerned English was also used for the purpose 
of preparaing them. If in the case of some other areas also 
such as Bangalore in Mysore State, I am not sure at the 
moment, I am speaking from memory. 


( 25 ) 

‘SCRUTINY OF CENTRAL AND STATE LAWS 

Pandit H. B. Bhargava : Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state whether the Government of India have set up 
or intend to set up a Law Commission or any other suitable 
machinery for the scrutiny and examination of all the Central 
and State Laws in the light of the Constitution of India with 
a view to amend, modify or repeal such provisions of the 
existing Laws which are inconsistent with Part III and other 
provisions of the Constitution and if not, why not ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : No Sir. In 
connection with the adaptation of the Central and State Laws 
under article 372 of the Constitution, in order to bring them 
into accord with the provisions of the Constitution, Government 
have taken the view that so far as fundamental rights are 
concerned, it would not be advisable to omit or modify any 
provision of a law on account of article 13(1), unless there 
was a clear inconsistency between such law and any of the 
provisions of Part III, as, for instance in the case of the 
Punjab Land Alienation Act, 1900, which has been repealed 
by adaptation. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava : Has the Government considered 
the question how far the State Laws and the Central Laws 
are in conformity with the present Constitution, and does 
the Government have any intention to apply its mind to this 
proposition ? 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 7th April 1951, p. 2820. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1030 


1030 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir I don’t think this is a matter which 
could be dealt with in the course of questions and answers. 
This would probably requisite a debate on the various modes 
and methods that could be adopted to carry out the purpose 
of article 372, in conformity with article 13(1). 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava: Sir, may I know why one 
particular Act has been selected out of the ocean of laws and 
on what particular criterion has this law been selected ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not in agreement with the hon. 
Member when he says there are an ocean of laws which are 
inconsistent with the Constitution, although I agree there 
may be some. My hon. Friend will remember that this is a 
very difficult matter and Government must come to a definite 
conclusion on the issue whether a law is really inconsistent 
and whether it should be retained. This one law was examined 
with great care both in the Law Ministry and by the Attorney 
General and also the Legal Remembrancer of the Punjab 
Government and then the conclusion was arrived that this 
could not be retained in view of the fundamental rights and 
the Government have no kind of doubt in the matter that the 
matter could be dealt with by adaptation. 


( 26 ) 

‘ELECTORAL ROLLS 

2824. Shri Sonavane : (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state whether it is a fact that electoral rolls are 
printed in Hindi in Bombay State ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the Centre has directed the Bombay 
State to print the electoral rolls in English in addition to the 
already printed Hindi rolls ? 

(c) If so, why was such a direction given, what is the extra 
cost of printing and who is going to bear it ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The electoral 
rolls in the State of Bombay have been printed in the regional 
languages of the districts concerned, viz., in Gujarati, Marathi 
and Kannada. In the case of bilingual districts of Belgaum 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 7th April 1951, p. 2957. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1031 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1031 

and Satara South, the rolls have been printed both in Marathi 
and Kannada. In Bombay City the electoral rolls have been 
printed in Devanagari script. 

(b) and (c) The attention of the hon. Member is invited to 
my reply given to part (b) of Shri Kamath’s starred question 
No. 1409 on the 13th February 1951. 

The cost of printing the electoral rolls in English in respect 
of the Bombay City is estimated at rupees six lakhs and will 
be shared by the Government of Bombay and the Government 
of India in the same way as any other expenditure relating to 
the preparation of the electoral rolls will be shared. 

Shri Sonavane : May I know after how many days or 
months of completion of the rolls printed in Devnagari in the 
Bombay City were these directions given to printing the rolls 
in English? 

Dr, Ambedkar : I cannot give a precise answer to this 
question, but I think the direction was issued after complaints 
were received by the Election Commissioner that there were 
many people in Bombay City who would not be in a position 
to understand the Hindi rolls. 

Shri Sonavane : Could this direction not have been given 
earlier which would have saved an extra expenditure of six 
lakhs over the printing of these rolls ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is perfectly possible, I think. Nothing 
is impossible. 

Shri Sonavane : Who is responsible for this waste of 
money ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no waste of money at all there. 
In any case it was necessary to have a roll in English whether 
it was printed simultaneously, earlier or later. 

Shri Sonavane : But could not the simultaneous printing of 
rolls in Devnagari and English have reduced the expenditure ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No, how could it ? 

Shri Kamath : Have reports been received from Bombay 
and other States as to how many claims and objections have 
been filed in respect of the electoral rolls published already, and 
how many of those claims and objections have been disposed of? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1032 


1032 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, this does not arise out of this question. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Yes, that is so. 

Shri Sarangdhar Das : Considering that Singbhum 
District in Bihar is a Bilingual area, will the Minister please 
state why the rolls are not published in Oriya Language also 
besides Hindi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is possible that that is not the regional 
language of the area. 


( 27 ) 

* LAWYERS IN SUPREME COURT 

3233. Shrimati Durgabai : (a) Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to state what is the practice followed in engaging 
lawyers to represent the Government of India and the State 
Governments in the Supreme Court? 

(b) Which is the Agency under the Ministry that is entrusted 
with the work of engaging lawyers on behalf of Government ? 

(c) Is there any panel out of which lawyers are chosen to 
represent Government in various cases ? 

(d) What is the basis on which fees for such lawyers is fixed ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The Govern- 
ment of India is almost always represented by the Attorney- 
General in the Supreme Court. He is assisted by a Junior 
Counsel who is selected in consultation with the Attorney- 
General and having regard to the nature and importance of 
the case. Similarly a State Government is usually represented 
by the Advocate-General of the State and he is assisted by a 
Junior Counsel. The instructions of the State Governments as 
to engagement of particular Counsel are carried out. 

(b) The Government Agent who is in charge of the Central 
Agency Section, Ministry of Law, engages Counsel on behalf of 
the Government of India and those State Governments which 
have entrusted their work to that Section. 

(c) No panel of lawyers is maintained in the Central 
Agency Section. The Government Agent keeps a list of Counsel 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 18th April 1951, p. 3315. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1033 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1033 

practising before the Supreme Court and engages Counsel as 
indicated in the reply to part (a). 

(d) Fees for Counsel naturally vary with the seniority and 
standing of the Counsel engaged and also with the importance and 
difficulty of the case. I regret I am unable to give a more precise 
answer to this question. 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I know whether the Hon. Minister 
could give us information as to who are all juniors for the purpose of 
engagement and what was the basis on which their fees were paid ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The seniors who were generally engaged for 
the Central or State Governments are Mr. Alladi Krishnaswami 
Ayyar and Mr. Indra Dev Dua. 

The junior advocates who are generally engaged are — 

Mr. G.N. Joshi 
Mr. S.N. Sikri 
Mr. Rajinder Lai 
Mr. K. Singh 
Mr. H. J. Umrigar 
Mr. R. Ganapati Ayyar 
Mr. B. Sen 

Mr. C.R. Pattabhiraman 

Mr. S.N. Mukerjee 

Mrs. Durgabai 

Mr. S.B. Jeth 

Rai Bahadur Nanakchand 

Mr. V.N. Sethi 

Sardar Kartar Singh Chowla 

Mr. G.C. Mathur 

Mr. A.N. Kirpal 

Mr. R.N. Tikku 

Mr. M.K. Pillai 

Mr. P.M. Nathwani. 

The usual fees fixed for junior counsels are as follows : — 

Ten gold mohurs for opposing a petition for special leave. 

Ten to twenty gold mohurs per day for criminal appeals, or 
applications under article 32 of the Constitution, according to the 
nature of the case. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1034 


1034 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Fifteen to twenty gold mohurs per day for civil appeals 
according to the nature of the case, but in cases in which 
important questions are involved higher fees have been paid 
to counsel but in no case exceeding forty gold mohurs. 

In cases where the Attorney-General is briefed on behalf of 
the State Governments, his fees are 100 gold mohurs per day, 
and where he appears on behalf of the Central Government 
no fees are charged except in cases where costs are recovered 
from the opposite party. 

In cases where other counsels are engaged directly by a 
State Government they are paid fees by that Government 
direct. 


( 28 ) 

‘COOCH BEHAR (POPULATION) 

3235. Shri S.C. Samanta: (a) Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to State the names and number of villages with 
population figures in Cooch Behar in West Bengal, where 
there are only one, two or three voters in each village for the 
coming General Election. 

(b) What were the corresponding population figures in 
those villages according to the census of 1941 ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (b) I 

understand from the Election Commission that there are 25 
villages in Cooch Behar which have not more than 3 voters 
each, entered in the electoral rolls. A Statement containing 
the names of these villages, together with the number of 
voters in each, entered in the rolls at the time of preliminary 
publication, is placed on the Table. (See Appendix XXII, 
Annexure No. 19). The population figures for these villages are 
not available here but I am trying to get them from the local 
authorities. I should also add that the period for presentatin of 
claims expired only on the 31st March last, and the Election 
Commission has no information so far, as to the number of 
persons enrolled as voters on the basis of such claims. 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 18th April 1951, p. 3318. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1035 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1035 

Shri S. C. Samanta : Is it a fact that the matter was 
referred to the Election Commission ; and if so, what steps 
have been taken by this time ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: As I said, we have referred the matter to 
the Local Government to find out what exactly is the position. 
It is quite possible that on account of the disturbances that 
have recently taken place some of the villagers have shifted 
from one side to the other and some villages have become 
what we call in technical language beckira. 

Shri S. C. Samanta: The Hon. Minister stated that the 
population figures of these villages are not available. Am I to 
understand that there is no census figures for Cooch-Behar ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have not seen it. 

Shri Kamath: When does the Election Commission expect 
to receive reports about the claims and objections filed from 
these villages ? Has any report been called for at all ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: In the ordinary course, I do not think so 
because this is a matter entirely to be left to be disposed of by 
persons who are appointed to adjudicate claims in this matter. 

Shri S. C. Samanta: Due to the sparseness of the 
population in Cooch-Behar, will Government consider relaxing 
the rules in respect of polling stations in the coming elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: All these considerations will be borne in 
mind. 


( 29 ) 

‘ELECTORAL ROLLS 

3361. Shri Kamath : Will the Minister of Law be pleased to 

State : — 

(a) whether reports have been received or called for from 
each of the Part ‘A’, Part ‘B’ and Part ‘C’ States as to the 
number of claims and objections filed in respect of electoral 
rolls in each State; 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 21st April 1951, p. 3439. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1036 


1036 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) if so, the total number of claims and objections filed in 
each State; 

(c) the number of such claims and objections disposed of 
so far ; and 

(d) the number allowed, and the number disallowed ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) to (d) The 

information is being collected by the Election Commission and 
will be laid on the Table in due course. 

Shri Kamath: Is the last date for the filling of objections 
the same in all the states or is it different ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot say. I must have notice of that 
question. 

Shri Kamath : When will the information about claims and 
objections be received in the Election Commissioner’s Office ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think there will be any undue 
delay in this matter. 

( 30 ) 

* MANUFACTURE OF BALLOT BOXES 

3355. Shri R. C. Upadhyaya (on behalf of Shri 
Kishorimohan Tripathi): (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to State what progress has so far been made by different 
States in the matter of manufacturing ballot boxes and the 
printing of ballot-papers for the purposes of General Elections ? 

(b) Are these going to be of a uniform type throughout India ? 

(c) Has sufficient care been taken in the making of the ballot 
boxes and the printing of the ballot-papers to see that ignorant 
and illiterate voters can vote freely according to their choice ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Orders for the 
manufacture of ballot boxes have been placed, in consultation 
with the Election Commission, by all the States except West 
Bengal, Bihar and Rajasthan. Information about these three 
States is awaited. Ballot papers for the whole of India are 
being printed centrally at the Security Printing Press, Nasik. 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 21st April 1951, p. 3444. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1037 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1037 

(b) The ballot boxes are all of designs approved by the 
Election Commission and are more or less of a uniform type, 
except for variations in locking arrangements. Ballot papers 
are of a uniform type. 

(c) Yes, the ballot boxes will be printed in two colours, 
one colour to be used for elections to the House of the People 
and the other for elections to the State Legislative Assembly. 
The ballot papers also will be similarly distinguishable. Each 
candidate will have a ballot box allotted to him at each 
polling booth, and the boxes of different candidates will be 
identified by means of labels pasted thereon bearing familiar 
and easily distinguishable symbols, such as flower, hut, tree, 
human hand, plough, elephant, etc., Each candidate will have 
a symbol allotted to him. These arrangements will make it 
easy for illiterate voters to cast their votes freely. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya: May I know if the Government 
have procured steel for the purpose of manufacture of ballot- 
boxes ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. How can the boxes be manufactured 
without steel ? 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : How many days ahead of the elections 
will be symbols be known to the electorates ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose the symbol will be allotted on 
the day the scrutiny is complete and the nomination paper 
is finally accepted. It is for the candidate to advertise what 
his simbol is among his voters. 

Shri J. N. Hazarika: May I know the basis on which 
the number of ballot boxes required for election purposes has 
been ascertained, and in so ascertaining whether geographical 
considerations have also been borne in mind ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It depends upon the number of voters, 
the capacity of the polling booth etc. I have got here figures 
as to the number of ballot boxes each State has requisitioned 
for the purpose of conducting the elections. It is a long list. 

An. hon. Member: He wants for Assam. 

Dr. Ambedkar: For Assam the total number of ballot 
boxes are 50,000. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1038 


1038 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think it need be read. The Question 
Hour is over. 


( 31 ) 

‘DISSOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT 

3476. Shri Sonawane : (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to State whether there is a proposal before Government 
for the dissolution of Parliament in view of the ensuing general 
elections in November-December 1951? 

(b) If so, when will Parliament be dissolved, whether before 
or after the results of elections are known ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) and (b) The 

attention of the hon. Member is drawn to article 379(1) of 
the Constitution. By virtue of this article, this provisional 
Parliament have been duly constituted and summoned to meet 
for the first session. Accordingly, there will be no dissolution 
of this Parliament before the general elections take place in 
November-December next, or even after the results of those 
elections are announced. It will automatically cease to function 
as soon as the new Houses of Parliament have been summoned 
to meet for first session. 


( 32 ) 

“ELECTORAL POLLS 

3611. Shri Kishorimohan Tripathi : (a) Will the Minister 
of Law be pleased to State whether sufficient arrangement 
has been made to meet all possible demands of electoral rolls 
during the coming elections ; 

(b) Is there any estimate of such demands and if so, what 
is its basis ; 

(c) What will the electoral rolls cost approximately for 
candidates contesting for (i) House of People seat; (ii) Council of 
States seat; and (iii) a seat in either House of State Legislature ? 

*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 25th April 1951, p. 3556. 

**bid„ 28th April 1951, p. 3702. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1039 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1039 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) Yes. 

(b) While it is not possible to make any precise estimate 
as to the probable demand for copies of the electoral 
rolls, arrangements have been made to ensure that every 
duly nominated candidate and every organised party in a 
constituency will be able to obtain a copy. 

(c) The information is being collected by the Election 
Commission and will be laid on the Table of the House in 
due course. 


( 33 ) 

‘WEST BENGAL LEGISLATURE (VACANCIES) 

3845. Shri Chattopadhyaya: Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to State — 

(a) how many seats in West Bengal Legislature were lying 
vacant . for more than a year in 1950-51; 

(b) for how many of them no elections have been held as yet; 

(c) whether they will be filled up before the coming general 
election; and 

(d) the reason for their lying vacant so long ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (While the 
Government of India as such are not concerned with the filling 
of casual vacancies in the State Legislatures, the following 
information has been obtained from the Election Commission: — 

(a) Seven, 

(b) Two 

(c) It is expected that bye-elections to fill the remaining 
two seats will be held very soon. 

(d) The delay in filling these vacancies is stated to be due 
to the uncertainty which existed for some time in regard to the 
term of the present West Bengal Legislative Assembly owing 
firstly to the proposed re-constitution of that Assembly and 
secondly to the earlier decision to hold the general elections 
in April-May, 1951. 


*P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 5th May 1951, p. 3931. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1040 


1040 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Chattopadhyay: Am I to understand, then, that 
the Central Government has got no responsibility to see that 
vacancies in the State Legislatures are filled up without any 
delay ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No. there is no responsibility. It is entirely 
a matter for the Provincial Government and the Rajpramukh 
or Governor. 

Shri Chattopadhyay : Of these constituencies lying vacant 
for more than a year, may I know how many are general 
constituencies and how many trade union constituencies ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid I have no information. 

Dr. M. M. Das: May I know whether it is a fact that 
during the last two months, four bye-elections have been held 
in West Bengal ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I can say nothing on the subject; I have 
no information, as I said. 

Prof. S. L. Saksena: Is the Hon. Minister aware that 
in the U. P. also there are seats which are vacant for more 
than a year ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order, the Hon. Minister has already 
said that he has no responsibility. Next question. 


( 34 ) 

♦GENERAL ELECTIONS IN MADRAS 

3866. Shri P. Basi Reddi: (a) Will the Minister of Law 
be pleased to State whether it is a fact that the Madras 
Legislative Council has by a resolution requested Government 
to hold the General elections in that State not earlier than 
February 1952 ? ‘ 

(b) If so, what action has Government taken in the matter ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Yes. 

(b) Government do not consider that the reasons urged 
in the Madras Legislative Council in passing the resolution 
are sufficiently weightly to warrant the postponement of the 
elections in that State to February, 1952. 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part I, 5th May 1951, p. 3955. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1041 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1041 

Shri P. Basi Reddi: Have any other State Governments 
made similar requests; if so, what are those Governments ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: None. 

Shri Kesava Rao : May I know whether Government is 
aware that November and December are rainy months in 
Madras and it is not possible to hold elections at that time ? 

Mr. Speaker: They are supposed to be aware of it. 

Seth Govind Das: Will the Hon. Minisater be pleased to 
assure us that the general elections will be held all over the 
country before 31st December, 1951 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is the intention of the Government. 

Shri J. N. Hazarika: In order to give opportunities to the 
cultivators to participate fully in the first National General 
Election, will Government not allow the elections to take place 
after the paddy harvesting season which is in January and 
February in certain States including Assam ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Government has fixed a period of two 
months. Within that period any State is free to choose any 
period it likes. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad: Has the attention of 
Government been drawn to the news published in the morning 
papers that elections would be held in February next ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have read it, but I am not responsible 
for that news. 

Shri P. Basi Reddi : Have any other State Governments 
made similar request; if so, what are they ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have already answered that. My answer 
was ‘No’. 

Shri Venkataraman: Has the Mysore Government made 
a similar recommendation like Madras that the elections may 
be held in February or March ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: No such information has come to my notice. 

Shri Dwivedi: In view of the fact that the delimitation of 
constituencies in certain States is still under the consideration 
of this House, may I know whether elections in those States 
will be held by the time they are held in other States ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1042 


1042 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: They will be settled in sufficient time to 
enable the elections to take place in the period prescribed. 


( 35 ) 

♦GENERAL ELECTIONS 

4553. Shri Sidhva: (a) Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state whether besides the Government of Madras, it is a 
fact that the Orissa Government has suggested to the Union 
Government that the General Elections should be held in 
January-February, 1952 ? 

(b) If so, what reply has been sent by the Union Government 
to the Orissa Government ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (b) A 

communication was received by the Election Commission from 
the Orissa Government pointing out certain difficulties in fixing 
a common period of polling for all the districts in that State 
within the months of November-December, 1951 and suggesting 
that from this point of view January-February might be more 
suitable. The State Government had however expressed their 
willingness to adhere to the November-December time-table, 
provided polling could be held in some parts of the State in 
the latter half of November and in the remaining parts from 
10th to 22nd December, 1951. The Election Commission has 
replied to the State Government that the programme for polling 
can in no circumstances be allowed to go beyond December, 
1951 and that the Commission has no objection to the polling 
being spread over November-December as proposed though 
efforts should be made to reduce the total period of polling 
to four weeks if possible. 

Shri Sidhva: As definite months have been fixed by the 
Government, may I know whether there is any likelihood of 
a change in those months ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: As at present situated there is no likelihood 
of change but I cannot say what may happen in the future. 

Mr. Speaker: I may say the question to confined is Orissa. 


*P. D., Vol. 8, Part I, 26th May 1951, p. 4684. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1043 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1043 

Seth Govind Das: Is ft a fact that in view of the 
information being received from Orissa and other places 
as also in view of the preparations of elections that are 
going on at present, the Hon. Minister has expressed 
the opinion that it is impossible to hold elections before 
January- February, and further if it is not a fact, then will 
the Hon. Minister make a clear statement that there is not 
the least likelihood of the election being postponed beyond 
31st December, 1951 ? 

Mr. Speaker: That is what he just said. 

Seth Govind Das: I just wanted to know whether it 
was a fact that the Hon. Minister himself had expressed 
this opinion before many responsible persons that 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order. No argument on that point. 

Shri Biswanath Das: May I know whether the 
Government are aware of the fact that the monsoons are 
active there in the months of November-December ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose the Election Commission has 
taken everything into account in fixing the time-table. 


( 36 ) 

‘REGIONAL COMMISSIONERS 

4565. Shri Kamath: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state: 

(a) Whether Regional Commissioners to assist the Election 
Commission are proposed to be appointed in accordance with 
Article 324 (4) of the Constitution; and 

(b) If so, how many and by what date ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Yes. 

(b) Four. No decision has yet been taken as to the date 
from which they are to be appointed. 


* P. D., Vol. 8, Part I, 26th May 1951, p. 4702. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1044 


1044 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 37 ) 

* FIXING OF ELECTION DATES 

93. Shri Kamath : Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(a) Whether Government have decided upon a date 
or dates for the holding of elections to the House of the 
People and the State Legislative Assemblies; 

(b) If so, what that decision is, and between winch 
dates polling will be held in each of the States; 

(c) By what date the final results are expected to be 
declared with regard to the House of the People as well 
as the various State Legislative Assemblies; and 

(d) When it is proposed to constitute the Council of 
States at the Centre and Legislative Councils in the States, 
and to elect the President of the Indian Union ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Yes. 

(b) Polling is scheduled to begin on or about the 3rd 
January and end by the 24th January, 1952, subject to such 
minor adjustments of the dates as might be necessary to meet 
exceptional difficulties that might exist in certain areas. In 
Himachal Pradesh, in parts of Kangra district in Punjab and, 
possibly in the high attitude regions of Uttar Pradesh, the 
polling may have to be finished by the end of October this 
year, since later on these, areas will get snow-bound. 

(c) The Election Commission has proposed the 15th 
February 1952 as the date by which the declaration of results 
is to be completed. 

(d) While it is not possible to say precisely at this stage 
when the Council of States and the State Legislative Councils 
will be constituted, it is expected that on the basis of the 
programme outlined above, it should be possible to constitute 
these Houses by about the end of March 1952. The election 
of the President will take place immediately after the due 
constitution of the two Houses of Parliament and the State 
Legislative Assemblies. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 9th August 1951, p. 116. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1045 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1045 

( 38 ) 

‘DATES OF GENERAL ELECTION IN STATES 

114. Shri J. N. Hazarika: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state: 

(a) Whether the States have fixed the dates, for the next 
General Elections, in their respective States, if so, which are 
such States and the dates fixed by them; and 

(b) Whether the constituencies have been called to elect 
their representatives to Parliament and State Assemblies ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) No, Sir. The 
Election Commission has addressed the State Governments 
on the subject. 

(b) No. 

Shrimati Durgabai: Has the attention of the Hon. 
Minister been drawn to the recent broadcast talk by the Chief 
Election Commissioner to the effect that nearly 25 lakhs of 
women voters are disqualified; if so, may I know whether 
opportunities will be taken of the postponement to qualify 
the disqualified women voters ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It does not arise out of this question. This 
question relates to the dates of election and not to electoral 
rolls. 

Shri Kamath : In view of the fact that polling in Himachal 
Pradesh will take place by the end of October, has Government 
already announced the exact date of polling so as to enable the 
voters as well as the candidates to get on with their work ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no doubt about it that Government 
will take all the necessary steps. 

Shri Kamath: Has Government any idea as to when the 
First Session of the new Parliament is likely to be convened ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, it could not be convened unless all 
the preliminary stages have been gone through. 


* P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 9th August 1951, p. 117. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1046 


1046 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Durgabai: May I know whether the women of 
Rajasthan have sent a memorandum in regard to the electoral 
rolls ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It does not arise out of this. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: It does arise because the question 
relates to the dates of the election. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is a very important matter, of 
course. But unfortunatly it does not relate to this question. 

Seth Govind Das : The Hon. Minister was pleased to state 
the date of the polling, but are the Government preparing a 
complete scheme for the preliminary work that has to be done 
in connection with polling e.g., nomination and other things 
and, if so, when will the dates for nomination, scrutiny and 
polling be made known ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is already set out in the People’s 
Representation Act. 

Shri Sondhi : In view of the fact that simultaneous voting 
will have to take place both for the State Legislature and the 
House of the People, will it be necessary to have at least seven 
constituencies of the State to complete one for the House of 
the People in Kangra district in Punjab ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Whatever is necessary will have to be 
done. Government certainly will not tolerate any irregularity 
with regard to elections. 

Shri Sondhi: There are five plains seats and two hills 
seats. I want to know whether elections will be for seven or 
only two ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: These are governed by rules; I think 
exceptions will be made when circumstances justify. 

Shri Sondhi: I want to know because polling is going to 
take place shortly. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister may not carry 
with him details with respect to every single constituency. 
Hon. Members will therefore appreciate the difficulty. 

Shri Sondhi: Because the time now left is only two months. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1047 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1047 

Shri Sonawane : Will elections in a particular State be 
over a day, or will they be spread out over several days ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It depends upon the available 
administrative machinery. If the State has got sufficient 
machinery to complete all the elections in a single day, 
certainly the State will do it. Otherwise Government is quite 
prepared to spread the elections over a certain period in order 
to enable them to cope with the difficulties. 

Shri Kamath: Arising out of answers to parts (a) and (b) of 
the question, have Regional Commissioners been appointed in 
the other parts of India and have the State Government been 
asked to assist the Regional Commissioners in ‘ going ahead’ 
with arrangements for polling and other cognate matters ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The question of appointment of Regional 
Commissioners is under consideration. It is expected there 
will be Regional Commissioners. 

Shri Kamath: Have the final electoral rolls been published ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot give an off-hand answer. Certainly 
they will be printed in due course. 

Shri Dwivedi: In view of the fact that Ministers of States 
and Home Affairs have accepted the principle that certain 
Part C States will have legislatures. I want to know whether 
the elections for the legislatures in Part C States will be held 
simultaneously with the General Elections. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I cannot say what the provisions of the 
Bill are. 

Shrimati Ammu Swaminadhan : May I ask the Hon. 

Minister what are the dates which are fixed for polling in 
Rajasthan ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot give an answer to that. 

Shri Kamath: By what date will the rules under the 
Electoral Bill be finalised and notified ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Next question. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is expected that they would be finalised 
by the end of this month. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1048 


1048 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am afraid hon. Members go on 
putting questions and Hon. Ministers go on giving answers. 
I have called the next question; the Hon. Minister need not 
have answered. 

Shri Kamath: I did not hear you, Sir. 


( 39 ) 

‘SYMBOLS FOR POLITICAL PARTIES 

115. Shri S. N. Das: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state: 

(a) The names of political parties which were invited by 
the Election Commission to consider allotment of symbols to 
different parties in the coming General Elections; 

(b) On what basis these parties were invited; 

(c) Before inviting these parties whether any effort was 
made to as certaina as to which of the political parties were 
going to contest the elections ; and 

(d) Whether any decision has been taken regarding 
allotment of symbols ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) (1) Indian 
National Congress. 

(2) All Indian Forward Block (Ruikar Group). 

(3) All India Forward Block (Marxist Group Party of 
Workers and Peasants of India). 

(4) Akhil Bharat Hindu Mahasabha. 

(5) Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party. 

(6) Akhil Bharatiya Ram Rajya Parishad. 

(7) Socialist Party. 

(8) All India Scheduled Castes’ Federation. 

(b) and (c) Such of the parties as, in the opinion of the 
Election Commission, actually function in all the States or 


* P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 9th August 1951, p. 133. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1049 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1049 

most of the States and are expected to set up candidates 
therein, were invited to the conference. 

(d) Symbols have been allotted by the Election Commission 
as follows : 

(1) All-India Forward Block (Marxist Group) — Standing 
Lion. 

(2) All-India Forward Block (Ruikar Group) — Human Hand. 

(3) Akhil Bharat Hindu Mahasabha — Horse and Rider. 

(4) Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party — Hut. 

(5) Akhil Bharatiya Ram Rajya Parishad — Rising Sun. 

(6) All-India Scheduled Castes’ Federation — Elephant. 

An early decision is expected to be taken regarding the 
symbols to be assigned to the Indian National Congress and 
the Socialist Party of India. 

The Communist Party of India also has selected two symbols 
and informed the Election Commission of them. These are 
being considered by the Commission. 


( 40 ) 

"ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR GENERAL ELECTIONS 

20. Dr. M. V. Gangadhara Siva : (a) Will the Minister 
of Law be pleased to state by which date the preliminary 
electoral rolls are likely to be finalised in various parts of 
the country ? 

(b) What time is likely to be taken in the printing of the 
final electoral rolls and is it proposed to print them in India 
or outside ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The electoral 
rolls are expected to be finally published by the end of this 
month. 

(b) The rolls are not to be reprinted before final publication. 
Only addenda and corrigenda necessitated by claims and 
objections will be printed and added to the preliminary rolls. 
No printing has been or will be done outside India. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 9th August 1951, p. 149. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1050 


1050 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(41) 

‘WOMEN VOTERS AND ELECTORAL ROLLS 

24. Shri S. N. Das: (a) Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state the total number of entries made for women voters 
which were subsequently removed according to the instructions 
issued by the Government of India on the ground that they 
did not bear the proper name of women voters — giving state- 
wise figures ? 

(b) Is it a fact that these entries were made by the 
enumerators without asking the names from those for whom 
these entries were made? 

(c) Is it a fact that a large number of representations have 
been received by Government to revise the electoral rolls with 
a view to include the names of large number of such women 
voters ? 

(d) If so, have Government considered those representations 
and come to any decision ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) to (d) The 

attention of the hon. Member is invited to the reply to starred 
question No. 120 given on 9th August 1951. 


(42) 

“CENTRAL GRANTS FOR BACKWARD CLASSES 

322. Shri Kshudiram Mahata : Will the Minister of 
Education be pleased to state the amount of Central grants 
in the year 1948, 1949, 1950 and 1951 sanctioned for the 
education of backward classes other than scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Under the 
Government of India scheme of scholarships to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes, 
scholarships are awarded to suitable Backward Classes 
candidates for their post-matriculation education in India. 
The expenditure incurred so far on award of scholarships to 

*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 9th August 1951, p. 151. 

**Ibid., p. 400. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1051 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1051 

Backward Classes other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes is as under: — 

1948- 49 ... ... Rs. Nil. 

1949- 50 ... ... 2,46,327 

1950- 51 ... ... 3,57,504 

In the year 1951-52, scholarships of the total value of 
Rs. 3,65,000 are likely to be awarded to Backward Classes 
candidates. 

Shri Kshudiram Mahata: May I know whether any 
provincial allocations is made of the total sum before 
considering any particular application and, if so, on what basis ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not suppose that there is any 
provincial allocation. 

Shri Rudrappa: May I know the number of applications 
in 1949-50 and 1950-51 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The figures are as follows : — 

1949- 50. — Applications received 3006. Awards made 349. 

1950- 51. — Applications received 3830. Awards made 517 

Shri Rathnaswamy: What is the method adopted by 
Government to see that the grants given for the benefit of 
these backward classes are properly spent by the States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The money is not awarded to the States. 
The applications are disposed of by a Central Board. The 
States do not intervene at all. 

Thakur Krishna Singh: May I know whether any lists 
of the backward classe in the merged States and Part B and 
Part C States have been prepared by the State Government 
concerned and is it not a fact that applications for scholarships 
presented by the students from these areas are not taken up 
because there is no such list ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is the list all right. These lists are 
made on the recommendations made by the various States. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: May I know when the lists of the 
backward classes were last revised ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1052 


1052 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I require notice. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Has any attempt been made to find out 
the population of these backward classes State-wise ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: At the moment, the question of population 
is quite unimportant. 

Dr. Deshmukh : May I know if it is not a fact that the 
number of backward classes included in the Schedule of each 
State varies very considerably and that so far as Part C States 
are concerned the number of classes included are very fes ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is quite possible, because a community 
which may be backward in one area may not be backward 
in another area. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Is it not a fact that Part C States are 
more backward than the rest of India ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is probably an aspersion which they 
would not like. 

Thakur Krishna Sinh : Is it not a fact that the revised 
list was prepared before the Unions were formed and before 
the States were merged into the Provinces ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That may be so, but how does it affect 
the issue ? These lists are not hard and fast. They are revised 
every time. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta: Is it not a fact that before 
these scholarships are awarded the amounts are allocated to 
different States on population basis and the distribution of 
the scholarships is also done through the States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far as I understand, that is not the 
case. 


(43) 

^GRANTS FOR PROMOTING NATIONAL LANGUAGE 

323. Shri Kesava Rao : (a) Will the Minister of Education 
be pleased to state the amount of money spent during 1949- 
50 and 1950-51 towards promoting the national language? 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 18th August 1951, p. 323. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1053 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1053 

(b) What are the private institutions and organisations 
which were given grant for this purpose ? 

(c) Have the Government of India set apart any amount 
towards grants to various non-Hindi speaking States ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Rs. 2,80,000 
during 1949-50 and Rs. 1,05,000 during 1950-51. 

(b) (i) Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad. 

(ii) Hindustani Cultural Society, Allahabad. 

(iii) Indara Talim-o-Tarraqi, Jamia Millia, Delhi, for post 
literacy Hindi literature. 

(iv) Akhil Bhartiya Hindi Parishad, New Delhi. 

(c) Government is opening a special Section in the Ministry 
for promoting the cause of Hindi in non-Hindi speaking 
States and also intends to establish a central organisation. 
In this connection the expenditure involved will be borne by 
Government. 

Shri Kesava Rao: Arising out of the answer to part 
(b) of the question, may I know whether any non-official 
organisations in non-Hindi speaking areas are given assistance 
by the Central Government ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The facts are as I have stated in the 
answer to part (b). 

Shri Kesava Rao : In answer to part (b), the Hon. Minister 
stated the names of certain organisations which are situated 
either at Allahabad or at Delhi. I want to know whether any 
organisations other than those in Hindi knowing areas are 
given any contribution by the Central Government. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know if there are any such 
oranisations outside the places mentioned, and if there are 
probably they are too weak to carry on this sort of work. 

Shri Kesava Rao: May I know whether the Government 
has got any idea of the extra expenditure incurred by the 
non-Hindi-speaking areas in connection with the promotion 
of Hindi in those areas ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: They might be doing it. There are State 
Governments which are very enthusiastic about the subject 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1054 


1054 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and they spend more money. There are others which are less 
enthusiastic and they spend less. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Minister has already 
said that the Government is considering the desirability of 
opening institutions and recognising them and having a central 
institution also for non-Hindi- speaking areas. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: Has the amount set apart for 
distribution to non-Hindi States been distributed already and 
if so, what is the amount allotted to Assam ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not know that this has been done. I 
cannot give any information on the subject now. 

Shri A. C. Guha: In view of the fact that the four 
institutions whose names the Hon. Minister has given as 
receiving subsidies are situated either in Allahabad or in 
Delhi, may we know what are their functions and what is the 
purpose behind the grant of subsidies to these institutions ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because we want to spread Hindi and 
they have branches all over India. 

Shri A. C. Guha: Have they branches all over India ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : One can draw a legitimate inference that 
they have branches all over India. Otherwise they would not 
be given any subsidy. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai: What is the amount given to the 
Hindi Sahitya Sammelan during 1949-50 and 1950-51? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have not got the break-up figures. 

Seth Govind Das: Why has the expenditure incurred 
on this account this year been less as compared to the year 
1949-50 ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because Hindi has spread very much. 

Seth Govind Das : What is the difference between the 
amounts granted to the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan and the 
Jamia Milla rspectively ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: As I said, on the basis of the figures which 
I have before me I am unable to make any such comparison. 
I have given totals. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1055 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1055 

Seth Govind Das: Has the Government any information 
regarding the activities of those institutions and organisations 
which are being given the grants for the propogation of Hindi: 
and do the Government receive any yearly, half yearly or 
quarterly reports in this connection ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think my hon. friend may legitimately 
presume that Government must be informed on this subject 
before making this contribution. 

Shri Kesava Rao: May I know if any non-Hindi States 
have asked for a grant to promote Hindi in their States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose every Government is in the 
habit of asking for grants. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister is giving answers 
which can be inferred by the Hon. Members themselves. He is 
obviously not in a position to give detailed answers. Members 
may reserve their questions for the Hon. Minister in charge 
when he comes here. It is no use putting hypothetical questions 
and getting hypothetical answers. 

Seth Govind Das : I am not asking for details, but I 
am asking on a question of principle. Has the Government 
prepared any definite plan for the propagation of Hindi or 
is any such plan in the course of preparation, or is there no 
such plan at all ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I should like to leave this question to be 
answered by the Hon. Minister of Education. 


( 44 ) 

‘MODE OF VOTING AT GENERAL ELECTIONS 

455. Shri Alexander: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(а) whether Government have decided upon the mode of 
voting in the next General Elections; and 

(б) if so, what it is and what steps are taken to educate 
the common people on the same ? 


* P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 22nd August 1951, p. 553. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1056 


1056 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (b) . 

Under section 59 of the Representation of the People Act, 
1951, at every election where a poll is taken votes are to be 
given by ballot in such manner as may be prescribed by rules. 
These rules are at present under preparation. 

The Films Division of the Ministry of information and 
Broadcasting is bringing out an educational film shot depicting 
scenes illustrative of the actual casting of the ballot by 
voters into boxes with symbols of candidates. The symbols 
used in this film will not be included in the list of symbols 
ultimately approved by the Commission. Radio talks and 
election rehearsals have also been arranged for the education 
of the voters. 


( 45 ) 

"STATUTORY AND NON-STATUTORY BODIES 

447. Shri S. N. Das : Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(a) the number and names of statutory and non-statutory 
bodies of a permanent nature functioning under the 
administrative controls of his Ministry : giving the following 
information in each case : (i)the year of their constitution ; 

(ii) the recurring annual expenditure incurred by them; 

(Hi) the provision for the audit of their accounts : and 

(iv) the method of submission of the report of their 
activities.; 

(b) the number and names of such ad hoc Committes as 
were appointed by the Ministry since the 15th August 1947 
and which have finished their work; and 

(c) the number and names of ad hoc Committees which are 
still functioning, giving the date of their appointments and 
the time by which they are expected to finish their work ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) There is no 
non-statutory body of a permanent nature functioning under 
the administrative control of my Ministry, and the Income- 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 22nd August 1951, p. 554. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1057 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1057 

tax Appellate Tribunal is the only statutory body of a permanent 
nature so functioning. 

(i) It was constituted in the year 1941. 

(ii) The expenditure varies from year to year. The budget 
grant for the current year is Rs. 7,87,700. 

(iii) The accounts are audited by the Accountant General 
concerned. 

(iv) Monthly reports of disposal of appeals and applications 
by the different Benches of the Tribunal are received in the 
Ministry. In addition an annual administration report is also 
submitted by the Tribunal to the Ministry. Information relating 
to the Tribunal is incorporated in the Notes on the activities 
of the Ministry circulated annually to members of Parliament 
in connection with the demands for grants. 

(b) None. 

(c) None. 


( 46 ) 

‘ELECTIONS IN SNOW-CLAD AREAS OF PUNJAB 

83. Giani G. S. Mussafir: (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state whether it is a fact that the areas of Lahaul 
and Spiti in the Punjab remain snow-clad during most of the 
year round ? 

(b) If the answer to part (a) above be in the affirmative, 
what arrangement do Government propose to make for holding 
elections in that area simultaneously with the rest of the Union ? 

(c) If not, when do Government propose to hold elections 
in that area ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) to (c). From 
a recent report of the Punjab Government it appears that 
Spiti is usually snow-bound after August, and Lahaul, after 
October. The question whether elections in these two sparsely 
populated regions should be held earlier than January next, 
or if that is not practicable, what special arrangements 
should be made for holding the elections in January is being 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 22nd August 1951, p. 551. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1058 


1058 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

considered by the Election Commission in consultation with 
the Punjab Government. An announcement will be made as 
soon as a decision is reached. 


(47) 

‘MANUFACTURE OF BALLOT BOXES 

84. Shri A. B. Gurung: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to refer to starred question No. 2084 for 10th March 1951 
and state the names of firms, with whom the Government of 
India have placed orders for preparing ballot boxes for the 
ensuing general elections in Part C States ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The Chief 
Commissioners of all Part C States (except Manipur and 
Tripura) have placed orders for ballot boxes with Messrs 
Godrej and Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd., Bombay, and the Chief 
Commissioners of Manipur and Tripura have placed orders 
with Messrs. Bungo Steel Furniture Ltd., Calcutta. The orders 
have been placed with the approval both of the Government 
of India and of the Election Commission. 


(48) 

“HINDI TRANSLATION OF ACTS 

530. Shri Raj Kanwar: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state whether all the Acts passed since 15th August 1947 
have been translated into Hindi ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): No Sir. But out 
of 274 Central Acts passed between the 15th August 1947 
and the end of the Third Session of Parliament last June, 
113 have been translated into Hindi. 

Shri Raj Kanwar: When are the remaining Acts going 
to be translated into Hindi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am quite unable to commit myself. 

*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 22nd August 1951, p. 562. 

** Ibid., 27th August 1951, p. 659. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1059 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1059 

Seth Govind Das: Have the Government established any 
special section for that purpose and have some persons been 
appointed in order that all these Acts may be translated into 
Hindi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is a section in the Law Ministry 
consisting of Hindi translators who translate the most important 
Bills passed by Parliament. 

Seth Govind Das: Have all the Acts connected with the 
forthcoming elections been translated into Hindi, and if not, 
when is that work likely to be completed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot give a definite answer. So far as 
my information extends I think it is contemplated to translate 
those Acts into Hindi. 

Shri Sondhi: Will they be done before the General Elections ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I believe so. 

Shri Jnani Ram: May I know if the People’s Representation 
Acts have been translated into Hindi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think they are under translation. 

Shri A. C. Guha : Have the Government any idea of 
translating these Acts into other Indian languages as well ? 

Shri Raj Kanwar: Normally how long after the publication 
of an Act in English is the translation in Hindi available ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no such thing as normality in this. 

Shri Amolakh Chand: May I know if the People’s 
Representation Acts would be translated before the elections 
or after ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It depends upon the capacity of the different 
departments to undertake this task but I suppose my friend 
can assume that Government has sense to understand that no 
purpose would be served in translating them after the elections. 

Seth Govind Das: So far as the Acts relating to the elections 
are concerned, how many of them have been translated into Hindi, 
how many have been published and how many remain to be 
published and in what time are they expected to be published ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: My friend evidently is under the 
impression that there is an ocean of laws which deal with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1060 


1060 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

representation or elections. We have got only two small Acts 
and one of them is the People’s Representation Act. I have 
no doubt that 

Seth Govind Das: When there are only three Acts 
pertaining to the elections, one big and two small ones, why 
is so much time being taken in their translation ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because there are only about two 
translators. 

Seth Govind Das : Why don’t you increase their number 
then ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Because the Finance Minister would not 
give the sanction. 

Shri Kamath: So far as the translation of these various 
Acts into Hindi is concerned may, I know if the Government 
in the Law Ministry or in its Secretariat has standardised 
Hindi with a standard vocabulary and a standard dictionary 
of Hindi ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose standardisation of Hindi is 
something which has to come in the future, unless my friend 
wants that the Hindi which prevails in U.P. should be accepted 
as the standard. 

Shri Kamath: No, Madhya Pradesh. 

Giani G. S. Musafir: Will the Government keep it in 
mind that the translation should be in simple Hindi so that 
it may be comprehensible to all ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I think the Government will see to it. 

Seth Govind Das : May I suggest to the Hon. Minister that 
so far as the transaction of Acts is concerned, if permanent 
hands cannot be added to the section, at least some temporary 
hands may be engaged for the time being so that their 
translation may be expedited ? 

The Minister of State for Finance (Shri Tyagi): I 

should like to have notice for consideration of this suggestion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 

( 49 ) 

*MOCK ELECTIONS 

532. Shri Sidhva: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(a) whether the Election Commissioner has held mock 
elections at certain places; 

(b) If so, the places at which these were held and the 
number of voters who participated ; 

(c) how much time was taken in recording the votes; and 

(d) whether the Election Commissioner has formulated his 
plans for real elections on the basis of the time occupied by 
such mock elections ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) to (d). The 
Election Commission directed the various State Governments 
in May 1951, to hold mock elections under all the assumed 
conditions of polling in order to obtain actual data and 
experience in the conduct of the forthcoming elections as 
also to get an idea of the average time required in recording 
votes. The Commission has asked the State Governments for 
information as regards places where rehearsals have actually 
been held, and so far a report has been received only from 
Orissa. The experience gained at these mock elections is to 
be taken into account in planning the actual number and 
the location of the polling stations. The tentative proposals 
of the State Governments framed on the experience of these 
mock elections will be published for general information 
and thereafter finalised in consultation with the Election 
Commission in the light of the suggestions, if any, received 
from the public. 

Shri Sidhva: In that mock election how many votes were 
recorded in any one of the States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no information. 

Shri Sidhva: What was the opinion of the Election 
Commissioner regarding the voting by illiterate persons ? Was 
it very successful ? 


1061 

1061 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 27th August 1951, p. 664. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1062 


1062 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: There is no question of literacy or illiteracy. 
There was no question of marking in that. 

Shri Sidhva: Even then what was the general impression 
of the Commissioner regarding the mock election ? Does he 
feel 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid he has not given me the 
impression he has formed, 

Seth Govind Das : The Hon. Minister has just stated 
that so far a report from Orissa only has been received and 
that reports from other Provinces have not been received yet. 
Have the Government fixed any date by which these mock 
elections should be held in the States and reports submitted 
to the Government of India ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I don’t think this is a matter in which the 
Government could assume or arrogate to itself the authority 
of issuing a directive. 

Seth Govind Das: No, Sir, it is not a question of authority 

Shri Bhatt: Will the Hon. Minister please tell whether the 
mock elections that were held were for the State Legislative 
Assemblies and the House of the People both together ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I believe so. 

Shri Chattopadhyaya: Was any such mock election held 
in any of the Centrally Administered Areas and, if so, why 
has no report been received? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have really no information as to in what 
States and whether in Centrally Administered Areas they 
were held, but I am sure they must have been. 

Shri Kamath : Did these mock elections include mock 
candidates and mock officers also ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose they had scare-crows. 

Shri R. Velayudhan: From the impression gained from 
this rehearsal of mock election, will the next general election 
also be a mock election ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Very likely. 

Shri Sidhva: May I know the total number of voters who 
participated in this mock election? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1063 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1063 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no information. 


( 50 ) 

‘OBJECTIONS TO ELECTORAL ROLLS 

534. Shri Kamath: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state: 

(a) The total number of claims and objections filed in 
respect of the preliminary electoral rolls in each of the Part 
“A”, Part “B” and Part “C” States ; 

(b) the number disposed of so far in each State; and 

(c) the number of claims and objections allowed so far in 
each State ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Abedkar): (a) to (c). A 
statement showing the position with regard to the number of 
claims and objections received and disposed of in the various 
States as on 1st August 1951, is laid on the Table of the 
House. (See Appendix IV, Annexure No. 17.) 

Shri Kamath : The statement laid on the Table shows, 
Sir, that in Hyderabad also 4,284 women voters were disen- 
franchised. Were they disenfranchised for the same reasons 
as women in Rajasthan were disenfranchised or for different 
reasons ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid I must have notice of the 
question. 

Shri Kamath : Is it a fact that the disenfranchised women 
of Rajasthan or their organisations, or their representatives 
have recently made a representation to the Government for 
getting their disenfranchisement removed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes, they have. 

Shri Kamath: Is that representation of theirs under active 
consideration ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are considering it but we are not 
quite certain whether we can give any relief. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 27th August 1951, p. 667. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1064 


1064 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Kamath: When, Sir, are the final electoral rolls 
likely to be published ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose pretty soon — I have not got 
the exact date. 

Shri Kamath: No date has been fixed so far ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, it certainly will be pretty soon. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Will Government take steps 
to see that relief is given to the disenfranchised women in 
Rajasthan? 

Dr. Ambedkar: The question of the relief really depends 
upon whether we can finish the registration of these women on 
the electoral rolls, allow sufficient time for raising objections 
and for the disposal of objections so that the electoral rolls 
could be finalised before the date of election. All these things 
hang together. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: Considering that it is due to 
no fault on their part and that the enumerators were not 
instructed properly either, does not Government think it 
necessary to take steps to see that this defect is remedied 
and those women are enlisted as voters ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, I am afraid we are not discussing 
who is at fault — we are discussing what the fact is. , 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya: Is it a fact that the Prime Minister 
has assured that delegation of women from Rajasthan that 
something will be done in that direction ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sure about it that the Prime 
Minister’s assurance must be subject to the law of the land. 

Shri Kamath: Did, Sir, the Election Commission receive 
complaints that in certain areas, in certain States even dead 
persons were brought on the preliminary rolls ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It does happen — I am sure about it. 

Shri Kamath: It did happen ? 

Shri Sondhi : Mr. Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact 
that the Prime Minister is here in the House would it not be 
better if he made a statement in this behalf? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1065 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1065 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): My 

colleague, the Law Minister has made it quite clear that 
neither I nor any other member of the Government can give 
an assurance against the law — it is obvious. In this matter I 
have taken very particular care not to interfere in any way 
with the discretion of the Election Commissioner. All I have 
done is if anybody has come to me I have sent him on, or 
sent her on, to the Election Commissioner. I have certainly, 
when this matter came before me, expressed my sympathy 
with the fact that a large number of women voters have been 
left out and I think the whole House will feel that way; the 
Electtion Commissioner himself wants to put them in subject 
to the law. How that is to be done is entirely a matter for 
the Election Commissioner. All sympathy was there but the 
only assurance I gave was of my sympathy but not of how 
it is to be done. 

Shri Kamath: As regards the electoral rolls, has the Prime 
Minister received a deputation from only Rajasthan women 
or from anyone else also ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: So far as I can remember 
they were only from Rajasthan — there may be one or two 
sympathisers with them from other States. 

Seth Govind Das: So far as law is concerned, it is not 
unchangeable. Changes always occur in the law. Then, is it 
not possible to do something to include these women in the 
lists for there is still time for the elections to take place ? 
The measure relating to Part C States has come up and the 
present session of Parliament is also going to continue for 
some time. Is not then some arrangement possible to remove 
these difficulties ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I would like to tell my hon. friend that 
it would require exactly not less than two months if relief is 
to be given from now. That means the election will have to 
be postponed. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya: Cannot the Government amend 
by proper legislation the mention of Mrs. so-and-so in the 
electoral rolls? 

The Minister of State for Finance (Shri Tyagi): 

Husband’s name cannot be amended. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1066 


1066 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya: Not husband’s name but 

Dr. Ambedkar: The procedure for registration has been 
laid down by the law and that procedure must be followed. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya: Cannot it be changed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Well, the law can be changed — it is in 
the hands of Parliament. I don’t know how long the law will 
take to be amended if it is placed before Parliament. 

An hon. Member: Five minutes. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: If the law is changed then these 
could be included in the voter’s list. Surely, that is the only 
possible way. Therefore, will Government consider placing a 
Bill before Parliament ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: It seems to me difficult to entertain a 
proposition that there should be one law for males and one 
law for females. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We are arguing this matter out. 
Next question. 


( 51 ) 

* ELECTION COMMISSIONERS IN STATES 

535. Shri Kamath: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state: 

(a) whether Regional Election Commissioners have been 
appointed and the requisite electoral machinery set up in 
each of the States ; and 

(b) if not, by what date, it is proposed to be constituted ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (6) So 

far, no Regional Election Commissioners have been appointed, 
but the question of appointing 3 or 4 such officers is under 
active consideration. I pressume that by the expression 
“requisite electoral machinery” the hon. Member means 
the various officers to be appointed in connection with the 
actual conduct of elections. The position is as follows. Steps 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 27th August 1951, p. 670. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1067 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1067 

have been tken by the Election Commission for formally 
appointing Electoral Registration Officers’, Returning Officers 
and Assistant Returning Officers for each constituency in all 
the States as soon as the modifications made by Parliament 
in the various Delimitation Orders are notified and the 
constituencies finally determined. The Returning Officers, after 
they are appointed, will appoint the Presiding and Polling 
Officers for each polling station. These latter appointments 
are expected to be completed by the end of November except 
that in areas, if any, where elections may have to be held in 
October they will be completed by the end of September, 1951. 

Shri Kamath: Has, Sir, any representation been received 
from any of the Part A or Part B State Governments to the 
effect that their law and order machinery or the other requisite 
machinery for polling and other purposes will not be able to 
cope with the huge work involved in the election and have 
they asked for any assistance in this regard so far as officers 
and others are concerned from the Centre ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no knowlede on this point. 


( 52 ) 

‘ELECTORAL ROLLS 

547. Shri Jnani Ram: Will the Minister of Law be pleased 
to state : 

(a) the States which have completed the work of publication 
of electoral rolls; and 

(b) the cost incurred by such States and the amount 
contributed by the Central Government ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The electoral 
rolls are expected to be finally published in all the States by 
the end of this month. 

(6) Until the work of final publication of the electoral rolls 
is completed, it is not possible to ascertain the exact cost 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 27th August 1951, p. 685. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1068 


1068 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

incurred by the State Government on this account and the 
Centre’s share thereof. I may however mention that during 
the last two financial years the amount contributed by the 
Government of India to Part A and Part B States as their 
half- share of the extra expenditure incurred by the latter on 
the preparation of electoral rolls was approximately 2 crores 
and 7 lakhs. 


( 53 ) 

*MOCK ELECTIONS 

575. Shri Bhatt: Will the Minister of Law be pleased to 
state : 

(а) at how many rural and urban places, Statewise, mock elections 
were held ; 

(б) how many voters at each place participated in the mock elections ; 

(c) whether there were separate booths for women; 

(i cL ) how much average time was taken by each voter to cast his vote 
in rural and urban polling booths respectively; 

(e) the percentage of votes cast; 

( f ) whether there was personation and challenged votes ; and 

( g ) whether women took more time than men to cast their votes in 
rural and urban areas ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) to ( g ) The 

information is being collected by the Election Commission and 
will be laid on the Table of the House in due course. 


( 54 ) 

* ARTICLE 171 (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION 

576. Shri Deogirikar: (a) Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state whether qualifications as equivalent to that of 
a graduate for electorates to elect members of the Legislative 
Council of a State as mentioned in Article 171(6) of the 
Constitution of India have been prescribed by or under any 
law made by Parliament ? 


* P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 27th August 1951, p. 698. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1069 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1069 

(6) If so, what are those qualifications ? 

(c) If not, when will such qualifications be prescribed ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The 

hon. Member’s attention is invited to section 27(5) of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, which authorises 
the State Governments to specify, with the concurrence of 
the Election Commission, the qualifications which shall be 
deemed to be equivalent to that of graduate of a University 
in India. 

(6) and (c) Notifications laying down the qualifications 
referred to above have been issued by the Governments of all 
the States which are to have Legislative Councils, namely, 
Bihar, Bombay, Madras, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal 
and Mysore. A copy each of these notifications is available 
in the Library of the House. 


( 55 ) 

‘MAPS OF CONSTITUENCIES 

748. Shri Raj Kanwar: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state whether Government intend to publish 
separately for each of the Part A, Part B and Part C States 
one or more maps showing the delimitation of constituencies 
as finally determined for purposes of General Elections ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The State 
Governments have been requested to prepare maps showing 
separately the Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies 
for each State as finally determined. 

Shri Raj Kanwar: When will these maps be available 
to the public ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: As soon as they are ready, I suppose. 

Shri Raj Kanwar: When is that going to be, Sir ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Before the Elections take place. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 4th September 1951, p. 941 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1070 


1070 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister, if he has got 
any more definite information, he may give the House. The 
House expects him to give a resonable period. 

Dr. Ambedkar : All I can say is to request my hon. friend 
to go and contact the Election Commissioner. His office will 
probably give all the information that he needs. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Hon. Minister is expected to 
be in touch with the Election Commissioner. It is his port- 
folio. There is no good generally giving such answers. The 
hon. Member can draw his own inferences. But, he expects 
that the Government will be able to say, within a month or 
two months and so on. All the three answers do not appear 
to be definite at all. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no information with me on the 
point. 

Prof. Ranga: Mr. Deputy Speaker, my objection is that 
any of the Hon. Ministers should get up and ask us to go 
to one of his subordinates and get the information is really 
derogatory to the dignity of the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think the Hon. Law Minister only 
meant that whether information could be had from official 
sources, they must exhaust all that before taking the time 
of the House with respect to such matters as are available. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am sure about it, that my hon. friend 
Prof. Ranga goes to officials on many other occasions without 
feeling any loss of dignity. 

Prof. Ranga: This sort of answer raises another 
controversy. We may or we may not go. But, it is not for 
the Minister to ask us when we ask for information that we 
should go to one of his subordinates and get that information, 
instead of himself getting the information. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Will the Hon. Ministers 
themselves not resent if Members went for information to the 
officers subordinate to them apart from the question of the 
dignity of Members ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1071 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1071 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I will pass on to another question. 
It is usual to refer to books and officers before coming to the 
House. 

Shri A. C. Guha : We have been issued a circular that we 
should not go and see the officers. How can the Hon. Minister 
ask us to go to an officer and get the information ? It is the 
function of the Minister to supply the information. 


( 56 ) 

‘TRIBAL CHRISTIANS AND GENERAL ELECTIONS 

770. Shri S. C. Samanta: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state : 

(a) whether tribal Christians (Adibasis) will be debarred 
from contesting the coming general elections from Scheduled 
tribes constituencies as Scheduled tribes candidates; and 

(b) if there be no bar, whether their elections will be 
questioned in and taken up as election disputes by the Election 
Tribunals ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The hon. 
Member is in effect asking me for an interpretation of the 
relevant legal provisions contained in the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
Order, 1950. A candidate for a seat reserved for the scheduled 
tribes in any State must be a member of a Scheduled tribes 
as listed in the Scheduled Tribes Order of the President. I 
cannot say whether the persons referred to in the question as 
“tribal Christians” are members of any scheduled tribe or not. 

As regards part ( b ) of the question the attention of the 
hon. Member is invited to section 100 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951, which contains the grounds on which 
an election may be called in question. In particular, he may 
see sub-section (2), clause (c). 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 4th September 1951, p. 972. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1072 


1072 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


^OFFICERS IN THE MINISTRY OF LAW 

227. Prof. K. T. Shah: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state: 


(a) the number of (i) Gazetted, and of (ii) non-Gazetted officers, 
clerks and Class IV servants in his secretariat, on: 

(i) 15th August 1947, (ii) 31st March 1948; (Hi) 31st March 
1949; (iv) 31st March 1950; ( v ) 31st March 1951; and 

( b ) the number of officers, clerks and Class IV servants, 
appointed temporarily in the first instance and subsequently (i) 
made permanent, (ii) retired or (Hi) retrenched, during each of 
the years 1947-48 (post-partition), 1948-49, 1949-50 and 1950-51 ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): The 

information asked for is not readily available. Its collection 
will involve a disproportionate expenditure of time and 
labour. 


**LIST OF POLLING STATIONS 

1069. Pandit Kunzru: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state : 


(a) whether the Election Commission has asked the Bombay 
State Government or the District Magistrates to prepare a list of 
the polling stations and issued instructions that the lists should 
not he shown to any party before they are finally approved : 

(b) whether the Bombay Government have in spite of the 
Election Commission’s instructions, issued orders to the District 
Magistrate of any districts that the preliminary lists should be 
shown to the Vice-Chairman of Rural Development Boards : 

(c) whether these Vice-Chairmen are members of District 
Congress Committees and in many cases their Chairmen ; and 

(d) If the answer to parts (a) and (b) above be in the 
affirmative, what action Government propose to take in the matter ? 




*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 12th Septembert 1951, p. 1270. 
**Ibid., 17th September 1951, p. 1273. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1073 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1073 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) No. The 

Election Commission did not issue instructions that the 
lists of polling stations should not be shown to any political 
party before final approval. On the contrary, the Commission 
suggested to the State Governments that their tentative plans 
regarding polling stations might be circulated to the different 
political parties, and also given as much publicity as possible. 
A copy of the Commission’s letter dated 26th May, 1951 to 
all State Governments is placed on the Table of the House 
for information. (See Appendix VII, Annexure No. 9). 

( b ) The Government of Bombay issued instructions to the 
Collectors that the tentative plans as approved by Government 
should be shown to the political parties and members of the 
public. These plans are being kept at the District Headquarters 
and Taluka Headquarters in that State for inspection, and 
the Collectors have been asked to consider carefully the 
suggestions or criticisms from the public. With a view to 
facilitating their work the Collectors, who are Chairmen 
of the Rural Development Boards, were also instructed by 
the Government of Bombay to show the plans to the Vice-. 
Chairmen of those Boards. 

(c) Some of the Vice-Chairmen of the Rural Development 
Boards in Bombay are members of District Congress 
Committees, and in a few cases their Chairmen. 

( d) Does not arise. 

Pandit Kunzra: May I ask whether as a matter of fact the 
preliminary lists of polling stations have been shown to other 
persons than the Vice-Chairmen of the Rural Development 
Boards in the Bombay State ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no such information. 

Pandit Kunzru: Why was it necessary then for the Bombay 
Government to ask the District Magistrates to show these 
preliminary lists of polling stations to the Vice-Chairmen of 
the Rural Development Boards if the instructions issued by 
the Election Commission were of a general character relating 
to all political parties ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That was probably because it was necessary 
to collect the organised opinion of the people in that area. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1074 


1074 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Is it a fact that the lists of 
the electors are arranged alphabetically for each constituency? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid I have not seen the electoral 
roll myself. Therefore, I cannot say. Probably, the hon. Member 
has more information. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhagava: Is it a fact that since 
there are no separate lists for each polling station, persons 
living in the area of a particular polling station will have to 
travel several miles before they will be able to vote in that 
constituency ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not think so. I think all people would 
be informed as to the number of voters who have to go to a 
particular polling station. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: All these lists are 
arranged alphabetically. This means that there will be no 
separate list for each polling station. Unless there is a separate 
list for each polling station, people will not know where they 
have to go and they will have to travel several miles. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am not aware that the voters’ lists are 
arranged alphabetically. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think they are arranged 
alphabetically and a list is hung in each polling station. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will make enquiries about it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Anyway, it does not arise out of 
this question. 

Pandit Kunzru: May I ask the Law Minister whether 
instructions of the kind issued by the Election Commission 
to the Bombay State have been issued in respect of other 
States also ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That letter was a general letter issued 
to all the States. 

Pandit Kunzru: Can he tell me whether these preliminary 
lists of polling stations have been shown to members of the 
political parties in the other States ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: My friend is assuming that there are 
political parties everywhere. If there are any political parties, 
I am sure the State Government will take steps to show the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1075 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1075 

lists to them in the same way as they are showing to the 
others. 

Pandit Kunzru: My hon. Friend cannot be such a 
simpleton as to believe that there is only one political party 
in the country. 

Dr. Ambedkar: The others are speculative perhaps. 


( 59 ) 

‘LEPROSY 

1074. Shri Sivan Pillay: Will the Minister of Health be 
pleased to state : 

(а) whether Government have got accurate statistics 
regarding persons affected with the disease of leprosy, state- 
wise; 

(б) if so, the State in India which has the highest percentage 
of the incidence of the disease in relation to population; and 

(c) the steps taken by Government to combat this dreadful 
disease ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : (a) and ( b ) As 

often stated before, no accurate statistics are available. 

(c) The matter is primarily the concern of State 
Governments. The Government of India have had for some 
time a plan to establish a Central Leprosy Teaching and 
Research Institute in the country whose objects it will be 
to undertake research into the problems relating to leprosy, 
to promote field studies for the application of the results of 
research, to train leprosy workers, to give technical advice 
and guidance for anti-leprosy work and to participate actively 
in the organisation and development of leprosy institutes in 
States. Financial stringency alone has kept the scheme from 
maturing. But voluntary bodies and some of the States are 
doing good work among sufferers from the disease. Research 
is also going on. 

Shri Sivan Pillay: May I know, whether Government are aware 
that a Central Leprosy Relief Committee has been formed by Gandhi 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 17th September 1951, p. 1378. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1076 


1076 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Smarak Nidhi ? In what way do Government propose to 
co-operate with it in the eradication of this scourge ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: Government is bound to co-operate in all 
possible ways it can. 

Shri Sivan Pillay: May I know whether there are no 
leprosy clinics at all, and if so which is that unfortunate State ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I can believe that there may be many 
States where there are no such clinics. 


( 60 ) 

*LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE 

1084. Shri Alexander : Will the Minister of Health be 
pleased to state ? 

(a) the financial aid given to the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College by the Government of India; 

(b) whether the Government of India are represented on 
its governing body and if so, by how many members; 

(6) whether this institution is intended to serve the whole 
of India; 

(d) whether any principle is observed in the matter of 
allocation of seats to the various States; and 

(e) the number of students admitted this year State-wise ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The grants 
paid to the Lady Hardinge Medical College vary from year 
to year. The grants paid during the last three years are as 
follows: 

1948- 49 ... Rs. 5,23,100 

1949- 50 ... Rs. 10,80,576 

1950- 51 ... Rs. 9,44,000 

(6) The Government of India as such are not represented 
on the Governing Body. Seven officials are, however, members 
of that Body. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 17th September 1951, p. 1388. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1077 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1077 

(c) Yes. 

(d) While every effort is made by the College authorities 
to admit students from as many States as possible provided 
the applicants are otherwise suitable, preference is given to 
the Centrally Administered Areas and those States where 
facilities for Medical education are limited. The question of the 
adequacy of the rules of admission to the College from the point 
of view of the maintenance of the All India character of the 
Institution is, however, engaging the attention of Government. 

( e ) A statement containing the required information is 
laid on the Table of the House. (See Appendix VII, Annexure 
No. 12). 

Shri Alexander: With reference to answer to part (a) may 
I know whether the Government have received any complaints 
against the administration of the College and if so, whether 
the Government propose to take over the administration of 
the College ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no information. 

Shri Kamath: Do not those seven officials mentioned by the 
Minister, represented the Government which has nominated 
them in the Committee ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I must have notice of the question. 

Shri Kamath: Has the Hon. Minister all the names of 
the officials, their designations or their ranks ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I must also have notice for this question. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad: May I know whether the 
Secretary of the Finance Ministry is a Member of this 
Committee in an individual capacity or in his official capacity ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I would like my hon. colleague to answer 
that question. 

The Minister of Finance (Shri C. D. Deshmukh): In 

his official capacity. 

Shri Kamath: Is it a fact that at no point of administration 
or the Committee’s work the Minister of Health comes into 
contact with this institution ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1078 


1078 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: She must be, I am sure. 

Shri Kamath: Government is not represented at all. He 
does not know. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I cannot say what is the original constitution 
of this body. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Next question, Mr. Guha. 


( 61 ) 

‘TRAINING OF MIDWIVES AND NURSES 

1081. Dr. M. V. Gangadhara Siva: (a) Will the Minister of 
Health be pleased to state the names of the institutions in Delhi 
maintained by Government and those which receive Government 
grant for training midwives, nurses and health visitors in Delhi ? 

(6) What is the number of students of each of these categories 
fixed for admission to these institutions ? 

(c) Is it a fact that more students than can be admitted in 
these institutions apply every year for admission ? 

(i d ) If so, how many approximately are refused admission ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and ( b ) A 

statement containing the required information is laid on the 
Table of the House (See Appendix VII, Annexure No. 13.) 

(c) Yes. 

( d ) The information is being collected and will be laid on the 
Table of the House in due course. 


( 62 ) 

“EMETINE 

1093. Shri Kamath: Will the Minister of Health be pleased 
to state : 

(a) what steps have been taken in the past and are being 
taken at present to cultivate in India Ipecacuanha plants, the 
roots of which yield Emetine, a specific for amoebic dysentery; 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 17th September 1951, p. 1403. 
**Ibid., p. 1405. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1079 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1079 

(■ b ) the incidence of amoebic dysentery in India; 

(c) the quantity and value of Emetine and Ipecac root 
imported annually into India and from which countries; 

(d) whether it is a fact that some work has been done 
in the direction of Ipecac cultivation in West Bengal by the 
Cinchona Directorate, if so, with what result; and 

(e) whether it is proposed to extend the existing West Bengal 
Ipecac plantations, and if so, what steps are contemplated ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) It is understood 
that difficulties attending its cultivation in India have so far 
deterred its being taken up on a commercial scale. The Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research is carrying on experimental 
cultivation of ipecacuanha and has included it in the co- 
ordinated scheme formulated by the Council for the cultivation 
of medicinal plants in Coimbatore, Panchagani and Darjeeling; 

(6) The incidence of emoebic dysentry is considered to be 
high particularly in the Eastern and Southern parts of India, 
namely, Madras and West Bengal. As the disease is not 
notifiable, no statistics are however maintained; 

(c) Statistics regarding the imports of Emetine Hydrocholoride 
and Ipecac root are not available; 

(d) and (e). The information has been called for from the 
Government of West Bengal and will be laid on the Table of 
the House in due course; 


( 63 ) 

* AYURVEDIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE 

1094. Dr. V. Subramaniam : (a) Will the Minister of Health 
be pleased to state whether the scheme for the establishment 
of an Ayurvedic Research Institute as per the recommendations 
of the Committee on indigenous systems of medicine (Pandit 
Committee) has been placed before the Standing Committee 
of Parliament for the Ministry of Health and the Standing 
Finance Committee ? 

(b) If so, what are their recommendations and has the 
scheme since been sanctioned ? 

*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 17th September 1951, p. 1406. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1080 


1080 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and ( b ) 

The scheme is under active consideration. It will be shortly 
placed for approval before the Standing Committee of 
Parliament for the Ministry of Health and the Standing 
Finance Committee. 


( 64 ) 

‘DIRECTORATE OP HOUSING 

259. Shri Kamath : Will the Minister of Health be 
pleased to state: 

(a) the date on which the Directorate of Housing was 
set up ; 

(b) the date on which it came to an end; 

(c) the nature and volume of work accomplished by the 
Directorate during this period; and 

( d ) what were the qualifications of the Director of 
Housing ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) and (6) 

No separate Directorate of Housing as such was set up. 
A Directorate of Housing with a skeletion personal staff 
was appointed with effect from the 4th October, 1948. The 
Director of Housing relinquished charge of his office on the 
1st July 1951. 

(c) The Director of Housing gave advice to the various 
Ministers of the Government of India, the State Governments 
and Local Bodies on questions relating to housing. Most of 
his time was however taken up with the construction and 
management of the Government Housing Factory. 

(d) The attention of the hon. Members is invited to the 
reply given to part (c) of his Starred Question No. 390 on 
the 7th December, 1949. 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 17th September 1951, p. 1413. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 

( 65 ) 

‘LEPERS 

1176. Dr. Deshmukh: (a) Will the Minister of health 
be pleased to refer to the answer given to starred question 
No. 1326 asked on the 8th April 1948, regarding lepers and 
leper-asylums in India and state whether Dr. Dharmendra 
who was deputed to U.S.A., U.K., South America and the 
Philippines has since returned ; 

(b) If so, what is the result of his tour; 

(c) What work is he doing at present; 

(d) Has the treatment of the lepers undergone any radical 
change since his return and if so, in what way; 

(e) What steps have been taken for the establishment of a 
Central Teaching and Research Institute for Leprosy; 

if) Has a permanent cure as well as an effective preventive 
against leprosy now been discovered; 

( g ) If so, to what extent are the people of India benefiting 
from this? 

The Minister of Law(Dr. Ambedkar): (a) Yes, on the 
12th November, 1948. 

( b ) During his tour he studied anti-leprosy work carried 
on in the various countries he visited. 

(c) He is at present the Head of the Leprosy Research 
Department at the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine. His 
activities include research, teaching and clinical work. He is 
also the Editor of the Journal “Leprosy in India” published 
by the Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh. 

( d) With the introduction of sulphone treatment for leprosy 
the duration of treatment has been shortened. 

( e ) The Central Leprosy Institute Committee recommended 
the location of the institute in Madras State, by taking over 
and expanding the Lady Willingdon Leprosy Sanatorium at 
Tirumani, and the silver Jubilee Children’s Clinic, Saidapet, 
both in Chingleput District, Madras State, on certain financial 
conditions being satisfied by the Government of Madras. The 


1081 

1081 


*P. D., Vol. 9, Part I, 20th September 1951, p. 1527. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1082 


1082 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Madras Government did not, however, agree to the conditions. 
The question of locating the institute in Orissa is now under 
consideration. 

if) No. It is too early to assess the value of sub phone 
treatment. 

ig) Does not arise. 

Dr. Deshmukh: May I know what are the reasons why 
Orissa is being chosen and why Madhya Pradesh has not 
been chosen ? Is it not a fact, Sir, that the largest number of 
leprosy homes are situated in Madhya Pradesh ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I do not suppose that the Madhya 
Pradesh Government ever expressed any desire to the Central 
Government that that State might also be considered for the 
purpose of the location of the Institute. 

Dr. Deshmukh: Is there any proposal before the Central 
Government to give any financial assistance to the asylumes 
for lepers ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I suppose wherever possible they would 
give assistance. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I can say generally when one 
Hon. Minister answers for another Minister, with respect to 
supplementary questions that the hon. Member has to ask, 
he need not go far out of the exact question. He might try 
to limit and reserve these questions. I do not mean to say 
that they are irrelevent; they do arise but the Hon. Minister 
cannot be expected to answer them. 

Dr. Deshmukh: When another Minister answering 
questions for some one else happens to be a habitual affair, 
what are we to do, Sir? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Next Question. 

Shri Jangde : One question, Sir. With the Hon. Minister 
kindly state what expenditure was incurred on the tour of 
Dr. Dharmendra who was deputed to U.S.A., U.K., South 
America and Philippines to study the work being carried on 
there in connection with leprosy ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: From the information that is at my 
disposal here, I find that to meet the cost of the attendance of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1083 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1083 

Dr. Dharmendra at the International Leprosy Conference in 
Cuba and his study tour abroad, the Government of India 
sanctioned a sum of Rs. 17,350 to the British Empire Leprosy 
Relief Association. Dr. Dharmendra’s pay for the period of 
his deputation was however met by the Indian Council of 
Medical Research. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Has the cost of the treatment of a patient 
been calculated so far as this new treatment is concerned ? 
Is it very costly ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am unable to answer this question now. 
I should like to have notice. 


( 66 ) 

*HARTAL OF REFUGEE STALL HOLDERS 

1185. Shri Jnani Ram: Will the Minister of Health be 
pleased to state : 

(а) whether the refugee stall holders of Irwin Road and 
Panchkuina Road, New Delhi are observing hartal since the 
27th August, 1951; 

(б) if so the reasons for the same; and 

(c) whether any enquiry has been ordered in the matter ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) The 

stallholders observed hartal for 3 days from the 27th to 29th 
August, 1951. 

(6) Although there had been disputes between the New 
Delhi Municipal Committee and the stallholders for some 
time, it is understood that the immediate cause of the hartal 
was the launching of prosecutions by the Committee against 
a number of stallholders for contravening municipal byelaws. 

(c) The question of an enquiry does not arise. 

Shri Jnani Ram: May I know whether the grievances of 
the stallholders have now been removed ? 


D., Vol. 9, Part I, 20th September 1951, p. 1538 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1084 


1084 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: There are hardly any greivances. From 
the papers that were handed over to me, it seems to me that 
the dispute is purely of a legal character. The municipality 
holds that they are licencees while the stallholders claim that 
they are lessees. The municipality says that since they are 
licencees, the municipality is entitled to remove them without 
any notice, while the stall-holders say that they are lessees 
and they must be governed by the terms of their leases. It 
is purely a legal dispute which can only be adjudicated by 
some court or judicial authority. 

Shri Sidhva: Do these stall-holders pay rent under certain 
agreements to the effect that they will be known as licencees ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far as I could understand and I speak 
subject to correction — they have been allowed to just sit and 
squat and do their business for the time being. But they say 
that they have been squatting so long that their licences have 
now matured into leases. 

Several Hon. Members: No, they are not squatters. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members cannot be educated 
in law. They probably want to know the difference between 
a licence and a lease. 

Shri Sidhva: My question was whether they pay rents ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I am not going to allow opinions 
on legal questions. 

Shri Sarangdhar Das: Besides the legal aspect of this 
matter, have there been any complaints about the non- 
availability of water and lack of sanitary arrangements in 
the places where the stalls have been built ? 

Mr. Deputy speaker: It does not arise out of this question. 
Was it for want of these amenities that the strike was started ? 

Shri Sarangdhar Das: This was also a part of their 
grievances. 

Dr. Ambedkar: So far as I know only because of the 
prosecutions launched by the Municipal Committee did the 
strike take place. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1085 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1085 

( 67 ) 

^PETITION OF MAHILA SAMITI, JAIPUR, 
REGARDING WOMEN VOTERS OF RAJASTHAN 

1266 . Shrimati Durgabai (on behalf of Shrimati 
Renuka Ray): (a) Will the Minister of Law be pleased to 
refer to the answers given to supplementary questions raised 
on Starred Question No. 534 asked on the 27th August, 1951 
and state whether the omission of the names of women voters 
was due to the fact that their proper names were not initially 
put down by the officials who prepared the lists ; 

(6) Is it a fact that these officials did not get instructions 
to take proper names of the women concerned which resulted 
in the omission of their names from the electoral rolls ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) No, Sir. The 
officials who prepared the lists initially were unable to get 
the real names of women voters in some States. I understand 
that this was due to the disinclination of the women, as well 
as their relatives, to disclose their names. 

(b) The Election Commission had issued specific instructions 
to State Governments that women voters must be registered 
by their proper names and not as “wife of” or “daughter of” 
and so. The State Governments were also instructed to make 
every effort through governmental agencies to ascertain the 
real names of women voters who were not registered on the 
rolls by their actual names. The public were so invited to assist 
in this task. It was not due to lack of proper instructions that 
the names could not be entered in the rolls in the prescribed 
manner. 

Shrimati Durgabai: Sir, will you be so good as to allow 
one or two supplementary questions ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No, this is not the Question-hour. 

Shri Sondhi: And the hon. Member knows the rules 
herself. 


*P. D., Vol. 10, Part I, 25th September 1951, p. 1666. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1086 


1086 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

( 68 ) 

‘HINDU DIVORCE 

1412. Shrimati Jayashri: Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state : 

(а) the names of States where legislation permitting 
Divorce of Hindu marriages is in force; 

(б) the number of applications for Divorce received by 
courts in these States during the year 1950; 

(c) the number of applicants granted divorce in 1950; 

(d) the number of applications rejected during the year 
1950 ; and 

(e) the total number of male and female applicants during 
the year 1950 ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) As far as I 

am aware, legislation permitting divorce among Hindus is 
in force in Bombay and Madras only. 

(6) to (e) The exact figures for the year 1950 are not 
available. I understand from Bombay that the figures in 
regard to that State for the period from 12th May, 1947, 
when the Act came into force to the end of June, 1950 are 


as follows : 

Total number of applications ... 5,356 

Number of male applicants ... 2,452 

Number of Female applicants ... 2,904 

Number of applicants granted divorce ... 2,756 

Number of applications rejected ... 1,164 


I have not received any information from Madras so far. 


*P. D., Vol. 10, Part I, 28th September 1951, p. 1813. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1087 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1087 

( 69 ) 

* PREVENTION OF HINDU BIGAMOUS 
MARRIAGES ACT 

1413. Shrimati Jayashri : Will the Minister of Law be 
pleased to state: 

(a) the names of the States where legislation for the 
Prevention of Hindu Bigamous Marriages is in force; 

(b) the number of cases of marriages performed in 
contravention of provisions of the Act, in the year 1950 ; and 

(c) the cases which ended in convinction, during the 
year 1950? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): (a) As far as I 

am aware, legislation for the prevention of bigamous marriages 
among Hindus is in force in Bombay and Madras only. 

(6) and (c). The exact figures for the year 1950 are not 
available. I understand, however, from Bombay, that the 
number of marriages performed in contravention of the Bombay 
Act between 6th November, 1946, when it came into force, and 
31st August, 1950, is 1,934, and the number of cases which 
ended in conviction during the same period in that State is 
756. I have not received any information from Madras so far. 

• • 


* P. D., Vol. 10, Part I, 28th September 1951, p. 1814. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1088 


1088 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ANNEXURE 

(A) 

*LEGAL PRACTITIONERS AND BAR COUNCILS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Legal Practioners Act, 
1879, and the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, be continued.” 

Shri Biswanath Das : (Orissa : General): May I know 
the stage at which this Bill stands ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R, Ambedkar: It was merely 
introduced. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Legal Practioners Act, 
1879, and the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, be continued.” 

The motion was adopted. 


(B) 

**PRESS (SPECIAL POWERS) BILL 

The Honourable Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel: Sir, I move: 

That for clause 17 of the Bill, the following clause be 
substituted, namely: 

“Repeal of Ordinance X of 1947 

‘17. The Press (Special Powers) (No. 2) Ordinance, 1947, is 
hereby repealed’.” 

Mr. Speaker: The words on the left side appear to be a 
marginal note. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Those words need not be put. 


* C. A. (Leg.). D., Vol. 1, Part II, 17th November 1947, p. 40. 
**Ibid., 20th November 1947, p. 353. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1089 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1089 

*Mr. Speaker: I shall take up this amendment after the 
Honourable Minister has moved that the Bill as amended be 
passed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, may I 
with your permission go back to clause 2 and move that for 
the word “something” in the clause the word “anything” be 
substituted. That is the more appropriate word that should 
have been used. There was an amendment but unfortunately 
my honourable Friend did not move it. 

Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: I was too late and that was 
the reason. 


(C) 

^DISPLACED PERSONS 
(LEGAL PROCEEDINGS) BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of 
Law): Sir, I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill to make 
special provision for the relief of displaced persons in respect 
of certain legal proceedings. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to make special 
provision for the relief of displaced persons in respect of certain 
legal proceedings.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


*C. A. (Leg). D., Vol. 1, Part II, 20th November 1947, p. 355. 
**Ibid., Vol. 3, Part II, 31st March 1949, p. 2141. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1090 


1090 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

CD) 

^DEMAND FOR SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS FOR 
1948-49 (ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE) 

Mr. Speaker: I think then, I should first call upon the 
Honourable Law Minister to reply to Demand No. 34. I have 
to put it to vote. I thought the honourable Member wanted 
to speak on that. 

Shri R. K. Sidhva: No, Sir. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of Law): 
Sir, this item ‘Administration of Justice’ really belongs to the 
Home Ministry, because they are in charge of the subject, 
but I am sure, we must today at least spare the Sardar of 
the trouble that would be involved in replying to this debate. 
I am, therefore, taking the responsibility on my shoulders. 
I must also say that I have had no previous consultation 
with him and so, I do not know, whether I would be exactly 
representing the views of the Home Ministry on the subject 
that I am speaking. 

Sir, this question of the law’s delay is a long cry that 
we have been hearing in this country and the Government 
of India, if I remember correctly, at one time appointed a 
Committee the Civil Justice Committee — and some of the 
recommendations made by that Committee were incorporated 
both in the Civil Procedure Code as well as in the Criminal 
Procedure Code with the object of avoiding delay in the matter 
of coming to conclusions so far as litigation was concerned. 
At the same time that unfortunately has not in any way 
softened the complaint which we are now hearing about the 
law’s delay. In my judgment and I think both my honourable 
friends, Dr. P. S. Deshmukh and Shrimati Durgabai, who 
have had considerable experience of practice in the Courts will 
agree that much of the delay that takes place in litigation is 
really due to the clients themselves. So far as my experience 
goes, in law courts every client on an appointed day instead 
of coming prepared either with the witnesses or with the 


*C. A. (Leg). D., Vol. 3, Part II, 31st March 1949, pp. 2151-53. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1091 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1091 

documents or some other subpoena that has been issued by 
the court, comes with nothing except a petition asking for a 
postponement. If the postponement is not granted, he either 
abandons his pleader thinking that he has no influence with 
the judge, because he has not been able to get the adjournment 
or postponement or he becomes thoroughly dissatisfied and 
the court has to consider whether in the interests of avoiding 
delay his application should be rejected. It may be that in 
view of the ignorance of our general mass of population they 
cannot be expected to be prepared with everything at the 
appointed time, and if they are not given time, even though 
their cause may be very just, it may be lost. 

Secondly, so far as the procedural law is concerned, there 
is all the method and all the rules necessary for avoiding 
delay. If our people who want to litigate about matters of 
dispute were more expeditious, more efficient and more alert 
in collecting their evidence, they themselves would avoid a 
great deal of delay that takes place in the matter of litigation. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : What about the delays in the High 
Courts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Well, the delays 
in the High Courts also to a large extent are due to this fact. 
My honourable friend probably does not know, as I happen 
to know, that many of our people believe in astrology. When 
they are told that their case is fixed on a particular date, 
they first go to the astrologer to find out whether that is an 
auspicious day, and if they find that it is not an auspicious 
day, they run up to Bombay and get in touch with the office 
of the Registrar of the High Court, sometimes bribe the 
clerks heavily in order to take the case of the board on that 
particular day. I know many such cases. Therefore, we have 
done so far as procedural law is concerned to avoid delay. 

Shrimati G. Durgabai: Is not delay due to the printing 
of the records which takes a very long time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Well, I suppose, 
in view of the fact that the Privy Council has laid down that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1092 


1092 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

all cases which come to them must have the records printed, 
the High Court has to follow that rule. Probably the Supreme 
Court hereafter may follow a different rule, we cannot say. 

With regard to the lower judiciary, there is certainly much 
room for improvement. I quite agree that our judicial stations 
so to say, the towns where the Sub-Judges sit are sometimes 
very far away from the villages, and the villagers have to incur 
large expenses for travelling from their villages to the places 
where they are situated. I have sometimes thought whether 
it would not be desirable for our Sub-Judges or some others 
subordinate to the Sub-Judges to go on what we may call 
circuit. You can have a circuit of six or seven in the villages 
which this man can visit from week to week, and hear the 
cases right in the villages. That, I think, is a feasible thing. 
I must say that that is a matter which is entirely within 
the power of the Provincial Governments. It is they who can 
reorganise the judiciary in terms of my suggestion if they 
think that that is a suggestion worth accepting. 

With regard to the question of court fees, that again is a 
matter which is entirely within the purview of the Provincial 
Governments. If the Provincial Governments think that 
court fees are so fixed that they are beyond the capacity of 
the litigants, it is for them to lower the court fees and give 
relief to the litigant public in that manner. With regard to 
the question of legal aid, there is no doubt that there is a 
necessity for doing something in that behalf. As every one 
knows, the British Parliament has recently passed an Act 
making it a national responsibility to provide aid to a litigant 
who is unable to find money for his litigation. However valuable 
that step might be it seems to me that having regard to the 
economic capacity of the people of our country, it would be 
perhaps impossible to place such a burden upon the national 
revenues of the country. There is no doubt that some other 
method might, be found whereby some amount of partial relief 
may be given to people who are indigenous and who. have 
important questions of law to be settled. 

Something was said with regard to the Law Revision 
committee. It seems to me that there is a certain amount of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1093 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1093 

misunderstanding about that matter. There is no doubt in 
England there is a Statute Law Revision Committee ; but its 
function is a very limited one. I have with me the Statute Law 
Revision Committee Act passed in 1927. It is an act which, is 
passed from time to time by the Parliament. The object of the 
Statute Law Revision Act is to delete from the Statute book 
of laws which have become spent, whose purposes have been 
served and which are not in force, and things of that sort. 
It is only to clear the dead wood, so to say, from the Statute 
book of laws which have become unnecessary. Here, I find 
that the Statute Law Revision Committee was appointed in 
1921. Although the intention of the Government of India when 
they appointed that Committee was very much the same as 
embodied in the British Statute, it somehow took upon itself 
quite a different species of work namely to suggest to the 
Government certain laws which they themselves drafted. I do 
not know whether that sort of a thing is necessary. Because, 
the drafting of laws is entirely a matter for the Government 
and the drafting is entirely left to the draftsmen who are 
engaged in the Law Department. Lrom that point of view, 
therefore, the Law Revision Committee does not appear to me 
very necessary unless it is found that the Law Department, by 
reason of the shortness of its personnel is not able to depute 
somebody whose duty would be to see what laws have been 
spent, what are unnecessary and what have gone out of force. 
However, I shall keep the suggestion in my mind when the 
Government has the time to deal with this question. 

With regard to the Lederal Court, the question has been 
raised that the number of Judges is small for the work that 
is now pending before the court. The question was also raised 
that the Lederal Court is not equipped with a library such as 
a Lederal Court should have. I have not the least doubt in 
my mind that the Government of India will never be callous 
to the requirements of the Lederal Court and of its library 
equipment. I have no doubt that this matter will be discussed 
when the Lederal Court will be converted into the Supreme 
Court. There is not a very long time between the transferance 
of the Lederal Court into the Supreme Court. Consequently, 
these reforms which have been suggested with regard to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1094 


1094 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

personnel of the Federal Court and its library equipment can 
well be delayed until the formation of the Supreme Court. 
I have no doubt about it that the Government of India will 
bear in mind the requirements of the library, as well as the 
number of judges that may be necessary to dispose of this 
work. 

Mr. Speaker: I am putting the demands to the House. 
The question is : 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 2,46,000 be 
granted to the Governor General to dafray the chargse which 
will come in course of payment during the year ending the 31st 
day of March 1949, in respect of administration of justice.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1095 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


1095 


(E) 

*PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 

Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Orders 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to lay on 

the Table the following documents under clause (2) of Article 
392 of the Constitution : 

(i) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. I 
(Made by the Governor-General on 7th January 1950) 

(ii) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. 

II (Made by the President on 26th January 1950) 

(iii) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. 

III (Made by the President on 26th January 1950) 

(. Placed in the Library. See No. P. 61/50). 


(F) 

**AIR FORCE BILL 

Presentation of Report of Select Committee 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to present 
the Report of the Select Committee on the Bill to consolidate 
and amend the law relating to the Government of the Air 
Force. 


(G) 

^REPEALING AND AMENDING BILL 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister for 
Law): Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill to repeal or amend certain enactments be 
taken into consideration.” 

I do not think, Sir, any speeches are necessary because this 
is a very routine measure. There were certain enactments passed 
during the War; the powers given by them have exhausted ; some 

* P. D., Vol. 1, Part II, 14th February 1950, p. 497. 

**P. D., Vol. 3, Part II, 21st March 1950, p. 1895. 

***C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 3, Part II, 11th December 1947, p. 1727. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1096 


1096 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of them have come to an end. It is very desirable that the 
Statute Book which has been so heavily burdened by these, 
should be pruned and curtailed. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Speaker: Motion moved: 

“That the Bill to repeal or amend certain enactments be 
taken into consideration.” 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar (Madras : General): 
Sir, I do not want to take up your time, but I am only sorry 
that he has not added to the list of the hundred and fifty 
odd, the Government of India Act. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is: 

“That the Bill to repeal or amend certain enactments be 
taken into consideration.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

Clauses 2 to. 4 were added to the Bill. 

The Schedule was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I move: 
“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Minister of 
Law): Sir, I beg for leave to introduce a Bill to repeal certain 
enactments and to amend certain other enactments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to repeal certain 
enactments and to amend on other enactments.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


*C.A. (Leg.) D., Vol. 2, Part II, 1st March 1949, p. 989. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1097 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 


1097 


(H) 

* STANDING COMMITTEE FOR THE 
MINISTRY OF LAW 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move : 

“That this House do proceed to elect, in such manner as the 
Honourable the Speaker may direct, one member to serve on the 
Standing Committee to advice on subjects dealth with in the 
Ministry of Law for the unexpired portion of the current financial 
year vice Dr. P. K. Sen who died on the 17th November, 1950.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

Mr. Speaker: I have to inform hon. Members that the 
following dates have been fixed for receiving nominations 
and holding elections, if necessary, in connection with the 
following Committees, namely: 


Date for Date for 
Nomination election 

(1) Standing Committee for the Ministry of 1-12-50 4-12-50 

Home Affairs. 

(2) The General Silk Board. 

(3) The Central Committee of the Tuberculosis 
Association of India. 

(4) The Standing Finance Committee for 
Railways. 

(5) Standing Committee for the Ministry of Law. 1-12-50 5-12-50 

The Nominations for these committees will be received 
in the Parliamentary Notice Office upto 12 Noon on the 
date mentioned for the purpose. The elections which will be 
conducted by means of the single transferable vote, will be held 
in the Assistant Secretary’s room No. 21 in the Parliament 
House between the hours 10-30 a.m. and 1-00 p.m. 


*P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 29th November 1950, pp. 845-48. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1098 


1098 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(I) 

* TRADE UNIONS BILL 

Presentation of Report of Select Committee 
The Minister of law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to present to 
12 Noon the R e P or t of the Select Committee on the bill to provide 
for the registration and recognition of trade unions and 
in certain respects to define the law relating to registered and 
recognised trade unions and to certain unfair practices by employers 
and recognised trade unions. 


(J) 

Constitution (Removal of difficulties) 

Orders Nos. VI to VIII 

** The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to lay on the 

Table the following documents under clause (2) of article 392 of the 
Constitution: 

(i) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. VI (Made 
by the President on 2nd September 1950), 

(ii) The constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. VII 
(Made by the President on 7th October 1950), and 

(iii) The constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. VIII 
(Made by the President on 25th October 1950). 

(Placed in Library, See No. P. 116/50) 


(K) 

*** Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) 

Orders Nos. IV and V 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to lay on the 

Table the following documents under clause (2) of Article 392 of 
the Constitution : 

(i) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. IV (Made 
by President on 24th May 1950) [Placed in Library, See No. P-92/50], 

(ii) The Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. V 
(Made by the President on 6th June 1950) [Placed in Library, See 
No. P-93/50] . 

* P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 1st December 1950, p. 1066. 

** P.D., Vol. 6, Part II, 20th Novenber 1950, pp. 266-67. 

*** P.D., Vol. 5, Part II, 1st August 1950, p. 21. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1099 


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 1099 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to move 
for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. 

Mr. Speaker: The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I introduce the Bill. 


(L) 

**PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 

Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. II 
(Third Amendment) Order 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): I beg to lay on 

the Table a copy of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) 
Order No. II (Third Amendment) Order, 1951, made by the 
President on the 16th August 1951, under clause (2) of article 
392 of the Constitution. [. Placed in Library, See No. P. 197/51.] 

••• 


* P. D., Vol. 7, Part II, 18th December 1950, p. 1835. 
** P. D., Vol. 14, Part II, 27th August 1951, p. 1363. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1100 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1101 


INDEX 


1101 


INDEX 


A 

Adaptation : 5, 378. 

Adult Franchise : 247, 440. 

Agnibhoj, R. U. : 968. 

Alagesan; 543-44. 

Alexander : 1055, 1076, 1077. 

Ali, Moulvi Wajed : 612, 677. 

Alsace-Lorraine : 849. 

Alva Joachim : 1026. 

Ambedkar, Dr. B. R. 

On — Adaptation Order : 289-96. 

— Administration of Evacuee 
Property (Amendment) Bill : 
184-87. 

— All India Bar : 768-72. 

— Army Bill: 103-10. 

— Assam (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Bill : 741-60. 

— Code of Civil and Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Bill: 
310-19. 

— Code of Civil Procedure Bill: 
266-78. 

— Constitution (First Amendment) 
Bill: 331-418. 

— Cooch Bihar (Assimilation of 
Laws) Bill: 193-94. 

— Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Bill : 60-61. 

— Delimitation of Constituencies 
Order : 790-814. 

— Dentists Law (Amendment) 
Bill: 172-81, 255-65. 

— Extra Provincial Jurisdiction 
Bill: 17-25. 


— Federal Court (Enlargement 
of Jurisdiction) Bill: 26-34, 36. 

— Foreign Exchange Regulation 
(Amendment) Bill: 5-6. 

— India (Central Government and 
Legislature) Act, 1946 : 46-48. 

— Indian Nursing Bill: 16. 

— Indian Tariff (Amendment) 
Bill: 195-200. 

— Insolvency Law (Amendment) 
Bill: 53-58. 

— Parliament (Prevention of 
Disqualification) Bill : 79-98. 

— Parliament Prevention of 
Disqualification Bill : 708-15, 
717-18, 720-40. 

— Parliamentary Member — 
Conduct of: 773-85. 

— Part ‘B’ States (Laws) Bill: 
280-89. 

— Part ‘C’ States Bill : 111-20. 

— Provincial Insolvency 
(Amendment) Bill : 38-45. 

— Qualifications for Election Bill : 
188-92. 

— Regarding letter of 
resignation — Discussion: 821- 
30. 

— Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Bill , 1950 : 205- 
38,427-29. 

— Representation of the People 
(No. 2) Bill: 239-47, 509-40, 
550-704. 

— Representation of the People 
Bill: 123-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1102 


1102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


— Society’s Registration 
(Amendment) Bill: 201-04. 

— Society’s Registration 
(Amendment) Bill: 101-02. 

— Statutory Law Revision 
Committee — Appointment of: 
7-15. 

— Supreme Court Advocates 
(Practice in High Court) Bill; 
297-309. 

Ambedkar, Dr. B. R. : 35, 37, 59, 
62, 64, 68, 69, 72-77, 99, 100, 
121-28,171,182-84,238,239-40, 
244,247,257,259,260,265,279, 
321-28,418,420-22,434,442-43, 
457, 459-60, 462, 464, 468, 
475-76, 478, 481-89, 493-94, 
497-98, 507, 540, 704, 719, 
931, 939-41, 944-46, 949, 952, 
954-62, 966, 968-69, 971, 973, 
975, 977, 982, 991-1015, 1017- 
54, 1057-99. 

American Supreme Court: 752. 

Aney, M. S. : 39. 

Anthony, Frank : 345, 353, 980. 

Arya Samaj : 465. 

Ashok Chakra : 539. 

Australian Constitution: 92 

Auarna : 467. 

Ayyangar, Ananthasayanam M.: 
12,14-15, 22, 36, 136, 186, 217, 
476, 667, 991-92, 999, 1011, 
1096. 

Ayyar; Sir Alladi Krishnaswamy : 
32-33. 

Azad Maulana Abul Kalam : 719. 

B 

Bahadur, Raj Mr. : 437, 557, 580, 
1019-21. 

Bakshi, Tek Chand : 33. 

Baldev Singh, Sardar : 103. 

Bali, Amarnath : 335. 

Ballia (Caste): 485. 


Banjaras : 442-43. 

Barman : 581, 582, 1004. 

Bawarias : 442. 

Bhangi : 857, 896. 

Bhargava, H. B. Pandit: 1029-30. 

Bhargava, M. B. Pandit : 112-17, 
769, 771. 

Bhargava, Pandit Thakur Das : 
145, 147, 155, 173, 180, 
181,200,243,257,264,303,305, 
308, 337, 352, 357, 360-61, 
421, 517, 541, 544, 578, 580, 
605, 608-9, 638-39, 658-59, 
662, 665, 669-70, 678-79, 697, 
701, 703, 716, 718-19, 721, 
732, 736-37, 742, 761-67, 786- 
87,1070, 1074. 

Bharati: 124-28,292,322,362,372, 
450, 553, 583, 628, 667, 1001. 

Bhartiya Depressed Classes 
League ;439. 

Bhatt: 140, 398, 514, 527-28, 656, 
661, 693, 1068. 

Bhattacharya: 558, 561. 

Bisht, J. S. :941. 

Boilers’ Bill: 666. 

Bombay City: 963, 965. 

Bose, Raj Krishna : 38. 

Brahmins : 554, 945, 970. 

Brij Bhushan : 335. 

British Constitution : 862. 

British King, The : 757. 

British Labour Party : 952. 

Buragohain : 143, 667, 1004. 

Butler; Justice : 369. 

c 

California : 967. 

Canada: 92, 343. 

Centrally Administered Areas : 
437, 439, 441. 

Chakravarty Smt. Renu : 979. 

Chaliha : 391, 522. 

Chamars : 896. 

Chaman Lai, Diwan : 946. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1103 


INDEX 


Chamberlain 1: 71, 99, 886. 

Chancellor of the Exchequer : 844. 

Chand Amolakh : 409, 467, 1059. 

Chandra Satish : 532, 641-43. 648. 
691. 

Chandrika Ram : 437-38, 497, 
503-4. 

Charkha : 539. 

Chatham House : 886 

Chattopadhyay : 403-4, 417, 801-2, 
1039-40, 1062. 

Chaturvarna : 947. 

Chettiar, Ramlingam : 154, 610. 

Chetty Shanmukham: 871. 

Chief Commissioner : 437-38. 

Chief Electoral Officer : 657. 

Chinese Walk 350. 

Choudhuri, Chiranjit Lai: 340. 

Choudhuri, Rohini Kumar : 135, 
345, 374-75, 548, 590, 626, 680, 
684, 696, 698, 749, 1014, 1051, 
1054. 

Churchill Sir Winston : 880. 

Civil Procedure Code : 23, 24, 269, 
271,275-76. 

Civil Rights Bill: 933. 

Civil War: 967. 

Clemenceau: 874. 

Clergy of England : 520. 

Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment 
Bill): 266, 300. 

Common Law: 343. 

Communism: 369, 951-52. 

Concurrent List: 14, 949-50. 

Congress : 321, 322, 338, 463, 948. 

Constituent Assembly : 29-31, 437, 
522-23, 709-10, 730-31. 

Constitution of Canada : 860-61. 

Constitution of the U. S.: 305, 338, 
710,711,948,954. 

Court of Faculty: 758. 

Criminal Law Amendment Bill: 60. 


1103 

D 

Damodar Valley Corporation : 86. 

Das, B. K. : 589. 

Das, Biswanath : 43-44, 57-58, 
226, 393, 561, 926, 994, 1011, 
1041, 1088.#Govind Das Seth: 
516-17, 524-25, 531, 993, 1007, 
1029, 1041,1043,1046,1054- 
55,1059, 1060, 1062. 

Das, Dr. Manmohan : 404, 1003, 
1021, 1026, 1040. 

Das, N. M.: 1022. 

Das, Nandkishor : 1005. 

Das, S. N. : 589, 615-18, 655, 
769, 1048. 

Das, Sarangdhar: 350,521-24,690- 
91, 1032, 1094. 

Datar, B. N. : 905, 906. 

Defence Budget: 849. 

Deliminations of constituencies 
order, 1951 : 390. 

Dental School in Bengal: 256, 
258. 

Dentists (Amendment) Bill : 171, 
255. 

Deogirikar Mr. : 1024, 1068. 

Depressed Classes : 484. 

Desai, Kanhayyalal: 399. 

Desai, Khandubhai: 526-27, 684. 

Desai, Morarji: 962. 

Deshmukh Dr. C. D.: 842-43, 
889, 1077. 

Deshmukh, Punjabrao Dr.: 97, 
126, 139, 149, 155, 388, 401, 
416, 434, 460, 483, 485, 496, 
498-500, 526, 538, 541, 548, 
560, 563, 571, 586, 602-3, 662, 
665, 683, 693-94, 766-67, 822- 
24, 842, 997, 1013-14, 1052, 
1081-83, 1091. 

Deshpande, P. Y. : 377, 472, 481, 
544-45. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1104 


1104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Deshpande, V. G. : 980. 

Dhage, Mr. : 929. 

Dhanu : 485. 

Dhanuk : 485. 

Dhinwars : 499-500. 

Directive Principles : 341. 
Diwakar, R. R. : 991, 993. 
Diwan Chaman Lall: 848. 
Dominion Legislature : 343, 710. 
Drafting Committee : 714. 
Durgabai, B. : 42, 44, 86, 368, 
375, 377,381,516,1004,1006- 
8,1032- 33, 1045-46, 1085, 
1091. 

Dutt, Romesh Chandra : 837. 
Dwivedi: 228-29, 450-51, 465, 467- 
68, 951,1018, 1026, 1041,1047, 
1050. 

E 

East India Company : 946. 
Election Commission: 241- 

243,505, 552, 657. 

Election Commissioner : 458, 481, 
489, 490. 

Election expenses : 529. 

Election Petition : 242, 245. 
Election Tribunal: 244, 511-13. 
English Common Law : 344. 
English Constitution : 862. 

Evat, Justice : 196. 

Evening Standard in London : 
874. 

Excluded Classes : 484. 
Expenses incurred : 529. 

F 

Federal Court: 26-32, 36. 

First World War : 849, 874. 
Floud Commission : 355, 519. 
Food Policy Committee : 843. 


Free and fair election : 246. 

Free Speech in the United 
States : 369. 

Fundamental rights : 338-39, 
341, 353, 531, 946-47. 

G 

Gadgil. N.V. : 685, 981. 

Gandhi, M. K. : 440, 448, 452, 
459, 916. 

Gangadhara, Siva M. V. Dr.: 1078. 

Gautam Mahanta: 162-63, 523, 
534-35. 

Ghose, B. C. : 404, 868. 

Ghule, Mr. : 545, 607, 668. 

Goenka, Ramnath : 468, 514, 
529. 

Gopalaswami N. : 76, 99, 226, 
232-33, 836. 

Gour, H. S. Sir: 8,10-11. 

Governor-General: 29, 45, 441, 
479-80, 493. 

Guha, A. C. : 594, 891, 1022, 
1054, 1059, 1071. 

Gupta Deshbandhu : 162, 223, 
225-27, 237, 347, 352, 462, 
464-65, 469, 500, 502, 1000-2, 
1011, 1015, 1017, 1019, 1052. 

Gupta, B.: 875-76, 880, 885. 

Gupte, B. M. : 994. 

Gurung, A. B. : 1058. 

Gy an : 189. 

H 

Hanumanthaiya, Mr. : 579-80. 

Harijan : 439-40, 452-53, 462-64. 

Hassan, M. A. : 389. 

Hathi, Mr. : 640. 

Hazarika J. N. : 235, 1037, 1041, 
1045. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1105 


INDEX 


Hedge, K. S. : 858, 966. 

High Court : 26-30, 32, 297, 305, 
307, 335, 337-39, 349, 646, 714. 

Himmatsingka, Mr. : 61, 121, 
733-34. 

Hindu Mahasabha: 910. 

Hiray Mr. : 399, 400. 

Hitler: 886. 

Holmes, Justice : 369. 

House of Commons (England) : 
72, 291, 520. 

Hukum Singh Sardar: 441, 501-02, 
560, 562, 575. 

Hussain T.: 96, 377, 954, 956, 
960. 

I 

Imam, Hussain : 117-20, 141, 
290, 296, 370-74, 376, 519, 562, 
589, 669, 1028. 

Implied Powers : 339-41. 

Indian Independence Act: 17, 22. 

Indian National Congress : 463. 

Indian Nursing Council Bill: 16. 

Indian Penal Code : 281. 

Indian States: 14,15,17,18,21,23, 
269. 

Indian Tariff (Fourth Amendment) 
Bill: 195. 

Inequality : 947. 

Insolvency Law (Amendment) 
Bill: 53. 

Instrument of Accession: 13- 
15,18, 19, 21. 

Ipso facto: 775. 

Irish Constitution : 354. 

Iyyunni: 608, 658. 

J 

Jagjivan, Ram : 439. 

Jains: 145, 148, 1007-08. 

Jalianwala Bagh : 321-22, 463. 


1105 

Jalianwala Bagh National 
Memorial Bill: 320. 

Jangde : 400, 1024, 1082. 

Jayashri Smt. : 1086-87. 

Jeremy Raisman Sir : 870. 

Jhinwara (fishermen): 499. 

Jhunjhunwala B. P. : 565. 

Jinnah M. A. : 459. 

Jnani Ram : 507, 822, 1059, 1067, 
1083. 

John Mathai Dr. : 871. 

Johnson Dr. : 521. 

Joseph, A. :403. 

Judicial Commissioner: 33,34,297. 

Julaha (Weaver): 443. 

K 

Kabirpanthi : 443. 

Kajrolkar:981. 

Kamath H. V. : 75, 83, 86, 88. 89, 
93-95,119,124-25,139,147,150, 
175-77, 192, 218, 225, 230, 249, 
258-62,273,321-23,325-27,337, 
341-44, 347, 352, 357-59, 370, 
377, 380, 383-85, 387-88, 394, 
508, 517, 528-31, 534, 536, 554, 
556,573-74,640,643-44,646-47, 
648, 650, 654, 656, 662, 664-66, 
668, 674, 679, 680, 681, 686, 
689-90,694-96,701,727-30,737, 
742, 744-45, 748-49, 771, 809, 
815-16, 818, 820, 828-29, 1002, 
1006,1012-13,1015,1031,1035- 
36,1043-45,1047-48,1060,1062- 
63, 1066-67, 1077-78, 1080. 

Kamble, J. R. : 1027. 

Kamma : 856. 

Kanwar Raj : 1058-59, 1069. 

Kapoor, J. R. : 143, 148, 162, 165, 
195, 308-9, 323, 325, 388, 404, 
416-18, 429-31, 433, 435, 441, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1106 


1106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


444, 478, 486-87, 490, 494-97, 
505-7,526,542,568-70,575,576, 
584, 611-13, 618, 623, 628-29, 
630-31,633,642-44,646-48,654, 
656, 662, 664, 665-66, 668, 674, 
679-80, 683, 700, 971, 1028. 

Kashmir : 129, 939. 

Kashmiri Pandit: 857. 

Katju, K. N. Dr. : 856-57, 861, 
901-2, 931, 940. 

Kazmi: 249. 

Keith’s Command Paper : 933. 

Keskar Dr. : 756. 

King of England : 752, 944. 

Kolis : 471-72, 9063-64. 

Krishna : 970. 

Krishnammachari T. T.: 72,85,90- 
91, 95, 115, 116, 146-47, 407, 
579, 588, 602, 620, 624, 630-31, 
634-35, 644-45, 648,1006,1008. 

Kumbhar: 398. 

Kunzru Pandit H. N.: 68,72, 
73,76, 81, 82, 92, 95-96, 99-100, 
103-6, 108, 110, 330-31, 343, 
368, 370, 414-15, 522, 598-99, 
695, 697, 722-24, 726, 735, 740, 
781, 808-9, 811, 814-16, 818, 
820, 842, 910, 1072-75. 

Kunzru, H. N. : 842, 910. 

L 

Labour Party : 952. 

Laik, Ali : 63. 

Lakshmi Bai (dowager queen): 
964. 

Lai, Shivcharan : 311, 313, 315, 
351,352,356,383,409,500,580, 
584, 591, 604, 610, 614-15, 
620, 632, 647, 669, 749, 1054. 

Lala Rajkanwar: 1008. 

Lall Kailash Bihari: 967, 911. 


Laxmanan : 408, 

Lloyd George : 874. 

Low Mr.: 874. 

Lower House : 835. 

M 

Maharashtrians : 963, 965. 

Mahars : 458. 

Mahata, Kshudiram : 1050-51. 

Mahata, S. N. : 738. 

Maheshwari, N. S. K. : 20 

Maitra, Laxmikant Pandit : 240, 
244, 292, 404, 514-15, 775, 
777, 782, 784-85. 

Maitra, P. C. : 907, 910. 

Majumdar, S. C. : 12. 

Man, Bhupendra Singh Sardar : 
156, 324-25, 528, 778, 1004, 
1013. 

Mang-garudis : 483. 

Mao: 882. 

Marathwada: 970. 

Master Tara Singh’s case : 335. 

Mazhabi: 442. 

Meeran, Mr. : 183, 309, 590, 
603. 

Mehta, Asoka : 979. 

Menon, Karunakara : 58, 621, 
717. 

Misra, S. N. : 192, 1025-26. 

Mitakshara Law of: 872. 

Mohanty, S. : 960-61. 

Montague Chelmsford : 8. 

Mookerjee, Dr. Shyama Prasad: 
48, 197, 331, 337, 341-47, 349- 
51, 363, 365-67, 369-71, 384, 
386, 528, 681, 749-54. 

Motilal Allahabad High Court 
(Report 1951): 348. 

Mukhtiars : 305. 

Musafir, G. S. : 326, 1057, 1060. 

Muslim Shariat Law : 193. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1107 


INDEX 


N 

Nagappa, S. : 994. 

Nai (Brahmin) : 500 

Nai (Thakur) : 500. 

Naidu, Ethirajulu : 158, 435, 450, 
486, 699, 

Naidu, Ramaswamy: 495-96. 

Naik, S. V.: 284, 1004. 

Naziruddin Ahmad: 11,21,39,307, 
318, 332, 345-46, 357, 371, 
382, 525,556-58,564-67,570- 
71,574, 583, 588-90, 756, 779, 
1089. 

Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal : 214, 
227,329,362,376,384,417,508, 
685, 690, 692, 815-16, 822-24, 
883, 885, 916, 974, 976, 1001, 
1065. 

Nizam: 970. 

Non-Brahmins : 970. 

Notary Public : 757. 

Nursing Council : 86. 

o 

Office of profit: 710. 

P 

Pakistan : 61, 318. 

Panchsheel: 882. 

Pande, C. D.: 71,516,533,537,541. 

Pande, T. : 966. 

Pant, G. B. : 952, 957, 963. 

Parmanand, Smt. Dr. Seeta : 
871, 917. 

Paramountcy : 17, 22. 

Parikh, C. P. : 973 

Parliament, The : 340, 442, 710, 
712, 953. 

Parliamentary (Prevention of 
disqualification) Bill: 79, 91. 


1107 

Parliamentary Statute : 47. 
Parmanand, Dr. Seeta : 871, 917. 
Parmar, Dr. : 470, 520-21. 
Patanjali Sastri : 340. 

Patel, Vallabhabhai Sardar : 
1088. 

Pattabhi Sitaramayya, Dr. B.: 
677, 731, 739, 748-49. 

Peers : 521. 

Peking Government: 344. 

Pillay Sivan : 281, 467, 1075-76. 
Poker Sahib Bahadur, B. : 995. 
Poona University : 971. 

Praja Socialist Party : 951. 
Prasad, Brajeshwar : 1012, 1041, 
1077. 

Prerogatives : 746. 

President: 379, 519. 

Press Emergency Power : 340, 
349. 

Prince of Berar : 885. 

Prince of Wales : 464. 

Privileges Committee : 272, 291. 
Privy Council : 27-34, 36, 40-41, 
196. 

Protestant Revolution : 520. 
Provisions of Laws : 349. 

Public Company : 673. 

R 

Rai, Lala Lajpat: 465. 

Rai, Yeshwant Prof. : 1009. 
Raidasi: 443. 

Raj Bahadur : 126, 128, 249, 274, 
276, 518-19, 542-43. 
Rajgopalachari, C. : 289, 333, 351, 
382-83, 538, 773, 778, 803, 901. 
Rajpramukh of a State : 64-67, 
385, 432, 437, 479-80, 493. 
Rajput: 896. 

Ram Chandrika : 1014. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1108 


1108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Rama, Rao, M.V. : 251, 589. 

Ramdasi: 443, 485. 

Ramesh Thapper : 335. 

Ranawat, M. S. : 860. 

Ranbir Singh, Captain ; 351, 374, 
380, 412, 504, 572, 596-97, 687, 

691, 1037. 

Ranga, G. Prof. : 42, 45, 120, 
248, 345, 547, 548, 550, 552, 
588-89, 856, 893, 925-26, 1007, 
1013, 1070. 

Rao, Keshava : 145, 1014, 1041, 
1052-53, 1055. 

Rao, Thirumala: 516. 

Ratnaswamy : 1003, 1051. 

Ravidasi: 443, 485. 

Ray, Smt. Renuka: 356,1046,1064, 
1066. 

Rayalaseema : 863. 

Reddi P. Basi: 577,579,1040,1041. 

Reddy Community : 856. 

Reddy, C. G. K. : 854. 

Regional Commissioner: 657. 

Relation and intercourse : 345. 

Representation of People Bill : 
123-24,205,427,521. 

Requisition land : 47. 

Reservation of seats : 243, 433. 

Roman Catholics : 861 

Roosevelt, F. D. : 880. 

Round Table Conference : 483. 

Rudrappa : 592, 1051. 

Ruler : 271-73, 275, 277, 675. 

Russian Government: 952. 

Ryotwari : 374, 76. 

s 

Sahaya Syamnandan: 
128,130,141, 152, 163, 289, 
357-58, 520, 538, 546, 572, 591- 
93, 596, 598, 601, 662-63,687, 
731, 768, 795,1017, 1022. 


Saksena, H. P. : 835, 857, 878, 
903, 957, 966, 969. 

Saksena, M. L. : 997, 999. 

Saksena, Prof. S. L. : 382-83, 
669, 1040. 

Samanta, S. C.: 295,1034-35,1071. 

Santhanam, K. : 6, 16, 19, 38, 
124, 136, 232, 295, 489-90, 
518, 562-63, 570, 581-82, 601, 
605-6, 613-14, 620, 654, 667, 
691, 775, 996. 

Sarwate, Mr. : 273. 

Sat Narain : 40. 

Savarna : 467. 

Sayed Nausherali: 165. 

Scheduled Caste Federation : 856. 

Scheduled Castes and Tribes : 
243, 291, 428-29, 432, 433, 
435, 439-42, 444, 446-49, 451, 
453, 456, 458-60,466-39,473- 
76,479,490, 493, 495, 500-5, 
506, 521, 523, 595, 856, 896, 
916-17, 929, 932, 982. 

Scotish Office: 862. 

Second World War : 886. 

Select Committee : 247, 513, 
533, 786. 

Sen, P. G. : 394-96. 

Shah, K. T.: 188,189, 191, 383-84, 
558, 673-75, 677, 703, 1072. 

Shailabala Devi: 335. 

Shakespeare :.932. 

Shankaraiya: 804. 

Sharma Balkrishna, Pandit: 389. 

Sharma, B. B. : 839, 870, 940, 
971. 

Sharma, Krishna Chandra 
Pandit: 69, 149, 197, 536. 

Sheel : 189. 

Shetty Basappa : 939. 

Sholapur Mills: 340. 

Shraddhanand Swami: 463-65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1109 


INDEX 


Sidhva R. K. : 6, 82-83, 89, 101-02, 
173-74, 178, 201-02, 257, 262, 
289, 295, 296, 317-19, 325-26, 
331,450,498,499,514,517,519, 
530-31, 534, 553, 555, 562, 568, 
603,615,623,628, 666,712,714- 
16, 718, 723-27, 729, 733, 737- 
39, 742, 759, 763-64, 771, 789, 
999, 1042, 1061-62, 1084, 1090. 

Sikhs : 501. 

Singh Babu Gopinath : 945. 

Singh Anup, Captain : 128, 135, 
288,451,474,477,949. 

Singh, Babu Ramnarayan: 
117,376-77, 535, 538, 550-51. 

Singh Baldev, Sardar : 103. 

Singh, Sardar Hukum : 441, 501- 
02, 560, 562, 575. 

Singh, R. V. : 74, 227, 274, 276- 
78, 128,135, 288. 

Singh, Ram Subhag Dr. : 539. 

Singh, Ranbhir Captain : 351, 
374, 380, 412, 504, 572, 596- 
97, 687, 691, 1037. 

Singh, Sochet Sardar : 561, 660, 
682. 

Singh, T. N.: 629,811-12,415,1018. 

Singh, Thakur Krishna : 1051-52. 

Sinha, B. K. P.: 920-21, 949, 
1026. 

Sinha, S. N. : 109, 110, 299, 389, 
626-27, 667. 

Sircar Nipendra, Sir : 71-72, 99. 

Siva Gangadhara, M. V. Dr.: 
1049. 

Socialism : 951. 

Sonavane, Mr. : 430, 435, 444-46, 
457, 459, 466, 499-50, 506, 555, 
563,596,598,622,1030-31,1038, 
1047. 

Sondhi, Mr.: 137-39,145,197, 225, 
533, 683, 712-13, 725, 728, 735- 


1109 

36, 738, 802, 1046, 1059, 1064, 
1085. 

Star Chamber Legislation: 116. 
Stare decisis : 954. 

States: 19,429. 

—Part ‘A’; 280, 359, 373, 430-31, 
437, 441, 448, 460, 476, 480-81, 
485-87, 489, 492-93, 506, 853. 
—Part ‘B’: 280-81, 359, 373, 
430-31, 437, 438, 441, 448, 451, 
456, 460, 468, 476, 480, 481, 
485, 486, 487, 489, 490, 492-93, 
506, 852, 890. 

—Part ‘C’: 113-14, 209, 215, 359, 
430-31, 435, 439, 465, 468, 470, 
473, 474, 478-82, 487-95, 506, 
853, 890. 

—Part ‘D’: 853. 

Subramaniam, V. Dr.: 299,1079. 
Sundarayya, P.: 857, 860, 884-885. 
Supreme Court : 297-98, 305, 307, 
335, 337, 339-40, 343, 714, 955. 
Swaminadhan Smt. Ammu : 1010- 
11 . 

T 

Tek Chand Dr. : 77, 127, 143, 303, 
306, 311, 320-21, 787. 

Trade Union: 952. 

Tyagi, Mahavir : 55, 80-81, 84, 97, 
135, 142, 151, 163, 179, 197, 
199, 202, 225, 236-37, 263-64, 
811, 1001-02, 1004, 1006, 1016, 
1014, 1022, 1060, 1065. 

U. N. O. : 849. 

U.S.A. :311, 338, 933, 967. 

U. S. Supreme Court: 368. 
U.N.E.S.C.O. : 869. 

u 

Ullah, Khwaja Inait: 783,823,871. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-015\voll5-10.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


9-10-2013>YS>28-ll-2013 


1110 


1110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Union Caste List: 445. 

United Maharashtra : 964. 
Untouchability : 447. 
Untouchables : 446, 466. 
Upadhayay, R. C. : 1036-38, 1064- 
65, 1066. 

Upadhyay Munishwar Dutt : 295, 
447, 492-94, 517, 518, 577-78, 
593-94,599,612,619-20,642-43, 
648. 

Upper Silesia : 849. 

Uttar Pradesh : 969. 


V 

Vaidya, R. : 313-14, 1018. 
Vaishya, M. B. : 451. 

Vaishya, Muldas : 449. 
Velayudhan, R. : 408, 458-59, 
462, 537,638, 1018, 1026, 1062. 
Venkataraman : 296, 300-03, 308, 
332, 546-47, 553-54, 584, 1041. 
Verma Phulan Prasad : 995. 
Violence : 370. 

Vyas: 1001, 1018, 1026. 


w 

Wanchoo, Justice : 855. 
Waqf: 870. 


z 

Zamindars: 355. 


Act 

Army Act : 199. 

Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 : 382. 

Burma Anti Boycott Act: 935. 

Criminal Tribes Act : 8. 

Central Government and 
Legislature Act : 46,47. 

Dentists Act of 1948 : 255. 

Government of India Act, 1935 : 29, 
30, 32, 43, 71, 72, 79, 242, 433. 

Forests Act : 9. 

Factories Act : 9. 

Elections Offences Enquiry Act : 
242. 

Indian Succession Act : 8. 

Insurance Act, 1938 : 9. 

Indian Independence Act : 17, 22. 

Indian Foreign Jurisdiction Act : 

22. 

India Act : 29. 

Legal Practitioners Act : 305. 

Merchant Shipping Act : 8. 

Partnership Act, 1932 : 9. 

Petroleum Act, 1934 : 9. 

Provincial Insolvency Act : 38,39, 
41, 45, 56. 

Press Act : 336. 

Presidency Towns Insolvency Act : 
40, 41, 53, 56. 

Punjab Land Alienation Act : 380- 
81. 

Representation of the People Act, 
1950: 446, 450, 451, 481, 486, 
489. 

Succession Act : 8. 

Sale of Goods Act : 9. 

Tolls Act : 9. 

Tariff Act : 9. 

Untouchability Removal Act 471. 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


PUBLISHED VOLUMES 

Vol. 1 

• Castes in India 

• Annihilation of Caste, Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province, Need for 
Checks and Balances 

• Thoughts on Linguistic States 

• Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah, Evidence before the Southborough Committee, 
Federation versus Freedom 

• Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It 

• States and Minorities 

• Small Holdings in India, Mr. Russell and the Reconstruction of Society 


Vol. 2 

• In the Bombay Legislature 

• With the Simon Commission 

• At the Round Table Conferences 

Vol. 3 

• Philosophy of Hinduism 

• India and Pre-Requisites of Communism 

• Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Ancient India 

• Buddha or Karl Marx 

• Schemes of Books 


Vol. 4 

• Riddles in Hinduism 


Vol. 5 

• Untouchables or the Children of India’s Ghetto and other Essays on 
Untouchables and Untouchability Social — Political — Religious 


Vol. 6 

• Administration and Finance of The East India Company, The Evolution 
of Provincial Finance in British India, The Problem of the Rupee [History 
of Indian Currency and Banking, Vol. 1] Miscellaneous Essays. 


Vol. 7 

Who were the Shudras ? 

• How they came to be the Fourth Varna in the Indo-Aryan Society ? 

The Untouchables 

• Who were They and Why They Became Untouchables ? 


Vol. 8 

• Reprint of Pakistan or the Partition of India 


Vol. 9 

• What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables ? Mr. Gandhi 
and the Emancipation of the Untouchables 


Vol. 10 

• Dr. Ambedkar as Member of the Governor-General’s Executive Council 
(1942-46) 


Vol. 11 

• The Buddha and his Dhamma 

Vol. 11-SUPPLEMENT 

• Pali and other Sources of the Buddha & his Dhamma with an Index 


Vol. 12 

• Ancient Indian Commerce, The Untouchables and the Pax Britannica, 
Lectures on the English Constitution, The Notes on Acts and Laws; 
Waiting for a Visa, Other Miscellaneous Essays 


Vol. 13 

Dr. AMBEDKAR 

• The Principal Architect of the Constitution of India 


Vol. 14 

Dr. Ambedkar and the Hindu Code Bill 
Part One 

• General Discussion on the Draft (17th November 1947 to 14th December 
1950) 

Part Two 

• Clause by Clause Discussion (5th February 1951 to 25th September 1951) 

Vol. 15 

• Dr. Ambedkar as free India’s first Law Minister and Member of Opposition 
in Indian Parliament (1947 to 1956) 

Vol. 16 

• Dr. B. R. Ambedkars 

(I) The Pali Grammar 

(II) The Pali Dictionary 

(A) Pali into English 

(B) Pali into English, Marathi, Hindi and Gujarathi 

(III) Bouddha Pooja Path 

Vol. 17 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and his Egalitarian Revolution 
Part One 

• Struggle for Human Rights 

Part Two 

• Socio-Political, Religious Activities 

Part Three 

• Speeches 


