z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


1 



Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


2 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


3 


Nationalism, a Means to an End 

Labour’s creed is internationalism. 
Labour is interested in nationalism only 
because the wheels of democracy — such 
as representative Parliaments, responsible 
Executive, constitutional conventions, 
etc. — work better in a community united 
by national sentiments. Nationalism to 
Labour is only a means to an end. It is 
not an end in itself to which Labour can 
agree to sacrifice what it regards as the 
most essential principles of life. 

— from Dr. Ambedkar’s Broadcast 
on All India Radio, Bombay 
in December 1942. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


4 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 
WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Vol. 10 


Edited 

by 

Vasant Moon 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


6 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 10 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : October, 1991 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 

Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : ? 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, 
Haryana 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


7 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 



Kumar i Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when 
these were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on 
the base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumar i Selja) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


8 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


9 


1 . 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

6 . 

7 . 

8 . 
9 . 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13 . 

14 . 

15 . 

16 . 

17 . 

18 . 

19 . 

20 . 
21 . 
22 . 

23 . 

24 . 

25 . 

26 . 

27 . 

28 . 

29 . 

30 . 

31 . 

32 . 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material 
Publication Committee 

( EDITORIAL BOARD) 


Hon’ble Shri Anantrao Thopate 

Education Minister 

Hon’ble Shri Patangrao Kadam 

State Minister for Education 

Shri R. S. Gawai 

Shri Dadasaheb Rupawate 

Shri Ramdas Athawale 

Shri B. C. Ramble 

Dr. P. T. Borale 

Shri Ghanashyam Talvatkar 

Shri Shankarrao Kharat 

Smt. Silantabai Dani 

Shri Waman Nimbalkar 

Shri Prakash Ambedkar 

Shri R. R. Bhole 

Shri S. S. Rege 

Dr. Bhalchandra Phadke 

Shri Daya Pawar 

Shri Laxman Mane 

Prof. N. D. Patil 

Prof. Moreshwar Vanamali 

Prof. Janardan Waghmare 

Barrister P. G. Patil 

Dr. M. P. Mangudkar 

Prof. G. P. Pradhan 

Shri B. M. Ambhaikar 

Shri N. M. Kamble 

Prof. J. C. Chandurkar 

Prof. Ashok Godghate 

Shri T. S. Shrungare 

Shri T. M. Kamble 

Secretary, Education Department 

Director of Education 

Shri V. W. Moon 


... President. 

... Vice-President. 

... Vice-President. 

... Executive President. 

. . . Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

. . . Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

. . . Member. 

... Member. 

. . . Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

. . . Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member. 

... Member-Secretary. 

.... Officer on Special Duty. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


10 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


11 


FOREWORD 

This volume of the Writings and Speeches of Dr. Ambedkar 
contains excerpts from the proceedings of the Legislative 
Assembly, and texts of his speeches on various issues connected 
with measures to ameliorate the conditions of Indian labour. 
They reveal literary flourishes and arresting originality seldom 
seen these days. 

The proceedings of the legislature in the 40s, when 
Dr. Ambedkar was Labour Member of the Government of India 
provide a refreshingly educative experience that elevates and 
uplifts. The speeches and remarks of Dr. Ambedkar contained 
in this volume bear the unmistakable stamp of his deep 
scholarship and profound understanding of labour problems. 

The second world war transformed the economy. It provided 
opportunities for expansion of industries. While entrepreneurs 
and managers could hope for prosperity, labour was not given 
its due share. Dr. Ambedkar piloted and introduced measures 
for labour welfare. 

The spirit of his philosophy could be summed up in his own 
words from the speech delivered on September 15, 1943 in the 
first session of the Plenary Labour Conference : “For a long time 
the conviction had gained ground that the industrial labour 
welfare problems could not be solved unless the three parties — 
Government, employees and employer — developed a sense of 
responsibility towards one another, showed more respect for one 
another and agreed to work in a spirit of give and take, and that 
there was not much chance of such a sense of mutual respect 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


viii 


(viii) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and responsibility growing up. A plan to bring them together 
and to let them talk to each other across the table was felt 
to be necessary for the realisation of this purpose.” 

The progressive labour policies adopted in free India owe 
much to the measures introduced by Dr. Ambedkar in the 
forties. He placed great emphasis on technical training and 
upgradation of skills. Skills, important in industrial growth, 
are slow to acquire. Progress by peaceful means is always a 
slow process. In an ancient country like India, with distinct 
lack of a social conscience, progress is bound to be slower. 
Dr. Ambedkar advocated change in our outlook. He also 
advocated that independence to be meaningful must be 
accompanied by good Government and a good society. 

Labour in India has been largely exploited. The efforts of 
Dr. Ambedkar were directed towards bringing the workers 
under the protective umbrella of social security. His 
contribution to the discussions on Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, Maternity Benefit Act, etc., are of lasting importance. 

Dr. Ambedkar found time to inspect the conditions in 
the coalfields. He went 400 feet underground to see the 
operations in the coal and mica mines. This concern for the 
working classes, particularly in the coal mines, manifested 
itself in the Coalmines Labour Welfare Ordinance in 1944. It 
is indeed instructive to read his speeches on different aspects 
of labour welfare. 

Dr. Ambedkar is remembered as the maker of the 
Indian Constitution. His contributions to economic policy 
are not known generally to the present generation of 
his countrymen. This volume contains his speech on 
the multi-purpose development of Damodar Valley. The 
speech brings out his intimate understanding of the 
pressing economic problems of the country. It is a tribute 
to his far-sightedness that he advocated development 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


IX 


FOREWORD (ix) 

of water resources as could be seen from his thinking on the 
multi-purpose plan for development of Orissa rivers. Internal 
navigation was a key to the improvement in the transport 
system. His non-conventional approach to the problems of flood- 
control, navigation, irrigation and drainage, soil conservation 
and power developments reveals the modern and scientific 
mind of Dr. Ambedkar. 

As Labour Member, Dr. Ambedkar studied the working of 
the Government of India. In a speech on Paper Control Order, 
he informed the Legislature that 149 forms were suspended 
during the war and 190 forms were abolished. He reduced 
the sizes of the forms and made the Government of India 
aware of the avoidable paper work. It is difficult to change 
the ways of the Government. 

The Writings and Speeches in this volume contain 
valuable material of contemporary relevance. The lay reader, 
the practical administrator, the research scholar, the labour 
lawyer, the labour leader, the economist and the student of 
history, all have much to study and to reflect in these pages. 



Bombay 
June 10, 1991 


Sharad Pawar 

Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


xi 


NOTE ON EDITING 

Dr. Ambedkar held the portfolio of labour in the Viceroy’s 
Executive Council during 1942-46. This volume comprises his 
speeches in the Central Legislative Council which have been 
compiled from the official debates. In addition to the speeches, 
the questions and answers relating to Dr. Ambedkar are also 
incorporated. 

Dr. Ambedkar had addressed several conferences outside 
the legislature concerning the problem of Indian labour. Details 
of these conferences and the speeches of Dr. Ambedkar given 
on the occasions were not available anywhere else except 
in the issues of the official magazine of the Government of 
India called ‘Indian Information’. The files of this magazine 
were traced in the Gokhale Institute of Political science and 
Economics, Pune. The files, however, do not contain the issues 
for July to December 1942, i.e. for 6 months, the early period 
of Ambedkar’s charge of the portfolio. One speech of this 
period delivered at the Boat Club, Delhi by Dr. Ambedkar on 
Labour and Parliamentary Democracy was made available by 
Shri R. T. Shinde of Bombay. 

Dr. B. D. Phadke brought to our notice few documents 
from the Transfer of Power volumes which are related to 
Dr. Ambedkar. On verification of all the 12 volumes from 
the Sachivalaya Central Library and the Legislative Council 
Library, substantial number of documents could be secured 
and are included. These documents show Dr. Ambedkar’s urge 
for ensuring safeguards for the Scheduled Castes in the new 
Constitution without hampering the process of achievement 
of freedom. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


xii 


(xii) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Several other documents were sought from Khairmode 
collection of the Bombay University Library, Dr. Ambedkar 
Research Institute, Nagpur and the papers received by the 
Government of Maharashtra from the Administrator General 
of the Government of Maharashtra, Bombay. 

The work of the Editorial Board has been made possible 
by the ready help and support it received: 

* first from the Ex- Chief Minister of Maharashtra Shri 
Sharad Pawar who encouraged us throughout our work; 

* next, from the Minister and Minister of State for 
Education; 

* from the Librarian of the Gokhale Institute of Politics 
and Economics, Pune; 

* from the Librarian of the Legislature Library, Bombay; 

* from the Librarian of the Bombay University Library; 

* from the Librarian of the Sachivalaya Central Library; 

* from Shri R. T. Shinde of Bombay; 

* from Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Research Institute, 
Nagpur ; 

* from Shri P. S; More, Director, Govt. Printing and 
Stationery, Shri P. L. Purkar, Manager, Shri U. S. 
Sonawane and Shri R. J. Mahatekar, Dy. Managers, Shri 
A. K. Rao, Asstt. Manager, Shri J. S. Nagvekar, Operator 
Film Setter, officers and staff of the Government Central 
Press, Bombay; 

* from Shri Pradeep Tayade who spared the coloured 
photograph of Dr. Ambedkar; 

* from Shri Salil Waghmare and Mrs. S. M. Newarekar 
of the O.S.D.’s office, who worked beyond the call of 
their duties ; 

To all of these, the Editorial Board is deeply grateful. Last 
but not the least, we acknowledge our gratitude to the Editors 
of ‘The Indian Information’, ‘The Legislative Assembly Debates’ 
of the Government of India and ‘The Transfer of Power’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 xiii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SR. SUBJECT PAGE 

NO. 

Foreword ... ... ... (vii) 

Note on Editing ... ... ... (xi) 

PARTI 

1. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A Biographical Sketch ... 3 

2. Appointment as Labour Member of the Viceroy’s 

Council. ... 10 

3. The need for uniformity in Labour Legislation ... 11 

4. Election of a Member to the Advisory Committee of 

Geological Survey of India ... ... ... 19 

5. The Situation in India ... ... ... 21 

6. Election of a member to the Advisory Committee of 

Geological Survey of India ... ... ... 30 

7. Why Indian Labour is determined to win the War ... 36 

8. The Paper Control Order ... ... ... 44 

9. Announcement re : Grant of Inadequate Dearness 

Allowance to Workers ... ... ... 50 

10. The Indian Finance Bill ... ... ... 53 

11. Election of members to the Standing Committee for 

the Labour Department ... ... ... 59 

12. The Indian Tea Control (Amendment) Bill ... 63 

13. The War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Bill ... 69 

14. Employment Exchanges for Skilled and Semi-Skilled 

Personnel ... ... ... ... 78 

15. The Indian Boilers (Amendment) ... ... 81 

Bill 

16. The Motor Vehicles (Drivers) Amendment Bill ... 84 

17. The Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill ... 87 

18. The War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Bill ... 89 

19. First Session of Plenary Labour Conference ... 100 

20. Labour and Parliamentary ... ... 106 

Democracy 

21. The Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill ... 113 

22. Post-war Development of Electric Power in India ... 120 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK SJ+YS 29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 xiv 

(xiv) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

SR. SUBJECT PAGE 

NO. 

23. Labour Member’s visit to Jharia Coalfields ... 129 

24. Labour Member visits Coalmines ... ... 130 

25. Promotion of Labour Welfare in India ... ... 135 

26. Lifting of ban on Employment of Women 
on underground work in Coalmines 

27. The Coalmines Safety (Stowing) Amendment Bill 145 

28. Government Policy towards Labour ... ... 149 

29. Miscellaneous Departments ... ... 159 

30. Protection of Mosques in New Delhi ... ... 161 

31. The Factories (Amendment) Bill ... ... 165 

32. Advisory Committee on Coalmines Welfare Fund ... 169 

33. Mica Industry to be placed on a sound and stable footing 172 

34. Standing Labour Committee discusses recognition of 

Trade Unions ... ... ... 178 

35. Post-war Employment of skilled workers ... ... 181 

36. Plenary Session of Tripartite Labour Conference ... 188 

37. The Factories (Second Amendment) Bill ... ... 201 

38. The Payment of Wages (Amendment) Bill ... 211 

39. Damodar Valley Scheme — Calcutta Conference ... 220 

40. Post-war Electric Power Development ... ... 226 

41. Government Policy re Mineral Resources of India ... 237 

42. Labour Policy of Government of India ... ... 243 

43. Need for immediate re-imposition of ban 
on Employment of Women underground 

in Mines ... ... 253 

Department of Labour : Demand for Supplementary 

grant ... 260 

45. The Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill ... 264 

46. The Factories (Second Amendment) Bill ... ... 267 

47. The Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill ... 274 

48. Health Insurance for Industrial Workers ... 277 

49. War Work of National Service Labour Tribunals ... 279 

50. Multi-purpose Development of Damodar Valley ... 284 

51. Housing of India’s Industrial Workers ... ... 291 

52. State’s obligations to Labour ... ... 293 

53. Multi-purpose Plan for development of Orissa’s rivers 302 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


xv 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


(xv) 


SR. 

NO. 


SUBJECT 


54. Rejection of Railwaymen’s Federation Demands 

55. Proposed evacuation of villages in the prosecution of 
the Damodar Scheme 

56. Workmen’s Compensation (Amendment) Bill 

57. Indian Mines (Amendment) Bill 

58. Factories (Amendment) Bill 

59. Rehabilitation Plans 

60. Welfare and Social Security of Workers 

61. Muslims have fared much better in Labour Department 

62. The Indian Finance Bill 

63. Strike by workers of Government of India Press 

64. Factories (Amendment) Bill 

65. Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 

66. Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Bill 

67. Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 

68. Miscellaneous 


PAGE 

312 

317 

320 

323 

326 

334 

339 

344 

354 

364 

367 

373 

385 

390 

392 


PART II 

SECTION 1 

1. Grievances of the Scheduled Castes : by Dr. Ambedkar 
SECTION 2 

1. Note by Sir S. Cripps 

2. Dr. Ambedkar and Mr. S. Rajah to Sir S. Cripps 

3. Sir R. Lumley (Bombay) to the Marquess of 
Linlithgow (Extract) 

4. Cripps Proposals 

5. Statement of Dr. Ambedkar on the Cripps Proposals 

6. The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 

7. War Cabinet Paper W.P. (42) 283 Memorandum by 

the Lord Privy Seal 

8. The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 

9. The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 

10. Dr. Ambedkar to the Marquess of Linlithgow 

11. Precis of discussion in the Viceroy’s Executive Council 

12. Field Marshal Viscount Wavell to Mr. Amery 


403 

445 

447 

449 

452 

455 

463 

465 

467 

468 
470 
473 
475 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-01.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


xvi 


(xvi) DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

SR. SUBJECT PAGE 

NO. 

13. Dr. Ambedkar to Field Marshal Viscount Wavell ... 476 

14. Field Marshal Viscount Wavell to Lord Pethick- 

Lawrence ... ... ... ... 480 

15. Note of meeting between Cabinet delegation, Lord 

Wavell and Dr. Ambedkar ... ... 482 

16. Dr. Ambedkar to Lord Wavell ... ... 487 

17. Members of the Executive Council to Field Marshal 

Viscount Wavell ... ... ... 491 

18. Dr. Ambedkar to Rt. Hon’ble Mr. A. V. Alexander ... 492 

19. Dr. Ambedkar to Lord Pethick-Lawrence ... 500 

20. Lord Pethick-Lawrence to Dr. Ambedkar ... 502 

21. Rao Bahadur Sivaraj to Field Marshal Viscount Wavell 503 

22. Mr. Attlee to Dr. ... ... ... 509 

Ambedkar 

23. Dr. Ambedkar to Mr. ... ... ... 512 

Attlee 

24. Lord Pethick-Lawrence to Mr. Attlee ... 515 

25. Lord Pethick-Lawrence to Mr. Attlee ... 517 

SECTION 3 

1. A Critique of the proposals of the Cabinet Mission: 

by Dr. Ambedkar ... ... ... 521 

2. The Cabinet Mission and the Untouchables: 

by Dr. Ambedkar ... ... ... 537 

PART III 

1 to Questions and Answers ... ... ... 551- 

472 1072 

Index ... ... ... ... 1073- 

1079 

Errata ... ... ... ... 1080 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


1 


Part I 

Speeches 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


2 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


3 


1 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 
A Biographical Sketch 

* Who’s Who in Viceroy’s Council 

Thirty years ago, a Mahar youth viewed the golden vista 
of opportunity opened up by education and decided that his 
life’s work should be a crusade against the social system which 
declared him and his kinsmen untouchables whose very shadows 
polluted high caste Hindus in their vicinity. Today, Dr. Bhimrao 
Ramji Ambedkar holds the portfolio of Labour in the Viceroy’s 
Executive Council, but he still feels that his first duty is to the 
millions in India who belong to the so-called Depressed Classes 
and that no considerations of personal well-being or ambition 
should come in the way of his leading them to emancipation. 

Those who know of his attacks on the Hindu social system 
and of his differences with caste Hindu leaders will certainly feel 
that he is a much embittered man. But to one who has heard 
him tell of his career and antecedents, the wonder is that he is 
not even more bitter and that he has managed to crowd into a 
life devoted so largely to his crusade against untouchability so 
many interests, and to study a great variety of subjects with so 
much distinction. 

One naturally asks : How did this untouchable manage 
to acquire any sort of education ? The answer is simple. His 
community — the Mahars — are cultivators, village servants 
and soldiers. They once supplied the Bombay Army of the 
East India Company with its manpower, just as the Dusads 
of Bihar and the Pariahs of Madras manned the armies of 
the Company in those Provinces. Then sepoys were given 
education in the Army, and Subedar Ramji Maloji Ambedkar, 
Dr. Ambedkar’s father, had once been a teacher in an Army school. 

* Indian Information, March 1, 1943, pp. 194-95. This article was published under 
the caption ‘Personalities’. Name of the author is not printed on the article. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


4 


4 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Early Education 

Had the recruitment of Mahars to the Army not been stopped in 
1892, it is possible that the Subedar’s son would have followed 
the profession of arms as well, but things were to be otherwise. 
Realising the value of education, the Subedar did his best to 
educate his sons. This called for great effort. Schools refused 
to admit the children of a Mahar, and from his native district 
of Ratnagiri he went to Satara and later to Bombay, where he 
finally settled. At one stage he had to decide which of his two 
sons he could afford to keep at school, and he chose the youngest 
boy, now the leader of the Depressed Classes. 

That youth learnt early what it was to be an untouchable. 
He was born in 1893* at Mhow in the comparatively democratic 
atmosphere of a military station, but as a child went to the 
Bombay Presidency. He remembers going to school in Satara 
carrying a piece of gunny cloth to squat on in a corner of the 
classroom. The school servant would not touch the cloth, which 
young Ambedkar carried to and fro every day. He could not touch 
the school tap and could only quench his thirst if the school 
peon was there to open it for him. At home his sisters did the 
family washing as no dhobi would wash their clothes, and also 
cut their brothers’ hair. 

One incident stands out very clearly in his memory. Once 
he, his elder brother and his little nephew set out to meet their 
father at some town off the railway line. No cartman would carry 
them on the last stage of their trip and they had eventually to 
pay double the fare to drive a cart themselves. The appetising 
meal prepared for the way was completely spoilt as they had no 
water to drink and nobody would give them any. 

Help From Baroda Ruler 

In due course B. R. Ambedkar finished school and joined the 
Elphinstone College at Bombay. Half way through his university 
course, his father ran out of funds and a friend took the young 
undergraduate to the Gaekwar of Baroda who gave him a 
scholarship which enabled him to secure his degree. 

After graduating, B. R. Ambedkar went to thank the Gaekwar, 
and to his surprise was asked if he would go overseas for further 
studies. 


* According to the biographers of Dr. Ambedkar, his date of birth is 14th April 1891 
as per school register at Satara where he had had his primary education. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


5 


WHO’S WHO IN VICEROY’S COUNCIL 5 

He jumped at the offer and it was arranged that he should go 
to the Columbia University of New York. During the months 
of waiting before sailing for America, the Gaekwar advised 
Ambedkar to try the profession of his fore-fathers and made him 
a Lieutenant in the Baroda State Forces. 

At the Columbia University, he studied Economics, Sociology 
and Political and Moral Philosophy, securing his Master’s degree 
and a Doctorate in Philosophy. In 1917 he went to London and 
carried on research in the India Office Library and at the London 
School of Economics, besides joining Gray’s Inn. 

Returning to India, he offered his services to the man who 
had helped him and was appointed a probationer in the office 
of the Accountant-General of Baroda. 

Experiences In Baroda 

Dr. Ambedkar had been several years abroad and made many 
friends, Indians, Europeans and Americans, who had not treated 
him as an untouchable. The feeling that he was one of the 
downtrodden had thus been erased from his mind. Now it all 
returned painfully as he went to Baroda to start work. Where 
was he, a Mahar, to stay ? He persuaded a Parsi innkeeper to 
board and lodge him. Luckily there were no other lodgers, but 
after ten days a number of Parsis armed with lathis called on 
him, asked what he meant by defiling a hostel reserved for their 
community and told him to quit by that very evening. 

He appealed to two friends, one a Hindu and the other a 
Christian, for shelter. The first said, “If you come to my home 
my servants will go.” The second friend wanted to consult his 
wife, and Dr. Ambedkar, knowing that husband and wife came 
of orthodox Brahmin stock and that the latter still suffered from 
inhibitions regarding caste, decided to return to Bombay. 

There he became Professor of Political Economy in the 
Sydenham College of Commerce. But he longed to complete 
his studies in England. He supplemented his salary by private 
tuitions, saved every pie he could and after a year or two rejoined 
the London School of Economics. He obtained the coveted D.Sc. 
at London for a thesis on “The Problem of the Rupee” and was 
called to the Bar. His desire to study at a German University 
took him to Bonn, but the fall in the exchange led him to return 
to India without a degree. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

He had now decided to practise Law rather than serve under 
Government or in a University, as he would then be completely 
free to work for the untouchables. 

Close Association With Depressed Classes 

His early fears that the prejudices of the caste Hindu solicitors 
and pleaders on whom he would depend for briefs, would bar his 
progress were not justified and he built up a good civil appellate 
practice in Bombay. The Universities of Bombay and Nagpur and 
the Bombay High Court offered him examinerships in law and 
he was for a time Professor and Principal of the Government 
Law College in Bombay. Tempting offers of judicial appointments, 
with the prospect of a life far removed from political turmoil, 
he has turned down. 

For ten years the untouchable Barrister and Professor lived 
in one of the Bombay Development Department’s chawls at Parel. 
These chawls are big five-storeyed buildings, each containing about 
100 one-room tenements. They possess no modern conveniences, 
each floor having a single lavatory and a single tap for bathing, 
washing and cleaning cooking utensils. Most of the tenants are 
millhands earning on an average Rs. 25 per mensem. 

Living under these conditions, Dr. Ambedkar acquired a 
firsthand knowledge of life among the workers of Bombay. It is 
his boast that hundreds of millhands know him personally and 
have sought his advice and assistance. He has thus gained the 
confidence of many workers and established his leadership of 
the Depressed Classes in his campaign against untouchability. 

Campaign Against Untouchability 

That campaign has been marked by two outstanding events. 
The first was the Chowdar Tank Satyagraha in Mahad (Kolaba 
District) when he organised mass demonstrations by members of 
the Depressed Classes to assert their right to take water from 
a certain tank. Heads were broken when the untouchables drew 
water and Dr. Ambedkar was compelled to accept the protection 
of the police, but the untouchables gained their point. More 
important still, a great feeling of esprit de corps was awakened 
among them and a sense of their dignity as human beings, which 
was to carry them further along the road to emancipation. 

Encouraged by their success, the untouchables decided to fight for 
the right to enter the most sacred temple in the sacred city of Nasik. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


7 


WHO’S WHO IN VICEROY’S COUNCIL 7 

For over five years they offered satyagraha at the Kalaram 
Temple. They obstructed pilgrims at the great annual fair to 
such an extent that the fair could not be held, and they bathed 
at a ghat which, till then, had been closed to them, thereby 
“polluting” the waters of the sacred Godavari. Many, including 
a large number of women, went to jail, and although the 
untouchables were not given the right to enter the Temple, by 
the time the satyagraha was called off, they had shown that 
they could unite and had given the caste Hindus a bit of a jolt 
in no way tempered by their threat to sever their connection 
with Hinduism once and for all. 

Political Activities 

As the leader of the untouchables, Dr. Ambedkar has been 
prominent in politics. He was nominated to the Bombay 
Legislative Council in 1926, and eleven years later, elected to 
the Bombay Legislative Assembly as the representative of the 
Scheduled Castes from the city of Bombay. He fought for his 
people at the three Round Table Conferences in London and on 
the Joint Parliamentary Committee which drafted the Bill on 
which the Government of India Act of 1935 is based. 

The most notable incident in his political career was his conflict 
with Mr. Gandhi over safeguards under the new Constitution. 
Dr. Ambedkar claimed certain political safeguards for the 
Scheduled Castes. As a protest against the provision which 
the British Government were about to make for safeguards, 
Mr. Gandhi started a fast to death. The result of the struggle 
was that Dr. Ambedkar and Mr. Gandhi agreed, under what is 
known as the Poona Pact, to joint electorates with reservation 
of seats for untouchables in elections to the Lower Houses of the 
Provincial Legislatures under the new Constitution. 

At the first elections under the new Act, Dr. Ambedkar 
organised his followers in his own Province of Bombay and, 
to a lesser extent, in the Central Provinces. In Bombay, his 
Independent Labour Party secured 11 of the 15 seats reserved 
for the “Scheduled Castes.” In the Ratnagiri District, caste Hindu 
candidates put up by his Party actually captured two seats not 
reserved for the Depressed Classes. In the Central Provinces, 
most of the successful Depressed Class candidates were non- 
Congressmen and followers of Dr. Ambedkar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Stigma Of Untouchability 

Even as a figure of national importance, Dr. Ambedkar does not 
escape the stigma of untouchability. In 1929, while serving on a 
committee investigating certain grievances of the untouchables, 
he visited Khandesh District, and at a place called Chalisgaon 
was welcomed by the local Mahars. After a long delay at the 
station he was put into a tonga and driven in the direction of 
the Maharwada, the Mahar quarters. The driver of the tonga 
was lamentably inexpert and at a culvert the horse bolted and 
Dr. Ambedkar was thrown on to the stone pavement and seriously 
injured. He then learnt that the untouchables had great difficulty 
in getting a tonga and that, as no tonga driver would drive him, 
one of the Mahars took the reins, not thinking of the risk to 
his leader. 

As recently as 1934 Dr. Ambedkar and some of his fellow 
workers visited Daulatabad Fort in the Nizam’s Dominions while 
on a sightseeing tour. They reached the Fort covered with dust 
and unthinkingly took water from a tank to wash. While they 
were getting permission to go round, an old Mohammedan ran 
up and raised an outcry, shouting, “The Dheds (untouchables) 
have polluted the tank.” The situation became serious and, 
exasperated by the attitude of the Mohammedans. Dr. Ambedkar 
asked : “Is that what your religion teaches ? Would you prevent 
an untouchable from taking water from this tank if he became a 
Mohammedan ?” That silenced the crowd, but the untouchables 
were only allowed to go round the Fort with an armed soldier 
who saw that they did not “pollute” water anywhere else. 

His life’s experiences have shown Dr. Ambedkar that, 
while caste and untouchability are of Hindu creation, India’s 
Mohammedans, Parsis and Christians are not wholly free from 
Hindu inhibitions on the subject. During his long struggle he 
has found valuable companionship in a world which denies none 
of its treasures to the outcast among men — the Common-wealth 
of Letters. 

Literary Activities 

No one who has seen Dr. Ambedkar at home can fail to be 
struck by the number and variety of the volumes which fill his 
bookshelves and he on the tables around him. Books of every 
kind, but more especially works on constitutional law, politics, 
economics and sociology, appeal to him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


9 


WHO’S WHO IN VICEROY’S COUNCIL 9 

His own writings include “The Problem of the Rupee”, 
“Provincial Finance in British India”, “Annihilation of Caste”, 
“Federation versus Freedom” and “Thoughts on Pakistan.” 

He has conducted Marathi newspapers to awaken the 
untouchables politically. In 1919* he started the “Muka Nayak” 
(“Leader of the Dumb”,), but this died a natural death soon after 
he left to resume his studies in Europe. In 1923@ he started 
the “Bahiskrata Bharat” (“Excluded India”), a title which was 
changed to “Janata” (“The People”) some years ago as he felt that 
its appeal should not be solely to the communities composing 
“Excluded India.” 

Attitude To Religion 

A word should be said about Dr. Ambedkar’s attitude to religion. 
He feels that the Hindu social system, with its four castes and a 
great mass of outcasts, has been a source of weakness to India 
as a whole and he docs not wish to remain within its fold. 

Some years ago the Jat Pat Todak Mandal, a reformist Hindu 
organisation, invited him to preside over their annual conference. 
Later the conference was cancelled as his draft presidential 
address, in which he stated that it would be his last speech as 
a Hindu, was not acceptable to the Mandal. He published that 
undelivered speech as a booklet “Annihilation of Caste.” Its title 
shows his attitude to caste. 

But, while he is determined not to remain a Hindu and 
has studied the teachings of several other religions, including 
Buddhism, Sikhism and Christianity, Dr. Ambedkar will not 
yet announce his entry into another faith. The untouchables, he 
feels, still need him. His conversion now would have far-reaching 
repercussions. His faith and the faith of every follower of his 
is a matter which each man should settle for himself; and he 
docs not wish to influence his followers in this matter. When 
he has handed over the leadership of the untochables to others 
and retired from public life, he will tell the world of his decision. 
For the present his crusade must go on. 

• • 


* Should be 1920. — Ed. 
@ Should be 1927. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


10 


2 


* Appointment as Labour Member of the 
Viceroy’s Council 


[Dr. B. R. Ambedkar joined as Member of the Viceroy’s Council 
on the 20th July 1942. He was asked to look after the portfolio 
of Labour. The appointment letter issued by His Majesty’s office 
in this regard reads as under : — Ed.] 

GEORGE R. I. 

George the Sixth by the grace of God of Great Britain, Ireland 
and the British Dominions beyond the seas, King Defender of 
the Faith, Emperor of India. 

To our Trusty and Well Beloved Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar, 
Esquire, Doctor of Science, Barrister-at-Law. 

GREETING ! 

We do by this, Our Warrant Our Sign Manual, appoint you, 
the said Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar to be, during Our pleasure, 
a Member of the Executive Council of Our Governor- General of 
India. 

(II) And we do hereby appoint that so soon as you shall have 
entered upon the duties of your office, this our warrant shall 
have effect. 

Given at our Court at St. James’, this ninth day of July in 
the year of our Lord, one thousand nine hundred and forty-two 
and in the sixth year of our Reign. 

By His Majesty’s Command 
Sd/- L. S. Amery. 

• • 


* Khairmode C. B., Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar (Marathi Biography), Vol. 9, 
1987, p. 113 (Published by Maharashtra Rajya Sahitya Sanskruti Mandal, Bombay). 
Dr. Ambedkar was already nominated as member of the National Defence Council 
vide Government Communique, dated 21st July 1941. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


11 


3 


* The Need for Uniformity in 
Labour Legislation 


[Here is the full text of speech delivered by the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, member for Labour, Government of India, 
at the Joint Labour Conference in New Delhi on friday, August 
7 , 1942 .] 

“I have great pleasure in welcoming you to this tripartite 
Labour Conference. I can hardly convey to you adequately the 
sense of gratitude which I and the Government of India feel 
for the ready response which you have given to our invitation 
and the trouble that you have taken to be present here this 
morning. I hope and trust that this ready response on your part 
will be followed by an equally willing cooperation in making 
this conference a success and in carrying through its purposes 
to fruition. 

I do not wish to detain you long; these are days of grave 
emergency and I realise that everyone must return to his post 
as soon as he can. I will not, therefore, make any lengthy speech 
on this occasion but will contain myself with touching upon a 
few points with a view to bringing home to you the significance 
of the conference and to state its aims and objects. 

TWO SPECIAL FEATURES 

As you know there have been so far three Labour 
Conferences held in New Delhi under the auspices of the Labour 
Department of the Government of India. The first one was 
held on January 22 and 23, 1940, the second on January 27 
and 28, 1941, and the third on January 30 and 31, 1942. The 
present conference is thus the fourth of this series. You will 
realise the significance of this conference better if I tell you in 
as few words as I can the special features which mark off this 
Conference from the previous ones. In the first place, although the 


Indian Information, September 15, 1942. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

previous Conferences met regularly at certain fixed periods, 
permanency was not a part of the plan of those conferences. 
There could have been a break in their regularity and the idea 
could have been abandoned without doing violence to any rule 
or convention or understanding. The present conference has 
permanancy as a part of its plan. The organisation that we want 
to set up will have the permanancy and regularity of a standing 
committee, ready to function when called upon to do so. 

More important than this feature of the conference is 
the second feature to which I want to draw your particular 
attention. It relates to the composition of the conference. The 
previous conferences were representative of Governments 
only — the representatives of the Central Government, Provincial 
Governments and some of the Indian States’ Governments — 
formed the only constituents of the conference. The most necessary 
and the most important elements, namely, the Employers and 
the Employees, were not represented at these conferences. Care 
was no doubt taken to establish contact and even to consult the 
organisations representing the Employers and the Employees. 
For instance, my distinguished colleague the Hon’ble Sir. A. 
Ramaswani Mudaliar, when he was the member in charge of 
Labour, did take occasion when he visited Calcutta to meet the 
representatives of Labour and of employers. 

Similarly, my distinguished colleague, the Hon’ble Sir 
Firoz Khan Noon, to whom we owe the project of the present 
conference, did in his tenure of office as Labour Member seek 
occasion to take counsel with the organisations of Employers 
and Employers. It is for the first time, however, in the history 
of these Labour conferences that the representatives of the 
Employers and the Employees have been brought face to face 
within the ambit of a joint Conference. To my mind this is a 
feature of the conference which should find a very ready welcome 
from all concerned and particularly from the representatives 
of the Employees. Ever since the Witley Commission, in 
its Report on Labour in India, put forth the proposal that 
there should be established in India as a permanent body an 
Industrial Council, the representatives of Labour have agitated 
for effect being given to that recommendation. For various 
reasons it did not until now become possible to realise the 
ideal of an Industrial Council. I do not claim that the proposal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


13 


THE NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN LABOUR LEGISLATION 13 

which this conference is called upon to give effect to amounts 
to a complete realisation of that cherished ideal. But there can 
be no doubt that this Conference seeks to pave the way towards 
the realisation of that ideal, and I am sure you will not deem it 
an exaggeration if I say that it marks a long stride on the road 
which leads to that goal. 

LABOUR LEGISLATION 

I will now say a word or two with regard to the aims and 
objects of this Conference. Some of you who arc familiar with the 
proceedings of the previous conferences will know that one of the 
primary objects which brought those conferences into being was 
the great desire to avoid the danger arising out of the diversity 
in Labour Legislation with which this country was threatened as 
a consequence of Provincial independence in Labour legislation. 

So long as the Government of India was a Unitary Government, 
uniformity in Labour legislation was not difficult to obtain. But 
the federal constitution created by the Government of India Act of 
1935 by including Labour legislation in the Concurrent Legislative 
List had created a very serious situation. It was feared that if 
there was no central legislation each Province might make a 
particular law specially suited to itself, but different from that of 
its neighbour by allowing Provincial considerations to dominate 
over considerations of general and national importance. 

THREE MAIN OBJECTS 

The conferences were called to supply a most necessary 
corrective to this tendency and to foster among Provincial 
Governments a regard for the wholesome principle of uniformity in 
Labour legislation. In constituting this conference I do not propose 
to abandon this object of uniformity in Labour legislation with 
which the three previous Conferences were mainly concerned. It 
will remain one of the object which the Conference will pursue. But 
to this I would like to add two other objects, namely, the laying 
down of a procedure for the settlement of industrial disputes and 
the discussion of all matters of all-India importance as between 
Labour and Capital. Our Conference will have, therefore, three 
main aims and objects : — 

(i) the promotion of uniformity in Labour legislation; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) the laying down of a procedure for the settlement of 
industrial disputes; and 

(iii) the discussion of all matters of all-India importance as 
between employers and employees. 

In regard to the first it is unnecessary to say why we have 
included it in our aims and objects. Uniformity in Labour 
legislation can never cease to be a matter of importance to so 
large a country like India with its many administrative and 
provincial jurisdictions. It must therefore, continue to occupy 
our attention in the future as it has done in the past. 

INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 

As to industrial disputes both Labour and Capital have, once 
in war, behaved with a sense of responsibility and the number of 
strikes that have taken place has not been on a very extensive 
or disturbing scale. There was some tendency at the beginning of 
this year for an increase in industrial unrest, but the laying down 
of a procedure for adjudication of disputes under the Defence of 
India Rule 81 -A has resulted in some reduction in recent months. 
That procedure will, we hope, prove an efficient and a reliable 
machinery, but it is a procedure for the settlement of industrial 
disputes as one of the aims and objects of the Conference which 
we propose to set up. 

In designing the last item included in our aims and objects 
we have deliberately used wide language so as not to exclude 
from the deliberation of the Conference anything that is of 
importance to labour and capital. But I like to tell you what we 

have in mind in employing this broad expression “matters 

of all-India importance.” We want to include in it all matters 
relating to Labour Welfare and the maintenance of Labour 
morale. So understood, I need hardly say this object, though 
placed last, may be regarded as the highest in importance. We 
certainly regard it as most urgent. The urgency I need hardly 
say is due to the necessities of the war. 

A WAR OF SUPPLIES 

The present war is a war of supplies and supplies depend upon peace 
in industry. How to secure peace in industry is a pressing problem for 
us today. I may not be wrong if I say that peace in industry depends 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


15 


THE NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN LABOUR LEGISLATION 15 

upon two things. In the first place, it depends upon the existence 
of the machinery ready at hand for the quick settlement of 
industrial disputes. Secondly, it depends upon the prompt removal 
of all such conditions in industry which may fray tempers and 
bring about a deterioration in the morale of people engaged in 
it. But there remain a large number of questions which are too 
small to lead to an industrial dispute, but which are big enough 
to raise temper. Most of those matters which are liable to raise 
tempers relate to what in ordinary parlance is disignated as 
matters affecting social welfare. For dealing with such problems 
we have no machinery, and it is mainly the necessity to provide 
immediately a machinery for advising Government as to how 
such matters should be peacefully and satisfactorily dealt with 
that has led Government to institute this Conference forthwith. 

THE TASK AHEAD 

Such is the significance of this Conference and such are its 
aims and objects. Now as to the task before this Conference you 
will perhaps find our agenda to be a very meagre fare. There is 
no much meat in it. But that is unavoidable. We cannot place 
before you any agenda other than the one we have placed until 
we have reached a decision on the preliminary question as to 
whether we agree upon the plan of having such a conference 
and what its constitution should be. That being the position, all 
I can do today is to call upon you to decide upon the following 
matters : — 

(1) The desirability of establishing a Labour conference a 
permanent organisation to meet at least once a year; 

(2) The desirability of instituting a Standing Advisory 
Committee of this Conference which would meet, whenever 
Government thought it necessary to invite them to meet 
and to advise Government on matters placed before it; 
and 

(3) Defining in general terms the procedure for the constitution 
of these bodies. 

As regards the constitution of these bodies, it may be desirable 
for me to place before you the plan which, we think, is best 
suited for the purpose of a tripartite conference like this. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

PLENARY CONFERENCE 
We propose to constitute two bodies : — 

(1) a Plenary Conference, and (2) a Standing Advisory 
Committee. 

The Plenary Conference will be composed of representatives 
of the Central Government, of Provinces, of States, of employers 
and of employees. In general, each Province or large State will 
be entitled to be represented, and those States not individually 
represented would be represented by a nominee of the Chamber 
of Princes. Representation would also be given to the main 
associations of employers and employees, and it would also be 
open to Government to nominate representatives of classes of 
employers or employees who in their opinion were not otherwise 
adequately represented. It would not in the case of the Plenary 
Conference be possible to ensure that the representation of 
employers and employees should be equal to that of Government 
repre sentatives . 

STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

The constitution of the Standing Advisory Committee would 
be more rigid, and as you will sec from the text of the resolution 
that will be placed before you that we propose to distribute the 
representation as follows : — (1) representatives of the Government 
of India, (2) representatives of Provinces, (3) representatives of 
States, (4) representatives of employers and (5) representatives of 
employees, with the Labour member of the Central Government 
as Chairman. 

In suggesting this constitution for the Standing Advisory 
Committee we have followed as closely as we can the principles 
underlying the constitution of the Governing Body of the 
International Labour Office which was set up under the auspices 
of the League of Nations. There are three principles which to my 
mind underlie that constitution. First, equality of representation 
between Government and Non-Government representatives. This 
is illustrated by the provision contained in article 7, Clause 1, 
whereby out of 32 representatives 16 represent Governments 
and 16 represent employers and workers. We have given effect 
to this principle by giving 10 seats to Government and 10 seats 
to Industry. 

The second principle is equality of representation as between 
employers and employees. This is provided by the same Article 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


17 


THE NEED FOR UNIFORMITY IN LABOUR LEGISLATION 17 

whereby the 16 Non- Government seats are divided equally 
between employers and employees. We recognise this by 
distributing the 10 seats allotted to Industry equally between 
employers and employees. 

THE THIRD PRINCIPLE 

The third principle is an assurance of representation to certain 
interests by reservation. This will be found in Article 7 which 
by clause (2) reserves 6 out of 16 Government seats to Non- 
European States and by clause (4) reserves two seats from the 
quota of employers’ seats to Non-European States. We propose 
to adopt this principle by allowing one representative from the 
quota of each, employers and employees, to be nominated by the 
labour Member of the Central Government. This will ensure some 
representation of interests other than those represented by the 
main employers and employees’ organisations. I have the justice 
and fairness of these proposals will appeal to you and that you 
will not find any difficulty in giving them your approval. 

We are setting up these bodies at the centre, but as you 
know very well Labour is much more concerned with Provincial 
Government than with the Central Government, and it seems 
to me that a body set up at the top will require to be supported 
from the bottom, and therefore if Provincial Government would 
desire to set up similar bodies in their own provinces to deal 
with question with which the Central Organisation would deal, 
I give on behalf of the Central Government an assurance that 
we should undoubtedly encourage any suggestion on this general 
point.” 

PLENARY LABOUR CONFERENCE AND 
STANDING COMMITTEE TO BE SET UP 

A resolution setting up a Plenary Labour Conference and a 
Standing Committee was unanimously adopted at the Tripartite 
Labour Conference. 

The Conference was attended by nearly 50 delegates, 
representatives of the Central and Provincial Governments, of 
certain States and of all important organisations of workers, and 
was opened by the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Representatives of employers and workers were in full 
agreement with the objects of the Conference. 

Mr. V. V. Giri, President of the All-India Trade Union 
Congress, welcomed the institution of the Conference and hoped 
that it would busy itself, not merely with discussions but with 
the question of the advancement of labour conditions and of 
peace in industry. 

Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, President of the Indian Federation 
of Labour, remarked that the method of the conference should 
ensure peace and contentment in industry particularly at this 
critical period. 

Sir A. R. Dalai and Mr. Sri Sri Ram, the presidents of the 
two all-India associations of employers, led their respective 
delegations. Representatives of the Chamber of Princes, and of 
Hyderabad, Baroda and Gwalior also took part in the discussions. 
All the delegates welcomed whole-heartedly the participation of 
the Indian States. 

The Plenary Conference will consist of 44 members with 
the Labour Member of the Government of India as Chairman. 
Twenty-two members will represent various Governments, 
11 workers and 11 employers. 

Similarly the Standing Committee, consisting of 20 members 
with the Labour Member as its Chairman, will have equal 
numbers of representatives of Government on the one hand, and 
of employers and workers on the other. 

The Hon’ble the Labour Member, who also presided at the 
conference, accepted on behalf of the Government of India the 
principle that representatives of all organisations of employers 
and workers should be appointed in agreement with such 
organisations. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


19 


4 


* Election of a Member to the Advisory 
Committee for the Utilization Branch of the 
Geological Survey of India 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I move: 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as 
the Honourable the President may direct one representative of 
the Assembly to serve on the Advisory Committee constituted 
by the Government of India, to advise on problems connected 
with the work of the Utilization Branch of the Geological Survey 
of India.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved: 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as 
the Honourable the President may direct one representative of 
the Assembly to serve on the Advisory Committee constituted 
by the Government of India, to advise on problems connected 
with the work of the Utilization Branch of the Geological Survey 
of India.” 

f The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is quite true 
that my Honourable friend had not the benefit of hearing my 
maiden speech. I have made many speeches in my life and I do 
not think I shall be afraid of making a maiden speech. 

My Honourable friend pointed out that the reason why I did not 
speak in support of the Resolution is because there is something 
very dark which the department is not prepared to disclose to this 
House. I can assure the Honourable member that I do not think 
that there is anything behind this project which cither myself or 
the Government of India need be ashamed of. When I put forward 
this motion, I thought that it would go through in the usual 
way in which such motions arc treated and if I had the slightest 
inkling that my friend was going to raise these points, I would 
certainly have posted myself on these questions. (An Honourable 
Member: “You must know the procedure of the House.”) Well, I 
am a new man and I expect from this House a little more charity. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. LI, dated 14th September 1942, p. 76. 
t Ibid.., pp. 78-79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

If my friend must have the information which he wants before 
he can allow this motion to go through, then my suggestion is 
that this debate may be adjourned to a later date when I shall 
be in a position to give my Honourable friend the information 
he wants. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member (Mr. Neogy) can get all the information he 
wants by putting down a question, but, I suppose it is the desire 
of the House that this motion should be postponed. 

(Voices : “Yes”.) 

The motion is postponed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


21 


5 


The Situation in India 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
House will now resume discussion of the motion : 

“That the situation in India be taken into consideration.” 

k k k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, the debate on the motion that has been going on for the last 
two or three days reveals that there are two definite points of 
view presented by the Members of this House. There is one point 
of view which holds that the action taken by the Government by 
arresting the members of the Congress and in suppressing the 
violent movement that has sprung up was not justified. There 
is one section of the House which holds that the action taken 
by the Government is perfectly justified. In a situation like this 
it might be well for Government to say that it is unnecessary 
for them to intervene in this debate for the simple reason that 
one side of the House cancels the other, but it seems to me, 
from what my Honourable colleague, the Member for Law, has 
said, that it would not be proper for Government Members 
and, particularly, the Indian Members of the Executive Council 
to allow this matter to rest there. Rather than let the burden 
remain on the shoulders of one section of the House, I think it 
is very necessary that the Members should take the burden upon 
themselves, and I, therefore, propose to deal with some of the 
points that have been made by that section of the House which 
thinks that the action was not justified. 

The points that have been raised evidently fall into two 
categories; some points arc particular in their significance 
and in their nature; some points are of general importance 
and although it might be desirable for some of us not only 
to deal with the particular points but also with the general 
points, time, I am afraid, is so short that one has to make his 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 18th September 1942, pp. 281-87. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

selection in meeting some of the charges that have been levelled. 
I, therefore, propose to offer my remarks only on two charges 
which have been levelled by the party opposed against the 
Government. 

Sir, the critics of Government have said that the Government 
were not justified in arresting the members of the Congress and 
if I understand the argument correctly, the argument seems to 
be that Congress is a body which believes in non-violence and 
that if the Congress had been allowed to be free they certainly 
would have controlled the situation in' such a manner that they 
would have prevented violence from emerging. It seems to me 
that the Members who take that line have not correctly read what 
has happened to the Congress and the members of the Working 
Committee during the last two years with regard to the principle 
of non-violence. Sir, as I read the proceedings of the Congress 
during the last two or three years, the impression that has been 
left upon my mind is that there has been a terrible landslide 
in the principle of non-violence as has been proclaimed by the 
Congress. The non-violence has been deeply buried — I have no 
hesitation on that point at all. 

Let me give the House a few facts. Sir, on the 22nd of 
December, 1939, the Congress first gave the threat of civil 
disobedience. On the 19th March, 1940, the Congress had 
its Annual Session at Ramgarh. At the Annual Session 
Mr. Gandhi was made the dictator and given sole charge to 
lead the struggle. Mr. Gandhi became the Commander-in-Chief 
under that resolution. But on the 22nd of June, 1940, barely 
within three months, Mr. Gandhi was deposed from his place 
as a Commander-in-Chief. The Working Committee refused to 
accept the principle of non-violence as a guiding principle for its 
action, and Mr. Gandhi had to tender his resignation. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea (Calcutta Suburbs : Non-Muhammadan 
Urban): That was with regard to the war. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Please do not 
disturb me. 

On the 15th December, 1940, the All-India Congress 
Committee met in Bombay and there a resolution was passed 
by which Mr. Gandhi was again made the Commander-in- 
Chief and requested to carry on the struggle. Mr. Gandhi 
continued to be the Commander till December 1941. In 
December 1941, a Working Committee meeting was held in 
Bardoli and a resolution was passed again deposing Mr. Gandhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


23 


THE SITUATION IN INDIA 23 

The important feature of the incident that took place in December 
1941 is, I think, not quite well-known to the Members of this 
House. There was a great schism at Bardoli between Mr. Gandhi 
and his followers who believed in non-violence out and out, 
and the other members of the Working Committee who did not 
believe in non-violence. The matter was put to issue at Wardha 
at a meeting of the All-India Congress Committee. Everybody 
in India, certainly the members of the Working Committee, 
expected that Mr. Gandhi would push the issue to a decision 
and cither have the Working Committee’s resolution passed 
at Bardoli rescinded or, if it was not possible for him to do 
so, tender his resignation. One of the most astounding things 
that Mr. Gandhi did at Wardha when the resolution came up 
for ratification before the All-India Congress Committee was 
that the apostle of non-violence instructed his followers not to 
carry the matter to a division. Not only that, he continued to 
associate himself with the Working Committee and continued to 
be its Commander-in-Chief. Sir, if that is not evidence that the 
Congress was saturated with a spirit of violence, right under the 
very nose of the Congress — Mr. Gandhi — I do not know what 
better evidence one could offer on that point. 

There is another point which, I think, Honourable Members 
are not aware of and about which I would like to make some 
reference. It is not only a fact that almost all members of the 
Congress Working Committee — at any rate a great many of 
them — had ceased to have any faith in non-violence, a great 
many of them had become indifferent to the principle, but there 
is enough body of evidence to indicate that inside the Congress 
there was an attempt being made for a planned campaign of 
violence. 

Sardar Sant Singh : So far as the war is concerned 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Please do not 
interrupt me. 

Sardar Sant Singh : You are making mis-statements. 

Some Honourable Members : It is not correct. There is 
no evidence. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not making 
any inaccurate statement. I think there is one piece of evidence 
to which no reference has so far been made in the House, and 
I would like to make a reference to it. 

An incident occurred at Deoli Detention Camp where 
Mr. Jai Prakash Narain was kept. The House probably is aware that the Jail 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Superintendent in charge of the Camp succeeded in getting hold 
of some papers which Mr. Jai Prakash Narain was surreptitiously 
trying to pass out of the Jail to his wife. That incident occurred 
in December 1941 and anyone who wants to understand what 
was happening within the Congress — within the Working 
Committee — I submit, ought to pay the greatest attention to that 
document. What does that document reveal ? That document, if 
I read it correctly, reveals four or five points. First of all — and 
I am using the words of Mr. Jai Prakash Narain himself — the 
Satyagraha which Mr. Gandhi was carrying on was held by a 
majority of Congressmen as a stupid farce; it had no sense, it 
had no meaning. Secondly, Mr. Jai Prakash Narain maintained 
that if the Congress wanted to achieve its goal it had better 
give up the task of attending to moral victories and should 
try to achieve political victories. That was again a hit against 
Mr. Gandhi. The second fact which the document revealed was 
that there were in existence in India certain parties who were not 
only not believing in non-violence but were pledged to violence 
and the parties that are referred to in that document, I find, are 
these, which are said to be within the Congress : The Communist 
Party of India, the Revoluitionary Socialist Party in Bengal, the 
Congress Socialist Party, the Hindustan Socialist Republican 
Association. It was the project of Mr. Jai Prakash Narain that 
all these bodies, except perhaps the Communist Party, should 
be amalgamated into one single organisation which should be 
a secret party, working within the Congress and working below 
ground, subterranean — to use the exact technical terminology. 
Mr. Jai Prakash Narain also suggested that this secret party 
should not only be within the Congress but should resort to 
political dacoities for the purpose of getting funds to carry on its 
own policy. If these two matters to which I have made reference 
do not convince reasonable people that the Congress was not to 
be trusted in the lip service which it rendered to the principle of 
non-violence, I do not know that there can be any better evidence 
by which a reasonable man can be convinced. That, Sir, is at 
any rate one of the circumstances on which Government relied 
in taking action at the stage it took. 

Then I come to the second point which I have selected in offering 
my remarks in this maiden speech. It has been said by the Members 
of the Opposition that, although repression may be justifiable by the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


25 


THE SITUATION IN INDIA 25 

circumstances of the moment, it should not be the duty of the 
Government merely to stop with repression but that Government 
must take some constructive step. When one begins to examine 
the constructive steps to which reference has been made from 
different sections of the House, one cannot but be surprised at 
the bewildering medley of suggestions that have been made. I, 
therefore, pick upon only one which appears to me something 
definite and something which you can put your teeth in and 
examine. The suggestion has been made that the Government 
of the day should be recast, refashioned, and should work as a 
national government. Now, in order that I may be able to present 
to the House the point of view which I am urging with regard to 
this suggestion, it would be better if I begin by stating what the 
present Government is, what is its nature. As Honourable Members 
are aware, section 33 of the Government of India Act says, that the 
superintendence, direction and control of the civil and military 
government of India is vested in the Governor General in Council. 
I am a bit of a constitutional lawyer. I do not claim to be an 
expert, but I do claim to be a student; and examining this section 
33 and comparing it with the constitutions that exist elsewhere 
and taking as a measure the wishes of the Indian people as to 
the nature of the government they want, I have no hesitation 
in saying that this section 33 provides a government which has 
two characteristics which are of infinite importance. The one 
characteristic which this government has got is that it excludes 
autocracy completely. The second characteristic which this 
government has got is that it imposes collective responsibility, a 
matter which is so much after the heart of the Indian people 

An Honourable Member : Is it practised ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will come to that. 
There is ample provision in the Act. The government is vested 
not in the Governor General, not in a single authority, but it is 
vested in the Governor General in Council 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta (Bombay Central Division: Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): Subject to the orders of the Secretary of 
State. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am coming to that; I 
am dealing with all that. The position is this, that every Member of 
the Executive Council is a colleague of the Governor General. That 
fact can never be forgotten and ought never to be forgotten; and my 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

submission, therefore, is that if Indians are wanting a 
government which is democratic, which excludes autocracy, 
and which by law — not by convention only — imposes upon 
those who are in charge of the administration a collective 
responsibility, then my submission to the House is this : 
that you cannot devise a better form of government than 
the one we have. I know it has been said against this government 
that although that may be so, this government is subject to the 
veto of the Viceroy and of the Secretary of State 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : No merely veto-orders. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I call it veto ; you 
can call it orders. I would like to use a constitutional phrase as 
I am a constitutional man 

An Honourable Member : The master’s voice from Whitehall. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What I said is that 
this government is not a free government; it is a government 
that is subject to the veto of the Viceroy, it is also subject to 
the veto of the Secretary of State. With regard to the veto of 
the Viceroy I would like to point out that the veto is confined 
to matters which relate to the safety and tranquility of India. It 
is not a general veto. It is not a veto which applies to the day 
to day administration of the country 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I ask one question. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You must not ask 
any question now, I have got a very short time, I am going to 
admit for the sake of argument that there is a veto. I have read 
a lot of constitutions, not to be afraid of a veto 

Sardar Sant Singh : I am asking a legal question. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : You can ask me 

later. I have no time to give a lecture now. 

I am perfectly prepared to admit that there is a veto and 
that the veto exists. My question to Honourable Members 
who are so much disturbed by the veto is this : what is the 
significance of the veto ? What does the veto mean ? Let me 
state it in the most categorical terms, because I find there is 
a lot of confusion in the minds of many Honourable Members 
who wish to talk about the constitutional question. What is the 
difference between an autocratic government and a responsible 
government ? What is the difference that exists in Germany under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


27 


THE SITUATION IN INDIA 27 

Hitler and the Government that exists in Great Britain ? The 
answer simply is this Interruption). 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Order, 
order. Honourable members must not go on interrupting like this. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The answer is 
simply this and I want to put it in the most categorical form — 
the difference between autocracy and responsible government — I 
repeat it, I emphasise it, — lies in the fact that in autocracy there 
is no veto, in responsible government there is a veto. That is 
the simple fact about it. Let all those who want to understand 
the constitution and who want to frame constitutions bear that 
fact in mind. 

Sir, the only question, the only quarrel that can arise — I can 
perfectly understand that sort of quarrel — is where should the 
veto lie ? Should it lie with the Secretary of State, should it lie 
with the Viceroy, or should it lie at any other place or in some 
other organisation ? That can be the only point of quarrel. As to 
the existence of the veto, I submit that there can be no quarrel 
among those who believe in responsibility, among those who 
believe in democratic government. The question, therefore, that 
arises is this : If we are not to have the veto with the Secretary 
of State, where arc we to have it ? It seems to me that if you 
want to transfer the veto from the Secretary of State, the only 
place where I can see it can be rightly placed is the Legislature. 
There is no other place for the veto. 

Sir Syed Raza Ali (Cities of the United Provinces : 
Muhammadan Urban): I am glad that my Honourable friend 
has at last thought of the Legislature ! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question, 
therefore, is this, and I think it is a simple question. Can 
we transfer the veto to the legislature as it exists today ? 
(Interruption by Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra). I cannot teach 
you constitutional law. I am afraid I shall have to open a class. 
I spent five years in the Law College teaching constitutional 
law. The question to my mind is this. Can we transfer this 
veto to the Legislature ? And I must consider the question from 
the stand-point of the present Legislature because the demand 
is that the British Government should abdicate at once. The 
question is, is this Legislature suited as a receptacle in which 
we can place this veto ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What is the composition, what is the character of this 
Legislature ? Now, Sir, it is quite true and I do not think I am 
saying anything derogatory to this House, that, having regard 
to the efflux of time, this House is almost in a deceased state. 

Sardar Sant Singh : It is always. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It was elected for 
three years, but it has been sitting for almost nearly nine years. 
I do not know to what extent the present Members of this House 
can be said to derive a mandate from their constituencies which 
can be regarded as direct and fresh, if it has not become stale 
by the efflux of time. I won’t say anything about it, but let us 
proceed further and examine the composition of the House. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member has already exceeded his time. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (Presidency Division): Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): What my Honourable friend says has 
nothing to do with the motion before the House. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If you think, Sir, 
that my time is up 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The time 
limit was arrived at by agreement of all Parties and I have got 
to enforce it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Then I will close 
my speech. Examine the Legislature from any point of view you 
like, examine it from the point of view of the mandate, examine 
it from the point of view of the composition of the legislature, its 
representative character, examine it also from the point of view of 
the electorate which is represented, and I have no doubt about it 
that this House cannot be regarded as sufficiently representative 
to impose a veto on a national government. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : Why did you call the Session ? 

(There were some more interruptions.) 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The point, 
therefore, is this, Either you must acknowledge the fact 
that this House is not representative enough to have the 
veto deposited in it, or you must consider whether during 
the period of the war it is possible for us to enter upon re- 
fashioning this legislative Assembly in such a manner that 
it will contain within itself a sufficient number of Hindus, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


29 


THE SITUATION IN INDIA 29 

a sufficient number of Mussulmans, a sufficient number of 
Depressed Classes, and all the other elements which go to make 
up the national life of the country. Therefore, my submission is 
that this demand which has been made for a national government 
is certainly the result of confused thinking, is the result of the 
desire of most people, to avoid what I regard as the most crucial 
question, namely, a communal settlement, because until we get 
a communal settlement, it is quite impossible to re-fashion this 
House in a manner in which it would be regarded as fit to receive 
the veto powers over the Executive that may be fashioned under 
the new Constitution. Sir, I cannot carry the matter further as 
my time is up and I resume my seat. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


30 


6 


* Election of a Member to the Advisory 
Committee for the Utilization Branch of the 
Geological Survey of India 


Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Further consideration of the motion moved by the Honourable 
Dr. Ambedkar on Monday, the 14th September. Dr. Ambedkar 
had then stated that this motion might stand over so that he 
might be able to give some information. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
May I know, Sir, how you propose to deal with the amendments ? 
Perhaps it would be better if the amendments are moved so that 
I may deal with the motion and the amendments also. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I think, 
the Honourable Members who wish to move their amendments 
may formally move them now. Then, the motion and the 
amendments will be for discussion before the House. 

Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait (West Coast and Nilgiris : 
Muhammadan): Sir I beg to move : 

“That in the motion for the words ‘one representative’ the 
words ‘four representatives’ be substituted.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved: 

“That in the motion for the words ‘one representative’ the 
words ‘four representatives’ be substituted.” 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (Presidency Division: Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): Sir, I beg to move : 

“That in the motion for the words ‘one representative’ the 
words ‘three representatives’ be substituted.” 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. HI, 21st September 1942, pp. 339-42. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


31 


ELECTION OF A MEMBER SURVEY OF INDIA 31 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved : 

“That in the motion for the words ‘one representative’ the 

words ‘three representatives’ be substituted.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, the motion 
and the amendments raise two questions. Last time when I 
moved the motion, my Honourable friend, Mr. Neogy, asked for 
some information to be given to the House with regard to the 
constitution of the Utilisation Branch of the Geological Survey 
of India. As the House will remember, on the very next day 
the Honourable Mr. Neogy had tabled a question with regard 
to the very same question. In the course of my reply, I gave 
some information with regard to the Utilisation Branch and I 
do not know whether my Honourable friend and the rest of the 
Members of this House desire any more information with regard 
to this Branch. But I see that there is probably some information 
which it was not possible for me to give to the house by reason 
of the fact that it could not be put either as answer to the main 
question or because of the peculiar nature of the supplementary 
questions that were asked on that day. I propose to give to the 
House some information now which I was not able to convey to 
it the other day. 

The first thing that I wish to refer from the point of view 
of information is the duties of the Utilisation Branch which, 
I think, I did not mention that day. I should like to inform 
the House that according to the constitution of the Utilisation 
Branch, it will have three main duties; firstly, to carry out the 
necessary field work for proving mineral deposits; secondly to 
initiate, where necessary, preliminary mining operations ; and, 
thirdly, conduct experimental work as may be necessary to solve 
problems in ore dressing and smelting and other problems of 
production that may be capable of solution by the utilisation of 
India’s minerals. Those are the duties of the Utilisation Branch. 

Then, with regard to the programme of work of the 
Utilisation Branch. I would like to inform the House that 
at present it falls under six heads: (1) re-opening of the 
lead and zinc mines of Zawar in Udaipur State in Mewar; 
(2) development of Rajputana mica mines ; (3) working of 
sulphur deposits in Baluchistan; (4) operations on wolfram 
in Bengal and the Central Provinces ; (5) examination of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

certain deposits in Bihar; and (6) search for certain minerals, 
stones and salts and other related substances. 

The third question on which my Honourable friend, 
Mr. Neogy, wanted information was the relationship in which 
the Utilisation Branch stands to the Board of Scientific and 
Industrial Research. Now, Sir, the position is this. The Board 
of Scientific and Industrial Research deals with three things, 
namely, inventions, heavy chemicals and naturally occurring salts. 
The Utilisation Branch deals with the discovery of minerals and 
proving them, obviously, their funcitons are different. At the same 
time, there is a certain amount of interrelationship between the 
Board of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Utilisation 
Branch, and the inter-relation has been brought about in this way. 
Dr. Fox, who is in charge of the Geological Survey of India, is the 
Chairman of the Committee on heavy chemicals which is working 
under the Board of Scientific and Industrial Research. On the 
other hand, the Director of Scientific and Industrial Research is 
a member of the Advisory Committee to the Utilisation Branch 
of the Geological Survey, and, secondly, by this arrangement, 
the House will see that exchange between the two Departments 
has been arranged. 

There were two other questions to which my Honourable friend 
referred. They were by way of criticism of Government’s actions. 
He stated that there was a neglect of India’s mineral resources 
and, secondly, he suggested that the Utilisation Branch was 
started more for the purpose of providing occupation for evacuees 
from Burma. Now, Sir, with regard to the first question, I say I 
regret as much as my Honourable friend does that the question 
of the development of India’s mineral resources was not taken in 
hand earlier than it was done. But I think my Honourable friend 
realises that there were three principal difficulties in the way 
of India’s undertaking a project such as the one we have now 
undertaken, namely, the establishment of the Utilisation Branch. 
It is to be admitted that up to the present time the Geological 
Survey of India had not qualified official mining personnel. 
Unfortunately, the Indian Geological Survey of India followed the 
functions which the Geological Survey in England had followed, 
namely, to act merely as an inspectorate of mines rather than as 
a technical body of experts who were engaged in developing the 
mineral resources of India. Secondly, there is a certain amount of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


33 


ELECTION OF A MEMBER SURVEY OF INDIA 33 

shyness in the mineral exploitation due to the risks involved in 
opening up mineral deposits. There was a general belief prevalent 
in India, probably due to long disuse of mining operations in the 
country, that India was not well-endowed with minerals other 
than those which were suitable for export, such as manganese and 
mica. What I would submit to the House and to my Honourable 
friend is that while we may regret that we have not tackled the 
business much earlier than we have done, whether it is not a 
case where one ought to say that better late than never. 

With regard to the question of the employment of Burmese 
evacuees, I would like to point out to my Honourable friend as 
well as to the House that in this matter, we really had no choice. 
As I told my Honourable friend we have been suffering from lack 
of official mining personnel. Burma was the only place where 
mining, such as, for instance, of lead and zinc, was carried on 
on an extensive scale. Burma is the only place where mining 
engineers were trained. Consequently rather than saying that 
we have opened this branch to give employment to Burmese 
evacuees I think the correct interpretation would be to say that 
it is because we were able to use the services of the Burmese 
evacuees that we have been able to undertake this project which 
I have no doubt is going to be not merely an item in India’s 
war effort, but is going to be one of the greatest things for the 
future of India. 

Sir, turning to the question of the amendments, one thing I 
would like to say I am really very glad that these amendments 
have been made. I can now say that the account which I have 
given of the Utilisation Branch is so convincing that those who 
came to scoff have remained to pray. But the temple is a very small 
one and although I welcome the enthusiasm of the worshippers, 
I cannot allow this small temple to be so overcrowded as to leave 
no breathing space. I am sorry I cannot accept the amendments. 

Sir Syed Raza Ali (Cities of the United Provinces : 
Muhammadan Urban): Would you refuse them entry into the 
temple even. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sorry I have 
to oppose these amendments. I will tell the House exactly the 
reasons which have dictated this policy. I would like to draw 
the attention of the Honourable Members who have moved 
these amendments to bear in mind that this Committee is 
not an Executive Committee. It is not a Committee which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

can take decisions and, therefore, anything that is done in this 
Committee is not going to commit this House one way or the 
other. It is purely an Advisory Committee. The second thing 
which in my judgment presents a stronger reason than the 
first arises out of the object of the Committee. The object of the 
Committee is to bring together experts of the representatives of 
trade and industry together. That is the primary object of this 
Committee. I would like to draw the attention of Honourable 
Members to the composition which has been devised for this 
particular Committee in order that this principal object may be 
achieved. Sir, there are altogether 16 members on this Committee 
as planned for the present. The House will see that what has 
been done is to put five experts on the Committee and to put five 
representatives of trade and industry along with them. First of 
all, there is the Director of Geological Survey, the Director of the 
Board of Scientific and Industrial Research, one representative 
of the Mining and Metallurgical Institute, one representative of 
the Indian Mining Association and representative of the Indian 
Mining Federation. They constitute a body of experts who will sit 
on this Committee. Then, as representatives of trade and industry, 
we have given two scats to the Federation of Indian Chambers 
of Commerce. We have given two seats to steel industry and we 
have the Secretary of the Commerce Department to represent 
the Commerce Department on this Committee. From this the 
House will see that the object of the Committee is really to bring 
experts who will tell the industrialists and the representatives 
of the trade what minerals they are in a position to prove and 
representatives of trade and industry will tell the experts how 
they could be commercially exploited. 

Now Sir, if the House bears in mind that this is the principal 
object of this Committee, there is really not much scope left for 
the inclusion of what I might call general opinion in the country. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea (Calcutta Suburbs : Non-Muhammadan 
Urban): Representatives of the general public. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, representatives 
of the general public. The next argument to which I wish 
to refer is the fact that the Committee is already a large 
Committee. As planned now, there are 14 Members on it. If I 
accept the amendment which demands four, then the Committee 
will consist of 18 and I must take into consideration the fact 
that if I allow four Members of this House, the Upper House 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


35 


ELECTION OF A MEMBER SURVEY OF INDIA 35 

will demand at least three. That means that the Committee will 
consist of 21 Members which I have no doubt the Mouse will 
agree will be too unwieldy for doing the business which it will 
be called upon to undertake. 

The next point to which I should like to draw the attention of 
the House is this: that the constitution of the Committee already 
provides for the nomination of four Members by the Labour 
Member and without committing myself to any particular line 
of using this power of nomination I think it is perfectly possible 
that one Member of the House may find a place on it through 
nomination. Therefore, Sir, having regard to the considerations 
which I have placed before the House, I am sorry to say that I 
cannot accept these amendments. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


36 


7 

*Why Indian Labour is Determined 
to Win the War 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar’s Broadcast 
from Bombay Station of All India Radio 

“Labour is aware that, if this is a war against the New Nazi 
Order, it is not a war for the Old Order. It is a war on both the 
Old Order and the Nazi Order. Labour is aware that the only 
compensation for the cost of this war is the establishment of a 
New Order in which liberty, equality, and fraternity will not 
be mere slogans but will become facts of life,” said the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Member for Labour, Government of India, 
broadcasting recently on “Why Indian Labour is determined to 
win this War” from the Bombay Station of A.I.R. 

Here is the full text of Dr. Ambedkar’s broadcast : 

There is to be a series of broadcasts by persons who are 
connected with and interested in Labour. My talk tonight is the 
first of this series. The subject of my talk is of a general sort. 
It is to serve as an introduction to the series. The title I have 
chosen for the subject is ‘Why Indian Labour is determined to win 
this War’. There is one fact which must arrest the attention of 
all. It relates to the attitude of Indian Labour towards the War. 
In the midst of this sudden surge of non-co-operation with and 
opposition to the war effort which we are witnessing in India, 
Labour has been actively co-operating in the prosecution of the 
war. Of this there can be no question. This, Labour has done 
and is determined to do notwithstanding the many efforts that 
are being made to dissuade it from doing. 

What Labour Wants 

During the war Labour has secured many gains and will no doubt 
secure many more. As pointed out by me recently, Labour has obtained 

*Indian Information, January 1, 1943, pp. 16-19. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


37 


WHY INDIAN LABOUR IS DETERMINED TO WIN THE WAR 37 

security through legislation. It has obtained the right to safety, 
care and attention, through the conditions of welfare which have 
been enforced by the Central Government upon the Employers 
for the benefit of Labour. But, if Labour is determined to do its 
utmost to accelerate the war effort, it is not simply because of 
the lure of these immediate gains. There arc other and stronger 
reasons which are at the base of this determination. Labour is 
not content with securing merely fair conditions of work. What 
Labour wants is fair conditions of life. Let me explain what 
Labour means by fair conditions of life. 

Liberty, Equality, Fraternity 

Labour wants liberty. There is perhaps nothing new in this. 
What is new is Labour’s conception of liberty. Labour’s conception 
of liberty is not merely the negative conception of absence of 
restraint. Nor is Labour’s conception of liberty confined to the mere 
recognition of the right of the people to vote. Labour’s conception 
of liberty is very positive. It involves the idea of Government by 
the people. Government by the people, in the opinion of Labour, 
does not mean Parliamentary Democracy. 

Parliamentary Democracy is a form of Government in which 
the function of the people has come to be to vote for their masters 
and leave them to rule. Such a scheme of Government, in the 
opinion of Labour, is a travesty of Government by the people. 
Labour wants Government which is Government by the people 
in name as well as in fact. Secondly, liberty as conceived by 
Labour includes the right to equal opportunity and the duty 
of the State to provide the fullest facilities for growth to every 
individual according to his needs. 

Labour wants equality. By equality Labour means abolition of 
privileges of every kind in law, in the civil service, in the Army, 
in taxation, in trade and in industry : in fact the abolition of all 
processes which lead to inequality. 

Labour wants fraternity. By fraternity it means an all- 
pervading sense of human brotherhood, unifying all classes and 
all nations, with “peace on earth and goodwill towards man” as 
its motto. 

The Nazi New Order 

These are Labour’s ideals. They constitute the New Order, the 
establishment of which alone can save humanity from destruction. How 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

can this New Order be established if the Allied Nations lose 
the war ? That is the supreme question which Labour knows 
it would be fatal to shirk or to avoid. Can this New Order be 
established by sitting idle and refusing to fight? Labour believes 
that Victory for the Allied Nations is the only hope of such a New 
Order coming into being. If the Allies fail, sure enough there will 
be a New Order. But the New Order will be no other than the 
Nazi Order. It will be an Order in which liberty will be found 
to be suppressed, equality denied, and fraternity expurgated as 
a pernicious doctrine. 

This is by no means the whole of the Nazi New Order. There 
are parts of the Nazi Order which must compel every Indian to 
give anxious thought to its dangers, no matter what his religion, 
his caste and his political faith. The most important part is the 
one which enunciates the creed of racial gradation. This is the 
principal dictum in the Nazi Order. The Nazis regard the German 
Race as the Race of Superman. They are pleased to place the 
other While Races below the German race. But to the Brown 
Races — and Indians are included in this category — they give the 
last place in the gradation. As though this is not humiliating 
enough, the Nazis have declared that the Brown Races shall be 
the serfs of the German and the White Races. They arc not to 
have education, they arc not to have any liberty — political or 
economic. 

“A Direct Menace” 

The fury with which the British Government has been denounced 
by Hitler in his Mein Kampf for having given Indians education 
and political liberty, is quite well-known. The Nazi ideology is 
a direct menace to the liberty and freedom of Indians. Given 
this fact, there is the strongest reason why Indians should come 
forward to light Nazism. No one who compares the Nazi Order 
with the New Order which Labour has in view, can have any 
doubt that Labour, in making up its determination to fight for 
the Allies and to defeat and destroy Nazism, has taken up a 
position which is the only position which all sensible people can 
take. There are, however, people who refuse to take this view. 

There are some who think that they do not mind a Nazi victory’ and 
the coming of the New Nazi Order. Fortunately, not many of these are 
to be found in the country. Those who take this view are not serious 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


39 


WHY INDIAN LABOUR IS DETERMINED TO WIN THE WAR 39 

themselves. Nobody takes them seriously. They arc embittered 
politicians who will not be satisfied unless they are allowed to 
dictate their way and whose motto is “all or nothing” 

There are pacifists who argue that all wars are wrong. They 
argue that the troubles of the world are largely due to the wars 
that have devastated and defaced human civilisation which men 
have built up at the cost of so much human effort. This is true. 
But in spite of all this, Labour refuses to accept pacifism as a 
principle of life. Wars cannot be abolished by merely refusing to 
fight when attacked. Peace obtained by surrender to the forces 
of violence is not peace. It is an act of suicide for which it is 
difficult to find any justification. It is a sacrifice of all that is 
noble and necessary for maintaining a worthy human life to the 
forces of savagery and barbarism. 

Surrender is not Labour’s way to abolish war. Only two things 
will, in the opinion of Labour, abolish war. One is to win the 
war and the other is to establish a just peace. In the view of 
Labour both are equally important. Labour holds that the origin 
of war does not lie in man’s thirst for blood. The origin of war 
is to be found in the vile peace that victors often impose upon 
the vanquished. According to Labour, the duty of the pacifist 
is not to sulk and to refuse to fight when war is on. Labour 
believes that the duty of the pacifist is to be active and alert 
both when the war is on and also when the terms of peace are 
being forged. The pacifist fails to do the right thing at the right 
time. The pacifists are active against war when war is on. They 
are inactive and indifferent when the war is over and peace is 
being made. In this way pacifists lose both, war as well as peace. 
If Labour proposes to fight this war, it is because pacifism is 
not the Labour’s way of abolishing war. 

French Revolution Recalled 

There arc pessimists who say that there is no guarantee that 
victory will be followed by a New Order. There is perhaps 
room for this pessimism. The New Order, which is the ideal 
of labour, has its roots in the French Revolution. The French 
Revolution gave rise to two principles — the principle of self- 
government and the principle of self-determination. The 
principle of self-government expresses the desire of the people 
to rule itself rather than be ruled by others whether the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rulers be absolute monarchs, dictators, or privileged classes. It 
is called ‘democracy’. 

The principle of self-determination expresses the desire of 
a people united by common ideals and common purposes to 
decide, without external compulsion ; its political status — whether 
independence, interdependence, or union with other peoples of 
the world. This is called nationalism. The hope of humanity was 
centred on the fructification of these principles. Unfortunately, 
after a lapse of nearly 140 years, these principles have failed to 
take root. The old regime has continued either in all its nakedness 
or by making sham concessions to these two principles. Barring 
a few countries, there was neither self-government nor self- 
determination in the world. All this, of course, is true. But this 
is no argument against the attitude taken by labour — namely, 
that the preliminary condition for the establishment of the New 
Order is victory over the forces of Nazism. All that this means 
is that Labour must be more vigilant and that the war must 
not stop with victory over Nazis, but there must be no peace 
unless there is victory over the Old Order wherever it is found. 

Labour And Nationalism 

More serious opponents of Labour are, of course, the Nationalists. 
They accuse Labour of taking an attitude which is said to be 
inconsistent with and injurious to Indian nationalism. Their 
second objection is that Labour agrees to fight for the war 
without getting any assurances about India’s independence. 
These are questions so often posed and so seriously argued 
that it is necessary to state what labour thinks of them. 

As to nationalism, Labour’s attitude is quite clear. Labour is 
not prepared to make a fetish of nationalism. If nationalism means 
the worship of the ancient past — the discarding of everything 
that is not local in origin and colour — then Labour cannot accept 
nationalism as its creed. Labour cannot allow the living faith 
of the dead to become the dead faith of the living. Labour will 
not allow the ever expanding spirit of man to be strangled by 
the hand of the past which has no meaning for the present and 
no hope for the future : nor will it allow it to be cramped in a 
narrow jacket of local particularism. Labour must constantly 
insist upon renovating the life of the people by being ever ready 
to borrow in order to repair, transform and recreate the body 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


41 


WHY INDIAN LABOUR IS DETERMINED TO WIN THE WAR 41 

politic. If nationalism stands in the way of this rebuilding and 
reshaping of life, then Labour must deny nationalism. 

Labour’s creed is internationalism. Labour is interested in 
nationalism only because the wheels of democracy — such as 
representative Parliaments, responsible Executive, constitutional 
conventions, etc. — work better in a community united by national 
sentiments. Nationalism to Labour is only a means to an end. 
It is not an end in itself to which Labour can agree to sacrifice 
what it regards as the most essential principles of life. 

Independence : A Wrong Approach 

As to independence, Labour fully recognises its importance. 
But Labour thinks that there is a wrong approach to the question 
of independence and a misunderstanding about its importance. 
The independence of a nation ex hypothesi does not tie it up to 
any particular form of government or organisation of society. 
External independence is quite compatible with internal slavery. 

Independence means nothing more than that a nation has 
liberty to determine its form of government and its social order 
without dictation from outside. The worth of independence 
depends upon the kind of government and the kind of society 
that is built up. There is not much value in independence if 
the form of government and the order of society are to be those 
against which the world is fighting today. Labour thinks that 
more emphasis ought to have been placed on New India — and 
less on ‘Quit India’. The appeal of a New India with a New Order 
is bound to be greater than the appeal of independence. Indeed 
the vision of a New Order in a New India would very greatly 
strengthen determination to win freedom. Such an approach 
would certainly have stopped the many embarrassing questions 
which are being asked, namely, freedom for what and freedom 
for whom. 

Secondly, immediate realisation of independence as a 
condition for support to the war effort, Labour finds it difficult 
to understand. This condition marks a sudden development 
in the attitude of some people to the war effort, and could be 
justified only if there was any sudden conspiracy to rob India 
of her right to freedom. But there is no evidence of any such 
conspiracy. Nor can such conspiracy, if there were any, succeed 
no matter who the conspirators are. In the view of Labour no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

one can deprive India of her right to freedom if she demands 
it with the combined strength of united people. If India’s 
independence is in the balance, it is because of disunity among 
Indians. The enemies of India’s independence are Indians and 
no others. 

Labour And War 

Labour’s attitude to this war is framed after a full realisation 
of what is involved in the war. Labour is aware that it must 
win the war as well as peace if war is to be banished from the 
world. Labour is aware that it is not enough to defeat the Nazis 
and to destroy the possibilities of the New Nazi Order, it is not 
a war for the Old Order. It is a war on both the Old Order and 
the Nazi Order. Labour is aware that the only compensation 
for the cost of this war is the establishment of a New Order in 
which liberty, equality, and fraternity, will not be mere slogans 
but will become facts of life. But the question of all questions 
is how can the hope of this New Order materialise ? On this 
question Labour is quite emphatic. Labour insists that for the 
materialisation of all these ideals there is one condition that 
is primary — and that is success in the war. Without success in 
the war there can be no self-government and self-determination 
for India. Without victory in the war, independence will be idle 
twaddle. This is the reason why Labour is determined to win 
this war. 

Two Features Of Present War 

This war is full of potentialities for good. It promises to give 
birth to a New Order. Labour finds that this war is different 
from other wars. There are two features which distinguish it 
from other wars. In the first place, this war is not altogether a 
war for the division of the world’s territory amongst the most 
powerful nations of the world as the preceding wars have been. 
In this war the division of the world’s territory is not the only 
cause. This is a war in which there is a conflict of ideologies 
relating to the forms and systems of Government under which 
humanity is to live. In the second place this war is not altogether 
a mere war as other wars have been. Its object is not merely 
to defeat the enemy, to march on to his capital and to dictate 
a peace. This war besides being a war is also a revolution — a 
revolution which demands a fundamental change in the terms 
of associated life — a replanning of the society. In this sense it 
is a people’s war, and if it is not, it could and should be made 
into a people’s war. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


43 


WHY INDIAN LABOUR IS DETERMINED TO WIN THE WAR 43 

Given these facts, Labour cannot be indifferent to this war 
and to its outcome. Labour is aware how the efforts in the past 
for the establishment of a New Order have been frustrated time 
and again. That is because democracy, after it was brought into 
being, was left in Tory hand. If the people of the world take 
care to see that this mistake is not committed again in future, 
Labour believes that by fighting this war and establishing the 
New Order the world can be made safe for democracy. 

Correct Leadership 

The country needs a lead and the question is who can give this 
lead. I venture to say that Labour is capable of giving to the 
country the lead it needs. Correct leadership apart from other 
things, requires idealism and free thought. Idealism is possible 
for the Aristocracy, though free thought is not. Idealism and 
free thought are both possible for Labour. But neither idealism 
nor free thought is possible for the middle-class. The middle- 
class does not possess the liberality of the Aristocracy, which is 
necessary to welcome and nourish an ideal. It does not possess 
the hunger for the New Order, which is the hope on which the 
labouring classes live. Labour, therefore, has a very distinct 
contribution to make in bringing about a return to the sane 
and safe ways of the past which Indians had been pursuing to 
reach their political destiny. Labour’s lead to India and Indians 
is to get into the fight and be united. The fruits of victory will 
be independence and a New Social Order. For such a victory all 
must fight. Then the fruits of victory will be the patrimony of 
all, and there will be none to deny the rights of a united India 
to share in that patrimony. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


44 


8 


* The Paper Control Order 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
I am indeed very glad that the Honourable Mr. Bajoria brought 
forward this adjournment motion which enables Government 
to place before the House the facts with regard to the paper 
situation in this country. Sir, in the speeches that have been 
delivered in this House, some very harsh things have been said 
about Government. The Government is accused of being callous, 
of being selfish, of being hard-hearted, of having no consideration 
for the educational institutions of this country. I merely propose 
to place before the House the facts as they arc, the reasons 
which led the Government to issue this order, the steps that the 
Government has taken in order to case the situation immediately 
and for the future. 

Sir, I would like to begin by pointing out to the House that 
there appears to be a certain misunderstanding about the nature 
of the order which has been issued by the Government. Member 
after member has risen in this House to suggest that the order 
passed by the Government in fact means that the Government 
claims 90 per cent of the paper production for itself. I would like 
to tell the House that that is a complete misunderstanding. The 
order passed by the Controller of Paper is not a requisition order. 
It is an order which in turn says that the manufacturers of paper 
shall be bound to hand over to Government 90 per cent of the 
paper that they produce. The order is what I may call a freezing 
order, and I want to tell the House that that difference that I 
am making is a real difference. It is not a difference without 
distinction, because the order, as it stands, all that it tells the 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I, 11th February 1943, pp. 128-31. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


45 


THE PAPER CONTROL ORDER 45 

paper-makers is that they shall not sell more than 10 per cent 
of their production to the public. It does not in turn say that 
they shall deliver 90 per cent of the paper to Government. That 
I think is a very fundamental and a very real distinction which 
the House should bear in mind. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (Presidency Division: Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): What is the difference in effect ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government 
may release more than 10 per cent. 

Bapur Baijnath Bajoria : How ? 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea : When wisdom dawned on Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is the order as 
it stands. I am not giving the interpretation of the order. I am 
explaining the terms in the nature of the Order. 

(There was an interruption, several Members speaking.) 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Order, 
order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The second point 
which I want the House to bear in mind is that the order is 
served on the paper mills. It is not served on the stockists, 
who have a large number of stocks of paper already in their 
godowns. Secondly, it is still possible for the public to satisfy 
its requirements by getting such paper as is still available in 
the stocks which have been stored and hoarded by stockists 
before the order was passed. The third thing which I wish to 
remind the House about this order is this : that it is possible 
under the order, as it is framed, for the Controller of Paper to 
permit the mills to sell more than 10 per cent. There is no bar, 
there is no impediment, no obstacle placed if the Controller of 
Paper, notwithstanding the order that has been passed on the 
5th November, finds that it is possible for him to release for 
public consumption more than 10 per cent of the paper. It is 
still open to him to do so. Having explained to the House what 
is actually involved in the order issued by the Government, I 
would like to take the House and acquaint it with the immediate 
circumstances which compelled Government to pass this order. 

Briefly, the facts are these. In the first six months, 
viz., from April to September, our demand for paper, which 
is put forth by the Central Stationery Office, amounted 
to 34,000 tons. It was found that the mills had already 
delivered about 16,000 tons of paper to Government on 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

behalf of the Central Stationery Office. The House will bear in 
mind that we had entered into a contract with the paper mills 
for supplying us 25,900 tons. If the House will enter into a little 
arithmetic, it will be found that as a result of our calculations 
for the first six months it was found that we had only 9,000 
tons to get under our contract from the paper mills and had to 
run six months yet. Consequently, what the Government did 
was this. The Government revised its estimate in the light of 
the circumstances that had been disclosed during the previous 
six months. The second thing that the Government did was to 
consolidate the method of requisitioning paper, and here I would 
like to tell the House that before the order was passed there 
were two methods by which demands for paper on behalf of 
Government were put forth. One way was the Central Stationery 
Office demand, which was a demand on behalf of the Central 
Government, and the provinces of Bengal, Orissa, Assam, and 
the North-West Frontier Province and the Central Provinces. The 
other was the non- Central Stationery office demand, made on 
behalf of what are technically called the Non-C.S.O. provinces, 
i.e. the provinces, who presented their demands independently 
of the Central Stationery Office, plus Indian States, Security 
Printing, Supply Department, and non-State Railways. It was 
found that these two independent methods of requisitioning paper 
for Government created a great deal of difficulty in arriving 
at an accurate estimate of the total demand for paper, and 
consequently the first step that was taken was to consolidate 
these two channels of demand into one single channel, and the 
whole matter is now concentrated in the hands of the Central 
Stationery Office. 

As I told the House previously, when the situation was found 
to have grown somewhat perilous on account of the excessive use 
of paper, and practically overdrawing over the contract amount, 
we revised the estimates and centralised the demands, and the 
position at the end of October worked out to these figures : 

Tons 

The Central Stationery Office demand for the next six months, i.e. from 

October 10 March 1943 was fixed at 32,000 

The Non-Central Stationery Office demand was fixed at ... ... 9,500 

Together the total came to ... 41,500 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


47 


THE PAPER CONTROL ORDER 47 

On the basis of the production of the mills during that year, 
it was calculated that the mills would produce 47,575 tons during 
October and March. It will be found that the Government demand 
of 41,500 tons represented 87 per cent of the mills production 
during the six months. Roughly it was 90 per cent, and that is 
the reason why the order maintained 90 per cent as the figure. 
Now, the House will understand why it became necessary in 
November to issue this order. I want to tell the House the 
measures that the Government has taken in order to increase 
production of paper. 

Of course, as the House will realise, it is not possible for 
Government to help the paper mills in the importation of 
additional machinery in order to enable them to increase their 
production. The difficulty of shipping is quite well known and 
it is quite beyond the powers of the Government to do anything 
in the matter. Consequently we have to work out whatever we 
can to increase the production of paper within the means which 
are available to us; and I would like to draw the attention of 
the House to three things which the Government has done and 
which could be usefully referred to as measures taken to increase 
production. The Government has appointed a paper production 
officer, whose duty it is to find out ways and means by which 
production of paper could be increased 

An Honourable Member : Who is this gentleman ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Bhargava. 
Secondly, the Government has cut out non-essential luxury 
varieties of paper and has restricted Government requirements 
to only a few easily manufactured standard qualities. Thirdly, the 
Government has been dealing with each mill separately to find 
out what sort of paper each particular mill, having regard to its 
machinery and its equipment, can produce to the largest extent. 
It is estimated at present that as a result of the measures taken 
to increase production, the increase would be about 12,000 tons. 

The next thing that the Government has done in order 
to ease the situation is to impose cuts, arbitrary cuts, on the 
demands of the various departments made for paper. These cuts 
are as follows : provincial and state requirements have been cut 
down arbitrarily by 10 per cent, which gives a saving of 950 
tons. Secondly, so far as the Central Government is concerned, 
the budgets for paper presented by the various departments 
which spend paper — their original estimates have been 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

revised and cut down to an appreciable extent. To illustrate 
what the Government has done in the matter of revising these 
estimates, I would place before the House the following figures. 
The original estimate of the civil departments was 11,400 tons 
and it has been cut down to 4,600 tons during the six months. 
The original estimate of the Defence Department was 15,000 
tons and it has been cut down to 10,000 tons. The Eastern 
Group Supply Council’s original estimate was 9,400 tons and 
that has been cut down to 7,900 tons. The Supply Department’s 
requirement of 3,100 tons has been increased to 4,500 tons — 
that is commercial paper used for industry. As the House will 
notice, the original estimates of the departments to which I have 
referred came to 39,100 tons, while the revised estimates come 
to 27,600 tons. The House will be pleased to notice that, as I 
have already indicated, by the cut imposed on the provincial and 
Indian State requirements a saving has been effected of 950 tons. 
And to that 11,900 tons obtained by revising the estimates of 
the different departments and the total comes to 12,850 tons. 
Now, compare this in the light of the paper that is consumed 
in India. There are no exact figures nor is it possible to obtain 
any exact figures ; but such figures as Government have shown 
that the annual consumption of paper in India was about one 
lakh of tons ; for six months it comes to 50,000 tons and as the 
House will remember, ten per cent of that is already left to the 
public under the orders issued by the Controller of Printing. 
That gives the public 5,000 tons. Add to that the 12,850 tons 
which have been saved now or will be saved by the reduction I 
have referred to, the total paper which can be released is 17,850 
tons which as the House will see comes to nearly 33 per cent of 
what the public consume during peace time 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
Honourable Member’s time is up; there is no option. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I was going to 
refer next to the measures that we have taken in order to avoid 
waste. As my time is up I do not wish to go into those details. 
I can send them to the press, if that is the view of the House. 

The next thing that I would refer the Honourable House to is what 
we propose to do for the next year. For the next year the estimate is 
about 70,000 tons ; in that what we have done is this ; we have fixed 
the quota of every department which needs paper. For instance, the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


49 


THE PAPER CONTROL ORDER 49 

Controller of Broadcasting is told he will not get more than 
260 tons ; the Counter-Propaganda Directorate will have only 
100 tons ; National War-Front 350 tons and Public Information 
300 tons. There is a lot of other matter which, if I had time, I 
might have presented to the House. All that I want to say to 
the House is that it is not fair to suggest that the Government 
is callous. I do not deny that there is probably still enough 
room for economy, and I am very much obliged to the members 
who have made various suggestions as to how economy could 
be effected, and I will certainly convey those suggestions to the 
proper quarters, so that action may be taken. I hope that the 
Honourable Members will be satisfied that the Government is 
taking such steps as it can in the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


50 


9 


* Announcement re Grant of Inadequate 
Dearness Allowance to Workers 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
the motion made by Mr. Mehta raises two points, if I understand 
it correctly. One point is that the Government failed to consult 
the representatives of Trade Unions when they last raised the 
dearness allowance. The second point which is raised in the 
motion is that the dearness allowances which were announced 
on the 21st of January last were meagre and inadequate. Sir, 
I am sorry to say that although I have every sympathy with 
Mr. Mehta for bringing forward this motion, I am bound to say 
that the motion has been based upon misunderstanding. 

Sir, I will take the first question, namely, that the dearness 
allowances announced by the Government of India are meagre and 
inadequate. Sir, with regard to the meagreness of the allowances 
the point that I would like the House to bear in mind is this, 
that there is no final decision at which Government have arrived, 
it cannot be said that the figures that they have announced by 
the notification of the 23rd February are not to be altered or 
are not to be increased. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra (Presidency Division: Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): Is it tentative ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It may be. There 
is the case that those figures do not grant adequate dearness 
allowance. But as I said there is no finality about it. The situation 
is still fluid and it is a matter for consideration now for the 
Government as to the form which the dearness allowance should 
take, whether the dearness allowance should take the form of 
cash allowance or whether the dearness allowance should take 
the form of food provision, that is a matter which the Government 
has to decide before the Government can fix upon any particular 
pitch at which dearness allowance should be fixed. Therefore my 
submission on that point is that it cannot be said that Government 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I, 12th February 1943, pp. 197-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


51 


ANNOUNCEMENT RE GRANT ALLOWANCE TO WORKERS 51 

has taken any decision which can be said to be irretrievable, 
irrevocable, unamendable. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra: Is there a good conduct 
allowance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think it is in 
the Postal Department that the concession has been given. With 
regard to meagreness and the inadequacy, the matter as I say, 
is still open and it may be considered at the proper time. 

Coming to the second accusation, namely, that the Government 
did not consult the representatives of trade unions, I think it is 
necessary to bear in mind that in the first place there are some 
difficulties in the matter of establishing contract with labour. 
The difficulty is this. As my Honourable friend, Mr. Jamnadas 
Mehta, knows, so far as the railways are concerned, there 
are Unions, which Unions have been federated into a single 
organisation and it makes matters quite easy for the Government 
to establish contact with workers on the Railways to obtain their 
opinion and to consult them whenever occasion for consultation 
arises. That, I think, Mr. Jamnadas Mehta will admit that the 
Government have been doing. In fact the convention has already 
been established and has been practised without any departure 
that the Railway Board and the Railwaymen’s Federation meet 
twice a year to discuss matters of common concern. 

Then, Sir, under the Central Government there are employees 
of the Posts and Telegraph Department. As I understand, there 
are twelve Unions which represent the posts and telegraph 
workers of the Central Government. Out of them four are Unions 
representing the higher officers and eight represent the union of 
workers. Unfortunately there is no single body, no Federation of 
the different workers of the Posts and Telegraph Department and 
consequently it has not been possible to establish the same sort 
of contact which it is possible for the Railway Board to establish 
with the Railwaymen’s Federation. But I do like to point out the 
fact that notwithstanding this difficulty the Government had as 
a matter of fact contact with the posts and telegraph workers 
before taking action. I should like to read to the House a short 
paragraph from a magazine called the Telegraph Review for 
January, 1943, which records the attempts made by the Posts 
and Telegraph Department to establish contact with the workers 
in the Posts and Telegraph. This is what the Review says : 

“During his recent visit to Calcutta, the Director General invited 

the representatives of the different recognised service Unions and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


29-9-201 3/Y S-l 6-1 1 -20 1 3 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

held a joint conference with them on the question of dearness 
allowance on 10th December, 1942. The representatives could 
not present a united front on this question at this conference. 
Subsequently they met together in Tarapad Hall of the Postal 
Club building, Calcutta on the evening of 12th December 1942, 
and drew up on mutual agreement a new scheme of dearness 
allowance which is published elsewhere in this issue.” 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : What did they ask in that 

scheme ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They saw the 
Director General again. The representatives met the Director 
General again in conference on 18th December, 1942 and 
submitted their scheme to him. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : What did they demand ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is a very long 
thing. I am sorry I have not got the time to read the whole of it. 
If my Honourable friend wants, I can pass it on to him for his 
perusal. The point that I am making is this, that so far as the 
Posts and Telegraph Department workers are concerned, it cannot 
be said that there was no consultation between the Government 
and the workers concerned before the announcement was made. 

Then, Sir, there remain what are called the clerical employees 
of the Central Government. So far as this body of workers is 
concerned, there is no Union and as there is no Union, there is 
also no Federation of the employees. What exists is a certain 
Association. First of all we have the Imperial Secretariat 
Association, secondly, we have the Daftary and Record Sorters 
Association and thirdly, there is the General Headquarters 
Association and the House will be glad to see that far from 
omitting to consult them, they sent their representatives to 
the Central Government and they were granted interview by 
the Honourable the Home Member and the Finance Member 
before this announcement was made. I think I am justified in 
saying what I said at the beginning that the allegations made 
by Mr. Jamnadas Mehta on which his motion was founded were 
really not correct. The Government have all along maintained 
the position they have always taken, namely, they consult the 
workers as far as possible. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


53 


10 

*The Indian Finance Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I rise to reply to the criticism made by Honourable 
Members during the course of this debate on certain points 
or acts of commission and omission with which the Labour 
Department is concerned. Sir, I will begin with the points 
raised by Sir Frederick James. As the House is aware so 
far as the Labour Department is concrened these were two 
points to which he devoted special attention. The first one is 
the point which relates to paper. Sir Frederick James paid 
great attention to the point how Government of India was 
extravagant in the use of paper and how in every direction 
Government was responsible for what he called waste. Sir, this 
question of paper, as the House will recall, was once debated 
in the course of this Session on an adjournment motion when 
I gave a reply on behalf of Government. It is quite clear that 
my Honourable friend Sir Frederick James was not satisfied 
with the reply that Government then gave and has returned 
to the subject again. I make no complaint of his returning to 
the subject again for I am glad that it does give me another 
opportunity to explain what Government is doing in the matter 
of conservation of paper. Sir, before I enter into the subject 
matter it might be desirable to tell the House that as far 
as I have any information it seems to me that the House is 
exhibiting, if I may say so, a certain degree of over-anxiety that 
there is a shortage of paper, but I am not quite convinced that 
there is what we might call acute suffering in the matter. It 
might be interesting to the House, if I present to Honourable 
Members a few figures with regard to the publications that 
have been issued in Great Britain and in India. Sir, in 1939 in 
Great Britain, fifteen thousand books were issued and in 1940 
eleven thousand were issued, in 1941 the figure was fourteen 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 16th March 1943, pp. 1130-34 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

thousand. I am not saying that shortage of paper is not a question 
with which we are not concerned. As I said, there is shortage, 
but what I want to emphasise is that there is not a case of what 
we might call acute suffering. 

Sir, proceeding further, as the House will remember, 
Sir Frederick James depended upon two illustrations in order to 
substantiate his charge of extravagance against the Government 
of India. Last time when the subject was debated, Sir Frederick 
James brought out a rent bill which is issued from the Western 
Court to the tenants who occupy that building. His case was 
that the rent bill which was presented to the tenants was a 
document of great enormity which contained details which were 
probably unnecessary and at any rate which could have been cut 
down in the period of the war. This time he brought out an old 
dilapidated copy of the Calcutta Gazette and pointed out that 
there were published in the Gazette certain information which 
could have been avoided in the course of the war. 

Sir F.E. James (Madras : European): May I just interrupt my 
Honourable friend for one moment ? The issue I demonstrated of 
the Calcutta Gazette was the one which was just received from 
Calcutta and I think it was dated February of this year. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am obliged to my 
Honourable friend. Now, Sir, the point I would like to make 
is this. If Sir, Frederick James was a lawyer, I am sure he 
would not have brought forth these two cases as illustrations 
of the points he was making. With regard to the rent bill, 
Sir Frederick James evidently forgot to look up the date on 
which it was printed. This bill was printed in 1938 and far from 
condemning the Government of India for using the bill, I think 
the Government of India ought to be congratulated that rather 
than destroying the old bills, the stock of which exists in the 
Government of India, the Government of India had laid aside 
all requirements of reforming the bill and were bent upon using 
the old stock which it possessed in order to conserve paper. 

Sir F.E. James: Make them into scrap. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, with 
regard to the question of the Gazette, I think a slip was 
committed by Sir Frederick James by reason of the fact 
that he was not able to appreciate the importance of 
the Gazette. The Gazette is not merely a matter which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


55 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 55 

contains useful information, information useful to Government, 
but as every lawyer knows, the Gazette is the only document 
where in some cases proof can be given by nothing else in a 
court of law except by the production of the Gazette. Even the 
list of enemy firms, patents etc. Government Gazette according to 
the Evidence Act, is the only primary evidence by which certain 
things can be proved. I would therefore ask Sir Frederick James 
whether he would not agree with me that whatever else we may 
do with regard to economics in Government paper, the Gazette 
is the last thing which we ought to touch. 

Sir F.E. James : I would point out that my case was that 
an enquiry should be made whether it was necessary to publish 
in all the Provincial Gazettes, undoubtedly unimportant items 
which are published in the Central Government Gazette. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The reason 
obviously is that every Provincial Government must publish its 
own Provincial Gazette as prescribed by the Government of India 
Act. But, Sir, I do not wish to rely upon what might be called a 
rhetorical reply to meet the argument of my Honourable Friend. 
I propose to refer to the practical steps which the Government 
of India have taken in order to economise paper. I would first 
of all take up the question of the Gazette. Now, I would request 
my Honourable friend Sir Frederick James and also other 
Honourable Members of this House who are interested in this 
question to compare Part-II, Section I, of the Gazette of India 
of 29th August with that of Part-II, Section I, of 6th March, 
1943. If the House and the Honourable Members would take the 
trouble of comparing these two issues of the Gazette, they will 
find that practically the matter which used to occupy IV 2 pages of 
the Gazette is now compressed in half a column, so much space 
has been economised. All margins have been cut out. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea (Calcutta Suburbs : Non-Muhammadan 
Urban): What about people with defective eye sight ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I cannot please 
all. Then, Sir, with regard to the point which Sir Frederick 
James just now raised, I might also inform him that the 
Government of India has circularised all Provincial Governments 
whether it would not be desirable and possible for them to use 
notifications issued in the Gazette of India by the Government 
of India and not to reproduce or repeat them for their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

own use in their own Gazette. Of course, all that we can do is 
to advise and to recommend. 

Then, Sir, with regard to Indian Information, the House 
will be interested to know that we have already issued orders 
that its size should be reduced to half. 

Coming to the question of forms, the House will be interested 
to know that as a matter of fact 149 forms have been suspended 
during the war and 190 have been altogether abolished. Secondly 
the size of the form has also been reduced from 1941. In the 
forms printed after July 1942, no superfluous space is allowed. 
I would say that if Honourable Members have any suggestions 
to make to the Government of India, I should certainly feel 
extremely obliged and give my best attention to them. 

Then, Sir, with regard to publications, I might assure 
the house that nothing is published, unless it is found to be 
absolutely essential. In order to determine the essentiality 
of any publication, the Government of India have introduced 
three different checks on publications. There is first of all the 
check applied by the Controller of Printing and Stationery. He 
is no longer the mechanical man who used to execute orders 
placed before him for printing. We have now invested him with 
authority to scrutinise and to examine the essentiality of any 
publication put before him. If he disagrees and objects, the matter 
is then referred to the Secretary of the Labour Department 
who considers the question and if the Labour Department and 
the Controller of Printing agree that the publication is not an 
essential publication, then the matter is referred to a Committee 
whose decision is regarded as final. Then, Sir, we have also 
issued instructions to printers whereby they are directed that 
they must make the most economical use of paper both in the 
matter of spacing, margin and other things. I am sure that 
although this may not be a very impressive list of steps taken 
by the Government of India, it is undoubtedly a serious attempt 
to produce economy. Sir, as the saying goes, no one expects 
Hannibal’s elephant to learn the goose steps. The Government 
of India, and any Government for the matter of that, is a 
huge beast, slow in moving, slow in gaits and yet it cannot be 
expected to learn goose steps and yet, I think the House will 
agree, the Government of India has learned the goose steps, if 
it has not learnt, it is ready to learn. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


57 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 57 

Sir F.E. James : It is still quite young. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Now, Sir, I come 
to the definite suggestion made by my Honourable friend 
Sir Frederick James in the matter of bringing about economy 
of paper in the Government of India. His specific suggestion, if 
I understood him correctly, was that a body was appointed in 
England, a committee consisting of a Chartered Accountant, a 
representative of the Publishing House and a representative of 
the Printing establishment. Sir, he has given us no details as 
to the mode and the manner by which this Committee works in 
England, nor has he referred to any principles adopted by this 
Committee in order to bring about economy. It is therefore at this 
stage quite impossible for me to say that I am ready to accept 
the suggestion that he has made. But I would like to point out 
to him the steps that we had taken which I am sure he will 
agree is more or less along the lines that he suggests. The step 
that we have taken is to appoint an officer called Commercial 
Master Printer to advise the Controller of Printing. We have 
very recently secured the sanction of the Finance Department 
and the Officer will be appointed before long. I am sure this 
Officer will be able to do what the Committee in England is 
said to have done. 

Dr. P.N. Banerjea : Is he an Indian or a European ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : We have only got 
the financial sanction just now. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta (Bombay Central Division: Non- 
Muhammadan Rural) : Will he save more than he will cost ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Let us hope so. 
There is no harm in guessing and hoping. That is all that I have 
to say with regard to this question of paper. 

The next point dealt with by Sir Frederick James was with 
regard to the housing of families of officers in Simla. He will 
appreciate that so far as housing is concerned, this is probably 
the tightest corner in which the Government of India finds itself. 
The accommodation which it had and the accommodation which 
it has been able to control as a result of the requisition order 
is nothing as compared to the officers which the Government 
of India has had to employ as a result of war efforts. He will 
also agree that if we are to prosecute the war effort fully, we 
have to have priority fixed for accommodation, and he will 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

agree that so far as the priority is concerned families must take 
a second place as compared to the officers themselves. At the 
same time, the Government of India is aware how separation 
of husband and wife, father and children is likely to affect the 
mentality, the ease of mind of an officer who is required to do war 
effort. In order to relieve whatever distress such an arrangement 
might be causing, the Government of India has undertaken to 
open three boarding houses in Simla in order to accommodate 
the wives of officers who cannot leave their stations and I hope 
that Sir Frederick James will accept this as a token of goodwill 
of the Government of India towards this very acute problem. 

Then, Sir, I come to the third point which was raised by my 
Honourable friend, Sir Jamnadas Mehta. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : I beg your pardon. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I hope you will be 
on the way to Knighthood. I won’t withdraw, nor apologize; I 
only say that it is in anticipation. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan (East Central Pubjab : 
Muhammadan) : Coming events cast their shadows before. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Mr. Jamnadas Mehta 
in the course of the debate referred to the Session of the Dominion 
Labour Trade Union Congress which is being held in England or 
which is about to be held, and he complained that Indian Labour 
was not represented at that Dominion Conference. Sir, I share 
the regret and the sorrow which Mr. Jamnadas Mehta feels at 
the omission of representation of Indian labour at this important 
labour conference, but I would like to tell Mr. Jamnadas Mehta 
that the Labour Department is in no sense responsible for this 
unfortunate result. I would also like to tell him that the Labour 
Department was not consulted by the conveners of this Conference 
and I am sure that Mr. Jamnadas Mehta will admit that we 
really could not do anything in this matter since we were not 
consulted. Why they omitted to consult us and why they did not 
directly consult the heads of the labour movement in this country, 
who are quite well known to the gentlemen who are working 
for this Conference, I can more than understand. But, I think, 
Mr. Mehta will agree that the Labour Department is as watchful as 
any department can be in the matter of safeguarding the interest 
and the position of the Labour Department. Sir, I have done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


59 


11 


*Election of Members to the Standing 
Committee for the Labour Department 


The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I beg to move : 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as the 
Honourable the President may direct, three non-official Members 
to serve on the Standing Committee to advise on subjects with 
which the Labour Department is concerned.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved: 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as the 
Honourable the President may direct, three non-official Members 
to serve on the Standing Committee to advise on subjects with 
which the Labour Department is concerned.” 

Dr. P.N. Banerjea (Calcutta Suburbs : Non-Muhammadan 
Urban): Sir, there are several Standing Committees attached to 
the different Departments, but there is no Standing Committee 
of this House which numbers only three. Now, what can be the 
reason for the small number of Members elected by this House ? 
Either the Labour Department is not an important Department, 
or it may be due to the fact that the Standing Committee is 
never called, or called very rarely, do discuss any matter. I should 
like to have information on either of these two subjects. Is the 
Labour Department an important Department ? I find that it 
is in charge of a very eminent person like Dr. Ambedkar. Even 
if it was an unimportant Department before, it should cease 
to be an unimportant Department at the present day at least 
so long as he is in control of the subject. But if it is to be an 
important Department, the Standing Committee should consist 
of a much larger number of persons. Look at the Standing 
Finance Committee, look at the Standing Finance Committee 
for Railways, and look at the Public Accounts Committee. 
The number of Members of any of these Committees is much 
larger than three. I am told that this Committee does not meet 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 20th March 1943, pp. 1278-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

very often I do not know whether it is a fact and that even when 
it meets, not much business is placed before this Committee. 
If that be so, I am afraid the utility of the Committee will be 
greatly diminished. I, therefore, appeal to the Government to 
increase the number of Members to eight. I understand that 
two Members are selected from the other place. I suggest that 
eight Members should be elected by this House. If you like, you 
may increase the number of Members given to the other House. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am very glad 
to notice that this motion of mine has excited so much interest 
from the House. The number three, as I understand, is based 
neither on the importance nor on any other consideration, but 
I am told that it is a standard number and that if there are 
any enlargements or deviations from the standard number, they 
constitute only an exception and not the rule. 

Now, Sir, with regard to the point raised by my Honourable 
friend Dr. Banerjea that the reason why the number was fixed 
at three is because the Department pays scant courtesy to this 
Committee, I submit, is not borne out by facts. The House will 
notice from what I am saying now that in 1940 there were 
two meetings of this Committee held and some very important 
business was placed before the Committee. For instance, at the 
two meetings that were held in 1940 the subject matter that 
was placed before the Committee included the conclusions of 
the Labour Conference, report of the Technical Training Inquiry 
Committee, scheme for the training of skilled artizans and 
accommodation in Delhi. In 1941 one meeting was held and there 
the business placed before the Committee included conclusions 
of the second Conference of Labour Ministers and progress 
made with the technical training under the Bevin training 
scheme. In 1942 one meeting was held and there was also an 
adjourned meeting held subsequently. The proceedings of the 
third Conference of Labour Ministers, the summary of the views 
of the employers and workers’ representatives on certain subjects, 
building programme in Delhi and Simla, proposals relating to the 
recognition of Trade Unions, progress made with the technical 
training under the Bevin training scheme and amendments of the 
National Service (Technical Personnel) Ordinance, 1940, were the 
subjects that were placed before the meeting of the Committee. 
I am sure nobody can say that the Department has not been 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


61 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS LABOUR DEPARTMENT 61 

placing before the Committee matters which are of importance 
and interest to Labour. 

Then, the other thing I would like to submit to the House is 
this that this is not the only Committee to advise the Labour 
Department. Besides this, we have now instituted a Plenary 
Conference which consists of representatives of the Central, 
Provincial Governments, and also the Indian States, the 
representatives of employers and of labour are also represented 
on the Plenary Conference on a very extensive scale. There is 
no case for so large an increase asked for by the Honourable 
Dr. Banarjea. In addition to that we have also got the Standing 
Labour Advisory Committee. Having regard to the circumstances 
I hold the view that if there was any case for the enlargement 
of the personnel of the Committee, that case has considerably 
suffered by reason of the constitution of the Plenary Conference 
as well as by the Standing Labour Committee. However, if 
my Honourable friend is anxious that the personnel of this 
Committee should be increased, I am prepared to increase the 
number to eight- assigning five to this House and three to the 
upper Chamber: and I hope this will satisfy my Honourable 
friends in this House. 

Mr. H.A. Sathar H. Essak Sait (West Coast and Nilgiris : 
Muhammadan) will the Honourable member please tell the 
house whether Members of this Committee are members of the 
Plenary Conference ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Some of them 
are Messrs Mehta and Joshi are Members both of the Plenary 
Conference as well the Standing Committee. 

Mr. H.A. Sathar H. Essak Sait : Are they ex-officio members 
of the Plenary Conference ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, they represent 
their organisations. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani (Tirhut Division : 
Muham madan) : Sir, in view of the war conditions this Labour 
Committee has become very very important. It deals with the 
labour questions. Besides, as has just been pointed out by the 
Honourable the Member in charge, this Committee deals with 
many other important questions such as building matters 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


62 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Labour Member has already replied. The question is : 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as 
the Honourable the President may direct, five non-official Members 
to serve on the Standing Committee to advise on subjects, with 
which the Labour Department, is concerned.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


63 


12 

*The Indian Tea Control (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, in view of the observations which fell from my Honourable 
friend, Mr. Joshi it is only proper that I should rise to state 
the position of Government on the points that he has made. 
In a certain sense, the remarks of Mr. Joshi might appear 
to be irrelevant. We are discussing the Tea Control Act and 
obviously any provisions dealing with conditions of labour 
would be entirely out of place therein. But looking at it from 
a larger point of view, it must be admitted that when the 
State is asked to suspend the laws of supply and demand with 
regard to any industry, it is fair that those who are interested 
in labour should ask that their interests should be protected. 
And it is from this point of view that I say that a reply from 
Government is necessary. 

Sir, the first point which Mr. Joshi made was that it is now 
more than 12 years since the Royal Commission on Labour 
reported and that the Government of India has practically done 
nothing with regard to the recommendations of that Commission. 
Sir, I agree that 12 years is a long period for any Government 
to lake in order to deal with the recommendations made by 
a Royal Commission which was appointed to investigate into 
this matter. But I think on the facts to which I propose to 
refer in the brief remarks that I am making, Mr. Joshi will 
realise and the House will also realise that much serious blame 
would not be laid at the door of the Government of India. As 
the Honourable Member will remember, the Royal Commission 
on Labour made five recommendations with regard to the tea 
plantation. First was that the Assam Labour Emigrant Act 
should be repealed and another Act permitting very much 
greater fluidity to the labour should be enacted. The second 
recommendation was to establish a wage board for fixing the 
wages of labourers there. Third recommendation dealt with the 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 23rd March 1943, pp. 1370-73 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

appointment of a Board of Health for the welfare of labour in 
convenient areas with power to make regulations relating to 
the drinking water, sanitation, drainage, medical facilities and 
housing. The fourth recommendation was that provisions relating 
to the regular and prompt payment of wages and deductions 
to be made for advances made to labour should be applied to 
plantation labour. The last recommendation was that provision 
should be made in order that access to public should be provided 
to gardens. 

Now, when the recommendations were made it is important 
to bear in mind that the Government of India without loss of 
time examined these recommendations in order to find out which 
was the proper authority to deal with them, and they came to 
the conclusion that except the first recommendation which dealt 
with the repeal of the Emigration Act and substitution of another, 
all these would legitimately be regarded as fundamentally of 
local concern. I do not think anybody could contend that the 
attitude taken by the Government of India in the matter of 
dividing responsibility with regard to these recommendations 
was incorrect. I submit that it was, in pursuance of the decision 
that the Government of India took on the recommendations of 
the Royal Commission on Labour they immediately addressed 
a despatch to the Assam Government informing them that 
liberty was given to the Local Government to deal with other 
recommendations, and the Government of India without loss 
of time, as the Honourable Members know, proceeded to pass 
the Act which is now on the Statute Book and which covers 
the first recommendation of the Royal Commission on Labour. 
Sir, unfortunately, for reasons of which I know very little, the 
Local Government of Assam did not move in the matter: and if I 
may say so my Honourable friend Mr. Joshi also, although he has 
been in the House right from the date when the recommendations 
were made, did not or does not appear to me to have taken 
up the question at all. But, Sir, if I may claim credit for the 
Government of India, the Government of India did move in the 
matter. I would like to inform the House that in 1938 when 
the Tea Control Act came up for extension in the Legislature, 
the Government of India did take initiative and approached the 
planting industry with a proposal for making enquiry into the 
conditions of labour in plantation. As my Honourable friends, 
Mr. Griffiths and Sir Frederick James will recall, even a Conference 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


65 


THE INDIAN TEA CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL 65 

was held between representatives of the Labour Department and 
the representatives of Planters. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Why did not the Government 
of India take to task the Assam Government for not moving in 
the matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The question may 
have been answered better by the Honourable Member in charge 
of the Department at that time. I came only yesterday and I know 
very little about it. The Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, referred to 
the question, I am not prepared to say, we’re being carried as to 
whether time had not arrived for making enquiries into the terms 
of the recommendations. Sir, I find that almost at a time when 
matters were heading for a decision the new Assam Government, 
which was the Congress Government, thought it fit to step into 
the matter and by a Resolution appointed a Committee on the 
23rd May, 1939. It is quite natural that as a result of the step 
taken by the Assam Government the Government of India was 
bound to withdraw from the Held which by the terms of original 
despatch they had assigned to the Local Government for being 
dealth with. As my Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, referred to the 
question, I am not prepared to say what exactly was the reason, 
but somehow there was a clash between the members who were 
on the Committee and the clash developed almost to a conflict 
with the result that the work of the Committee was suspended. 
Ultimately the Government of Assam took no action. All that they 
did was to issue a notification as to what happened and why the 
Committee was suspended. That brought matters to the end of 
July, 1939. Obviously every one knows, a few months after that 
war was declared, and it is impossible for anybody, either the 
Local Government or the Central Government, to have initialed 
an enquiry into the matter. I am sure these circumstances will 
convince Mr. Joshi that the Government of India is really not 
liable to be taken to task for any kind of inactivity on its part. 

With regard to the main question as to whether Government 
does or does not consider the necessity of protecting the 
interests of labour, I would straightaway begin by saying 
that Government does regard this question as of paramount 
importance. I do not wish to go into the question as to the 
conditions of labour on the plantation. We hear in newspapers 
various figures given ; figures relating to wages in Ceylon, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

figures given relating to wages on the Assam plantation. I am not 
prepared to give the imprimatur of Government to either sets of 
figures as to wages, etc. We have no exact data for the simple 
reason that so far no investigation has been made in the matter. 
But I do say one thing that the conditions on tea plantations are 
unregulated, that they vary enormously from one place to another. 
There is no common, uniform standard in the conditions of work 
and the Government of India does think that that is a state of 
affairs which it can tolerate. It is also clear that we cannot enter 
upon any legislation unless we have sufficient material brought 
before us by an impartial enquiry. This is not a condition which 
the Government of India can be said to have strutted out in order 
to block any move that may be made in the interests of protecting 
labour on the plantation. My honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, himself 
will recollect that this was one of the riders that was put by the 
Royal Commission on Labour themselves. The Royal Commission, 
while making the recommendation added a proviso that before 
these recommendations will be put into operation, specific enquiry 
ought to be made on the conditions in plantations. Now, Sir, the 
Government of India has no doubt that this enquiry must be made. 
Speaking for Government I am prepared to say that Government 
thinks that proper standards of welfare must be imposed on the 
plantations. There is no escape. What my Honourable friend, 
Mr. Joshi, said, I entirely support. It is not open for the Government 
of India to impose fair conditions of wages on Ceylon as a condition 
precedent and not applying the same standards of labour in India. 
The Government of India by the various Ordinances has laid down 
that wherever any restriction has been imposed upon labour, the 
Government of India will see that fair conditions of labour are 
granted to labour. These are the things which the Government of 
India considers it is bound to apply in the case of plantation labour. 
Nor can it be denied that whatever may have been the condition 
of the plantations in the long past, at present the condition of 
plantations is such that they can bear the weight of such wage 
standards as a Board may impose upon them. 

Now, therefore, the only question that arises is this : can we institute 
an enquiry at the present moment ? There is no difference between 
my Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, and myself as representing the 
Government of India on the two issues, namely that proper standards 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


67 


THE INDIAN TEA CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL 67 

must be imposed. As my Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, and other 
Honourable Members of the House know very well, a large part 
of the tea estates are situated in the Eastern corner of India, 
Assam and Bengal. It is quite obvious that those areas are greatly 
exposed to enemy action. It is quite likely that any enquiry that 
may be started in that corner may have a very disturbing effect. 
Therefore, the only question that remains is whether we can begin 
that enquiry on the plantations which are situated in Southern 
India. I should like to tell the House how the plantations are 
divided between Northern and Southern India. The figures which 
I have and which relate to 1941 show that, so far as acreage of 
the tea plantations is concerned, in Northern India the acreage 
is 607,000, in southern India the acreage is only 163,132. So 
far as labour employed on plantations is concerned, in Northern 
India the labour employed is 773,969 while in Southern India 
the labour employed is only 144,385. 

Sir F. E. James (Madras : European): That only refers to tea. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes, we are only 
talking about tea. It is obvious from the figures which I have 
given that the plantations in Southern India form a very small 
portion of the Tea Planting Industry in India. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : What is the acreage in Assam ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am taking the 
North and South. I am not taking Assam separately. Assam is 
included in Northern India. It is obvious from these figures that 
the plantations in Southern India form a very small portion of the 
total population working in tea gardens in this country. It seems 
to the Government of India that no kind of gain can arise either 
to the country or to the labourers by undertaking such a partial 
and limited inquiry. It is not possible to begin an enquiry which 
by the situation in which this war finds itself must necessarily 
be limited to so microscopic an area of the total plantations 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I must 
ask the Honourable Member to realise that the labour question 
arises only incidentally on this motion. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I have nothing 
more to say. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : May I know whether the owners of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

gardens were paid substantial sums of money for not growing 
tea at all and that was at the expense of the consumers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : That is a matter 
which the Commerce Secretary will deal with. 

Some Honourable Members : The question be now put. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That the question be now put.” 

The motion was adopted: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


69 


13 


*The War Injuries (Compensation 
Insurance) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : Sir, 
I move: 

“That the Bill to impose on employers a liability to pay 
compensation to workmen sustaining war injuries and to provide 
for the insurance of employers against such liability be referred 
to a Select Committee consisting of Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar, 

Mr. N.M. Joshi, Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta, Mr. D.S. Joshi, 

Mr. Ilooseinbhoy A. Lalljee, Khan Bahadur Mian Ghulam Kadir 
Muhammad Shabhan, Mr. C.C. Miller, Mr. K.L.C. Gwilt, Maulana 
Zafar Ali Khan, Mr. Yusuf Abdoola Haroon, Hajee Chowdhury 
Muhammad Ismail Khan, Mr. II. A. Sathar II. Easak Sait, 

Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya, Mr. R.R. Gupta and the 
Mover, that the number of Members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five 
and that the Committee be authorised to meet at Simla.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Has the 
honourable member given the names ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I will hand 
over the list now. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
names ought to have been given earlier. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not think 
it would be necessary for me to take much time of the House 
in order to command this measure to the Honourable members. 
The main provisions of the Bill are three. The Bill seeks to 
give compensation to workmen who may become victims of war 
Induries ; secondly, the Bill seeks to make employers liable for 
such compensation; and thirdly, the Bill seeks to compel employers 
to insure against liabilities imposed upon them. 

Now, taking the question of compensation, the point to which I wish 
to draw the attention of the House is that this Bill is a linked measure. 
It is linked to Workmen’s Compensation Act. Now, Sir, the relationship 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 31st March 1943, pp. 1649-51. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of this Bill to the War Injuries Ordinance to which I have made 
a reference is plain. As Honourable Members will recall, the War 
Injuries Ordinance, 1941, defines what is called the qualifying 
injuries. Those injuries are classified in that Ordinance. What 
the present Bill does is to adopt in the main the scope and 
limits of the qualifying injuries as has been defined in the War 
Injuries Ordinance. As to the question of relationship of the 
present Bill to the Workmen’s Compensation Act that will be 
clear to the Honourable Members from the fact that the amount 
of compensation which has been fixed in this Bill for the victim 
of war injuries more or less follows the scale that has been fixed 
in the Workmen’s Compensation Act. 

Now, Sir, the reason for bringing this measure is this : After 
the War Injuries Ordinance was passed in 1941 a question was 
raised, a question which is of substance and if I may say so, of 
some importance and that question is whether the payment made 
to a workman who unfortunately happened to sustain what is 
called the qualifying injuries should be a sort of relief or should 
be compensation. The difference between relief and compensation 
is quite obvious. Relief is merely to help a person to get over 
the difficulties to which he might be reduced by reason of the 
incapacity which he suffers by a war injury and which prevents 
him from earning him normal wages. Compensation, on the other 
hand according to the terms of the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, seeks to make payment which compensates him fully for the 
loss which he incurs. When this question was raised a reference 
was made to the conditions that were prevailing in England and 
it was found that the British Parliament passed an enactment 
which is known as the War Injuries Miscellaneous Act of 1936. 
On examination of the provisions of this English Law it was found 
that the payments which were allowed under that Act amounted 
to compensation and not merely relief. Obviously the question 
arose whether it was not desirable for the Government of India to 
follow the principle which was laid down in this English statues. 
Secondly, some of the employers, on their own accord after the 
passing of the War Injuries Ordinance of 1941, addressed a letter 
to the Government of India stating that from their point of view 
the provisions made in the War Injuries Ordinance were not 
sufficient for the maintenance of the morale of labour and that 
compensation should be paid in order that the labourers working in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


71 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 71 

disturbed areas may remain steady at that work. From both 
these points of view the Government of India accepted the 
principle of giving compensation to workmen in place of what 
was originally thought to be only relief. 

On examining the provisions of the War Injuries Ordinance, 
it was found that at a level of about Rs. 24, the payments made 
under the War Injuries Ordinance constituted not only relief but 
also compensation. What is therefore necessary to do is to give 
the workman drawing a salary above Rs. 24 additional rebate 
which will make payments made to him amount to compensation; 
that is to say to supplement what he gets under the ordinance 
so that what he will get will also amount to compensation. 
This measure therefore is a measure which is a supplementary 
measure, which supplements the provisions of War Injuries 
Ordinance of 1941. 

Having explained to the house the main provision, namely 
of compensation and how the Bill was linked up to the War 
Injuries Ordinance as well as to the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act and having explained to the house the reason which led the 
Government of India to bring in this supplementary legislation, 
I will proceed to explain the second main provision of the Bill, 
namely to make the employer liable for such compensation. 
It might be said that while under the provisions of the War 
Injuries Ordinance, it was government which was undertaking 
the liability to pay relief, the Government also should undertake 
similar liability for making compensation to those to whom this 
present Bill applies. It is quite obvious that it is not possible 
for Government to undertake the liability which under the 
circumstances of the case may almost amount to anything because 
if India remains as it is, there may be no liability arising out 
of this. Or, if the situation worsens, the liability may be quite 
indefinite and having regard to the capacity of the Government of 
India, it is quite obvious that the Government cannot be asked to 
undertake such indefinite liability. Secondly, I do not think that 
much can be made of the fact that Government is not undertaking 
liability in this matter for it will be realised that whatever 
amount of compensation the employer may be called upon to pay 
under the liability which we are imposing upon him, it would 
no doubt be regarded as an admissible revenue expenditure 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

under E.P.T., and consequently in the main the burden would 
ultimately fall upon the Treasury. 

I might also mention that while the Government of India 
is seeking to impose this liability upon the employers, the 
Government of India is not forgetting its own obligations to its 
own employees. Honourable members will find a clause there 
stating that this Bill does not apply to servants of the Crown 
or to employees of the Federal Railway. But that does not mean 
that these employees are not going to get the benefit similar to 
those which we are providing in this Bill. I should like to inform 
the House that the Federal Railways as well as the Government 
of India have informed their employees that they would be 
prepared to extend the provisions of extra pensions which are 
contained in the Civil Service Regulations and in the Statutory 
Rules governing the employment of railwaymen. 

Now, Sir, the third provision which seeks to compel the 
employer to ensure the liability imposed upon him is, I claim 
to be, a very necessary and a very salutary provision. The 
object of making this provision is to ensure that the workmen 
at all time will get the compensation for which this Bill seeks 
to make provision. It may be, as the House may well realise, 
that if a factory is bombed or demolished, the assets of an 
employer are destroyed and if any provision of the sort that is 
sought to be made in this Bill is in existence, notwithstanding 
the benefit which the Act extends to the workmen, it may in 
the final analysis leave the workmen where they are without 
any opportunity of getting compensation which is provided for. 
Insurance therefore is guaranteed to the workman that in all 
circumstances the benefits which the Bill seeks to give him will 
be there for him, if he is so unfortunately situated as to receive 
the war injury. The working of the system will be somewhat 
as follows. The payment will be made by the employer to the 
employee in the first instance in regard to the terms of the 
Bill. The employer will be reimbursed out of an insurance fund 
which may be managed by the Government. The employer will 
contribute to this insurance fund the premium which will be 
settled at the end of the war when the total liability will be 
known. In the meanwhile, Government will be recovering advances 
from employers against the final premium which will be settled 
after the war. The quantum of advance will vary from quarter 
to quarter. In the first quarter the advance will not exceed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


73 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 73 

eight annas per 100 of the Wage bill. For subsequent quarters it 
will change depending upon the liability that may be outstanding. 
It may be that there have been no casualities in the preceding 
quarter. If that is so, it is obvious that no advances will be 
recovered from the employer. As I said, the advantage of the 
insurance scheme is that it ensures the workmen a payment, 
secondly the risk is distributed-safer areas which are not exposed 
to any attack will also be contributing towards the payment of 
compensation to workmen living and working in areas which 
have been attacked. Thirdly, the burden is proportionate because 
it is based upon the Wage bill of each employer. 

It will therefore be seen, Sir, that the Bill is a very simple 
measure. I would also say that it is a non-controversial measure. 
The House would like to know that the idea of the Bill came 
from the Millowners Association in Bombay in the beginning 
of 1942. After the suggestion was sent to the Government of 
India, there was an informal conference held in April 1942 
between the Secretary of the Labour Department, Sir Henry 
Richardson, Sir Frederic James, Mr. Haddow, Mr. Gwilt and 
Mr. Hooseinbhoy Lalljee. On their suggestion, the employers were 
consulted, two employers organisations were approached and two 
All-India organisations of Industrial employers have completely 
supported the measure. With regard to employers Federation, 
that organisation unfortunately was divided. One section is in 
favour, and the other is not. So far as labour representations 
are concerned, the Standing Labour Committee unanimously 
recommended this measure. I do not think that anything more is 
necessary to enable the house to understand fully the provisions 
of this Bill. Sir, with these remarks, I move. 

•k "k 'k 

*The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am glad 
to find such a general support accorded to the measure which 
I had the pleasure of moving this morning. The words of 
criticism which have emerged are indeed surprisingly few and 
most of them came from my Honourable friends, Mr. Miller and 
Mr. Joshi. My Honourable friend, Mr. Miller, said that it was 
necessary that the Government should give more information 
with regard to the measure. I shall always be glad to give 
him whatever information he wants if he would kindly let me 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 31st March 1943, pp. 1659-61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

know the points which are troubling his mind. With regard to 
the other question which he raised, namely, that in his mind 
there appeared a certain discrimination between the rates we 
were paying under the War Injuries Ordinance and the rates 
we proposed to pay under the present measure, I fear he is 
labouring under a misapprehension because, as I tried to make 
out, the object of this measure is really to equalise the position 
of those who are covered by the War Injuries Ordinance and 
of those who are going to be covered by the present measure. 
As I pointed out, on examination of the rates we offered to the 
war injuries victims, we found that those who drew Rs. 24 and 
above only got relief and those who drew Rs. 24 and below got 
compensation. And what we propose to do now by this measure is 
to give compensation to those who stand above Rs. 24. Therefore, 
my Honourable friend will see that far from creating a position 
which will be called discriminatory, we are really equalising the 
position of all workmen to which both these measures are going 
to apply. I quite appreciate the point that my Honourable friend, 
Mr. Miller, made, namely, that this measure is restricted to a 
certain type of workmen or certain classes of workmen who are 
defined in clause 5. That is quite obvious from the provisions 
of the Bill itself. But, as I pointed out, having regard to two 
circumstances, firstly, that it is not possible for Government to 
undertake the liability of paying compensation to all workmen and, 
secondly, having regard to the fact that any scheme of insurance 
which Government can put forth must be administratively 
workable, it follows that Government cannot spread itself out 
to cover all sorts of workmen because, as I said, it would be 
too much of liability for Government to take and the scheme 
will become administratively unworkable. In order that we may 
run the insurance scheme, it is quite obvious that we must be 
able to locate an employer on whom we can definitely place the 
liability and from whom we can recover the premium. In the 
case of general population it is not possible to locate someone 
on whom this liability could be imposed and from whom the 
premium could be demanded. That is certainly the reason why 
we have been required to limit the scheme to certain classes of 
workmen who have been defined in clause 5. My Honourable 
friend, Mr. Miller, said that we have given no justification 
for confining our scheme to the classes of workmen who have 
been defined in clause 5. Some of the answers which I could 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


75 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 75 

have given to him have already been given by my Honourable 
friend, Mr. Joshi, and I do not propose to repeat them. The answer 
really is to be found in the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
itself. The Statement of Objects and Reasons (paragraph 2) 
makes it clear that they are exposed to danger in factories and 
other industrial concerns. That, I submit, is as good a reason 
as any could be given for confining this measure to the classes 
of workmen who are defined therein. It cannot be denied that 
factories and industries are easy targets for enemy attack and 
the people working there are, therefore, more exposed to danger 
than the general population. 

With regard to the question raised by the Honourable friend, 
Mr. Joshi, that this Bill does not apply to all workmen and he 
pointed out two particular cases in which he desired that the 
provisions of this Bill should be extended, namely, to the labourers 
working in Assam on tea plantations and seamen, are, no doubt, 
cases which require some particular answer. Now, Sir, my general 
answer to the criticism of Mr. Joshi, with regard to these two 
particular points is this, that Government is quite aware of 
what he has said and that is the reason why Government has 
introduced sub-clause (c) in clause 5, whereby Government has 
reserved to itself the power of extending the provisions of the 
Bill to other workmen employed in any employment. Government 
does not regard that the categories of workers defined are the 
final and that no occasion may arise to include others. 

Dr. P.N. Banerjea : It is not exhaustive. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : It is not exhaustive 
and, therefore, if a situation arises when it becomes clear to 
Government that the provisions of this Bill should be extended 
to workmen employed in other employments, Government will 
undoubtedly consider the matter. 

With regard to the question of Assam, the only point I 
would like to make is this that, as I said, we are confining 
the measure to workmen who are living in what might be 
called exposed centres. To my mind and according to the 
information we have at present, it cannot be said that the tea 
plantations are exposed centres. If at any time the plantations 
do become exposed centres and subject to risk, there is no 
doubt about it that either Mr. Joshi may move in the matter or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government will take notice and see that the provisions of this 
Bill are extended to the labourers in Assam. 

With regard to the seamen, I think the matter was brought 
forward by the Commerce Department and I understand that 
there is a measure already in existence whereby a provision, if 
not of the same force, at any rate, analogous to the scheme that 
we are having, is already in existence. If my Honourable friend, 
Mr. Joshi, thinks that it is desirable that the Select Committee 
should examine and make some provision, if that provision is 
not incongruous with the main features of the Bill, I certainly 
will raise no objection for his considering the matter in the 
Select Committee. 

My Honourable friend, Mr. Miller, referred to one or two 
clauses in the Bill. The first was sub-clause 5(3). To that I have 
given my reply that Government has deliberately introduced 
that sub-clause by way of caution because Government thinks 
that the expedience may arise whereby the provisions of this 
Bill may have to be extended. 

The other section to which he referred was section 10 of 
sub-clause (3). His point of criticism was that by this provision 
Government proposes that if any balance is left out of the fund 
the excess will be paid into the general revenues. I understood 
Mr. Miller to say that this policy of the Government of India 
was not justified by the circumstances of the case. But if 
Mr. Miller will bear in mind the fact to which I have already 
referred, namely, that a good part of the money which will be 
paid as premia by the employers to this fund will come out of 
the E.P.T., then it is only proper that Government should be the 
residuary legatee of such balance. Sir, I have nothing more to say. 

Mr. E.L.C. Gwilt (Bombay: European): May I ask a question 
from Honourable Member ? He said in his opening speech that 
it is the Millowners’ Association that initiated the scheme. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : They made a 
suggestion. 

Mr. E.L.C. Gwilt: Did not they also make a suggestion that 
any money left in the fund after the compensation is completely 
paid should be devoted to industrial research and if so, will my 
Honourable friend give consideration to that suggestion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I have no memory, 
but I will look into the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 77 

THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 77 

Mr. Chairman (Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang): The question is : 

“That the Bill to impose on employers a liability to pay 
compensation to workmen sustaining war injuries and to provide 
for the insurance of employers against such liability be referred 
to a Select Committee consisting of Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar, 

Mr. N. M. Joshi, Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta, Mr. D.S. Joshi, 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee, Khan Bahadur Mian Ghulam Kadir 
Muhammad Shahban, Mr. C. C. Miller, Mr. E.I.C. Gwilt, Maulana 
Zafar Ali Khan, Mr. Yusuf Abdoola Haroon, Hajee Chowdhury 
Muhammad Ismail Khan, Mr. H.A. Sathar H. Essak Sait, 

Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya, Mr. R.R. Gupta and the 
Mover, that the number of Members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be live 
and that the Committee be authorised to meet at Simla.” 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


78 


14 


* Employment Exchanges for Skilled and 
Semi-Skilled Personnel 


Standing Labour Committee Discussions 

Questions relating to labour welfare, war production, the 
employment of skilled and semi-skilled personnel, industrial 
disputes and the collection of statistical information on labour 
problems were discussed at the third meeting of the Standing 
Labour Committee, in Bombay on May 7 and 8. The Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, presided. 

Opinion, in general, favoured the scheme for establishing 
employment exchanges for skilled and semi-skilled personnel, 
the scheme being conducted on a voluntary basis. The suggestion 
that there should be representatives of Provincial Governments 
on the advisory committees attached to Employment Exchanges 
was also adopted. 

The Conference discussed the insertion of a Fair Wage Clause 
in Government Contracts. There were suggestions that contracts 
other than those of the public Works Department should also 
be covered. 

Labour Legislation 

The plan for labour legislation and labour welfare during wartime 
covered aspects like social security, wages and welfare ; and the 
question whether Wage Boards were desirable in India also came 
within the scope of discussion. The delegates were assured that 
the Government of India were anxious to use the machinery of 
the Tripartite Conference as an advisory body to help them in 
achieving further progress in respect of labour welfare measures. 

It was generally agreed that it was advisable that Labour Officers 
should be appointed in industrial undertakings, to maintain close touch 
with labour, hear its grievances and secure redress as expeditiously as 


Indian Information, June 1, 1943, p. 431 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


79 


EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES FOR SKILLED AND SEMI-SKILLED PERSONNEL 79 

possible. Reference was made to the Bombay Millowners 
Association’s scheme for training of Labour Officers. 

The meeting was attended by the following delegates and 
advisers from Provinces and Indian States and representatives 
of Employers and workers all over India : — 

Government of India: Mr. H.C. Prior, C.I.E., I.C.S., Secretary, 
Labour Department; Dr. D.T. Jack (Adviser); Mr. R.S. Nimbkar 
(Adviser); Sir Theodore Gregory (Adviser); and Mr. D.S. Joshi, 
(Secretary to the Meeting). 

Bombay : Mr. C.H. Bristow, C.I.E., I.C.S., Adviser to H.E. the 
Governor ; Mr. G.B. Constantine, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner 
(Adviser). 

Bengal: Mr. A. Hughes, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner. 

United Provinces: Mr. J.E. Pedley, C.I.E., M.C., I.C.S., Labour 
Commissioner. 

Madras and Central Provinces and Berar : Rao Bahadur 
N.R. Chandorkar, Labour Commissioner, C.P. & Berar; Mr. F.R. 
Brislee, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner, Madras (Adviser). 

Punjab, Sind & North-West Frontier Province : Mr. A.P. Le 
Mesurier, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner, Sind ; Mr. Amin-ud-Din, 
I.C.S. Secretary, Electrical and Industries Department, Punjab 
(Adviser). 

Bihar, Assam & Orissa: Mr. S. N. Mazumdar, I.C.S., Labour 
Commissioner, Bihar ; Mr. A.S. Ramachandran Pillai. Labour 
Commissioner, Assam (Adviser); Mr. S. Solomon, I.C.S., Director 
of Industries and Chief Inspector of Factories, Orissa (Adviser). 

Chamber of Princes : Mr. Maqbool Mahmood, Secretary, 
Chamber of Princes. 

Hyderabad, Mysore, Travancore, Baroda, Gwalior and Holkar 
States : Mr. Mahdi Ali Mirza, Labour Commissioner, Hyderabad ; 
Col. Sirdar M.N. Shitole, Minister of Industries, Commerce 
and Communication, Gwalior; Mr. B.G. A. Mudaliar, Labour 
Commissioner, Mysore (Adviser); Mr. E.I. Chacko, Director of 
Industries and Labour Commissioner, Travancore (Adviser), 
Mr. K.R. Dotiwala, Director of Industries and Labour Baroda 
(Adviser); Captain H.C Dhanda, Commerce Minister, Holkar 
State (Adviser). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

All-India Organisation of Industrial Employers : Sir Rahimtoola 
M. Chinoy, Bombay; Mr. Kasturbhai Lalbhai, Ahmedabad ; 
Mr. D.G. Mulherkar, Delhi (Adviser). 

Employers’ Federation of India : Sir V.N. Chandavarkar, 
Bombay ; Mr. K.W. Mealing, Calcutta ; Mr. A.H. Bishop (Adviser). 

Other Employers : Dewan Bahadur C.S. Ratnasabapathy 
Mudaliar, C.B.E., Coimbatore. 

All-India Trade union Congress : Mr. N.M. Joshi, Bombay, 
Mr. Fazal Elahi Qurban, Lahore ; Mr. B.K. Mukerjee, Lucknow 
(Adviser); Mr. P.R.K. Sharma, Madras (Adviser). 

Indian Federation of Labour: Mr. S. Guruswamy, Madras; 
Mr. S.C. Mitra, Cawnpore ; Mr. M. A. Khan, Lahore (Adviser). 

Other Workers : Mr. R.R. Bhole, M.L.A. (Bombay) Poona. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


81 


15 


* The Indian Boilers (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member), 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Boilers Act, 1923, 
be taken into consideration.” 

This measure is a very simple measure. It is a non-controversial 
measure and it does not involve any matter of principle. Having 
regard to these considerations, I do not propose to deal at any 
very great length in explaining the provisions of the Bill. It will 
be sufficient if I tell the house the circumstances which have 
led Government to bring in this amending Bill. Briefly, the 
circumstances are these. 

On the 23rd February 1942 there occurred in a mill in 
Bombay a boiler accident which resulted in a very serious loss 
of life. When this accident occurred, an enquiry was made by 
the Government of Bombay in order to ascertain the cause of 
this accident. It was found as a result of the enquiry that the 
explosion was due to something that was wrong in the apparatus 
which is called an “economiser”. To put it specifically, it was 
pointed out that the tubes of the economiser, which I understand 
are technically called “feed pipes”, had been weakened as a 
result of long internal corrosion. This result of the enquiry 
came as a matter of surprise to Government because under the 
Indian Boilers Act, 1923 there is a provision made for the Boiler 
Inspector to regularly inspect boilers and issue certificates that 
the boilers were in working order. The question arises as to 
how the boiler Inspector permitted himself to issue a certificate, 
knowing that the feed pipes of the economiser had become 
unfit for work. It was then found out that having regard to the 
regulations issued under section 28 of the Indian Boilers Act, 
it was not the duly of the boiler Inspector to examine the feed 
pipes or any other auxiliary apparatus that was connected with 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th July 1943, pp. 176-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the boiler, and it is because of this fact that the feed pipes were 
not examined in the case of this particular boiler which exploded. 
It is to remove this lacuna that the present amending Bill has 
been brought in. 

The present Bill makes two amendments. The first amendment 
is to introduce a new clause (cc) to section 2, which is an 
interpretation clause. It adds a new term called “feed pipe” and 
defines what is a feed pipe. The second amendment is to enlarge 
the scope of what is called a “steam-pipe”. According to the law 
as it stands to-day, the steam-pipe means the main pipe only 
and under the amendment the steam-pipe will now include not 
only the main pipe but also the feedpipe. After this amendment 
has been carried, it would be possible for Government to amend 
the regulations framed under section 28 in order to make it 
obligatory upon the Boiler Inspector not only to examine the 
steam-pipes but also the feed-pipes. It is because of this that 
the present Bill has been brought in. Sir, I move that the Bill 
be taken into consideration. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Boilers Act, 1923, 

be taken into consideration”. 

Mr. C.C. Miller (Bengal: European): There is one small 
point on which I would seek enlightenment from the Honourable 
Member. It relates to the system of feed-pipes known as the 
economiser. This is an adjunct to but not an essential part of 
a boiler and I take it that the Inspector would not be legaly 
entitled to refuse a certificate for a boiler being in good condition 
because of there being some defect in the feedpipes provided the 
owner undertook to disconnect the feed-pipes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : My friend will 
understand that it is not possible for me to give a categorical 
answer, but as I am advised, he is quite correct in making the 
assumption that he has made. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Boilers Act, 1923, 

be taken into consideration.” 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


83 


THE INDIAN BOILERS (AMENDMENT) BILL 83 

Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I move that the 
Bill be passed. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
question is : 

“That the bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


84 


16 


* The Motor Vehicles (Drivers) 
Amendment Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill to amend the Motor Vehicles (Drivers) 

Ordinance, 1942, be taken into consideration.” 

This is a simple measure. As the House will remember, 
there have been several Ordinances by which the services of 
several persons have been requisitioned by Government. 

An Honourable Member : How many in all ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am afraid I 
have not got the information but I think the general fact 
is quite well known. The Ordinance which requisitions the 
services of motor drivers is one of those. After the Ordinance 
was passed, it was discovered that there was one provision 
which was present in other Ordinance, but was absent in 
the Motor Drivers Ordinance. That provision was that there 
was not anything in the Ordinance requiring the owner to re- 
employ a motor driver after his services were dispensed with 
by the authority which had requisitioned his services. It is to 
fill this gap that the present Bill has been brought in. The 
purposes of the amendment are three-fold. The amendment 
declares the employer’s liability to re-employ a driver where his 
services have been dispensed with by Government. Secondly, 
it lays down a method for the settlement of disputes as to 
the liability of the employer. The Bill provides reference to 
authority nominated by the Provincial Government on their 
behalf; and thirdly, there is a penalty for non-compliance 
with the orders passed by the authority. Other provisions in 
the Bill relate to the limitations on the right of employment 
which has been given to a motor driver and they are two- 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th July 1943, p. 178. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


85 


THE MOTOR VEHICLES (DRIVERS) AMENDMENT BILL 85 

fold. In the first place, a motor driver must have been in 
continuous service for a period of six months before he can claim 
the right to re-employment. Secondly, he must have applied for 
re-employment within two months from the date of discharge 
from the national service. These conditions being satisfied, this 
present Bill puts him on the same level with other persons 
whose services have been requisitioned. I have nothing more to 
say with regard to this Bill. With these remarks, Sir, I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
question is : 

“That the Bill to amend the Motor Vehicles (Drivers) 

Ordinance, 1942, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

•k "k "k 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Clause 2. 

*Sir Cawasjee Jahangir (Bombay City : Muhammadan 
Urban) : Sir, this is the main clause of the Bill, clause 2, so 
far as I can make out. I see that the reason for the Bill is to 
find Employment for such motor drivers as may have been 
requisitioned by Government for war purposes and the attempt 
is to make the previous employer employ that motor driver under 
two conditions, provided he has been in the employment of the 
original employer for six months and he applies for employment 

within two months If the Honourable Member will take these 

points into consideration, he may take time over it. I think the 
Honourable Member will be doing well by the public and this 
Honourable House. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : With regard to 
the observations which have fallen from my Honourable friend, 
Sir Cowasjee Jehangir, I am bound to say that he has really 
given a very big and a dark colour to what is likely to happen 
when an employer is called upon to reinstate his former 
driver. He seems to think that this matter, once it becomes 
a subject matter of dispute, would assume a form which 
lawyers call a long civil suit. But I am sure it will be shorter 
than a shortcoat. We have made provision that the Provincial 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th July 1943, pp. 179-80. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government will appoint an authority and I have no doubt that 
that authority will be an authority which would be satisfactory 
to both sides. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : How are we to know that ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : We must trust the 
Provincial Government to do its best. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : Does not the Honourable Member 
know that when such an authority is appointed, the rules 
and regulations are very elaborate and that it always causes 
considerable inconvenience, however simple the issue may be. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : It cannot be so 
inconvenient as to make it difficult for people to settle the matter 
expeditiously and I therefore think that there is really no very 
great substance so as to compel me to withhold this measure. 
I think the points that may arise will be points of very small 
dimensions which could be settled without much difficulty or 
worry to either side. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
question is : 

“That clause 2 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Tide and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move that 
the Bill be passed. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The Motion was adopted. 


17 


* The Mines Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill to amend the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 

1941, be taken into consideration.” 

It might be desirable if I explain to the House why this 
amendment has become necessary. Under the Mines Maternity 
Benefit Act, a woman working in the mine is entitled to 
maternity benefit for a period of 8 weeks, at the rate of 8 annas 
per day. This period of 8 weeks is divided into two parts of 
four weeks each, one part preceding delivery and another part 
succeeding delivery. The four weeks before delivery is a period 
of optional rest during which a woman may work and get full 
wages or absent herself and gel the maternity benefit. With 
regard to the four weeks succeeding delivery, it is a period of 
compulsory rest during which the woman must not work. In 
fact it is unlawful and criminal for her to work, and be content 
only with the maternity benefit. Section 5 of the Maternity 
Benefit Act provides for the payment of maternity benefit and 
if Honourable members will refer to the works as they stand 
in line 9 of that section, they will find that the words as they 
stand are ‘absent from work’. Now, it has been suggested that 
these words, particularly ‘absent from work’ or rather ‘from 
work’ are words which are ambiguous and I will briefly explain 
to the House why it is suggested that these words ‘from work’ 
introduce a certain amount of ambiguity. 

It is said, suppose the mine was closed by the owner on a particular 
day, would the woman be entitled to maternity benefit ? It is suggested 
that she would not be, because the implications of the words ‘absent 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th July 1943, p. 180. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

from work’ mean that there is work, but when a mine is closed 
there is no work. Therefore, the existence of the words ‘from 
work’ has introduced this ambiguity. I have compared section 5 
with the five different Maternity Benefit Acts which have been 
passed in the different provinces and I find that these words 
‘ from work ’ do not exist. Consequently, it has become necessary to 
remove this ambiguity by removing these words. The amendment 
is sought to be carried out by two different amendments. One 
is to delete the words which have caused this ambiguity from 
section 5 and make the section read to the effect that ‘for every 
day during the four weeks preceding delivery the woman would 
be entitled to maternity benefit. With regard to the days on 
which she choose to amend — and as I told the House, the four 
weeks preceding delivery are periods of optional rest when she 
may choose to go and earn her full wages or stay at home and 
be content with maternity benefit — we have added a proviso that 
she shall not be entitled to any maternity benefit at all. With 
these words, I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is. 

“ That the Bill to amend the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 

1941, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move that 
the Bill be passed. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved: 


That the Bill be passed; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


89 


18 


* The War Injuries (Compensation 
Insurance) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move : 

“ That the Bill to impose on employers a liability to pay 
compensation to workmen sustaining war injuries and to provide 
for the insurance of employers against such liability, as reported 
by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

The principles which underlie this Bill have already been 
explained by me at the last time when the Bill was before the 
House and it is unnecessary for me therefore to traverse the 
same ground over again. I would briefly like to point out to 
the House the changes of principle which the Select Committee 
have made in the original Bill. The House must have noticed 
that although there are very many changes which the Select 
Committee has made, there are really four which are matters 
of principle. In the first place there has been an enlargement of 
the category of workmen to which this Bill is made applicable ; 
we have now included workmen employed in plantations. The 
second change made relates to the rate of the first contribution 
which is to be made to the insurance fund. The Bill as it 
originally stood permitted Government to levy a rate of annas 
eight per Rs. 100 of the wage bill of an employer; the Select 
Committee has reduced the rate from eight annas to four 
annas. The third change made relates to the use of the unspent 
balances in the insurance fund. The original proposal in the 
Bill was that the balance left in the fund should be merged 
in the general revenue and should be used for the general 
purposes of Governmental expenditure. The Select Committee 
has made a change and provided that the blance should be 
returned to the employer who have made the contribution in 
proportion to the contributions made by them. The fourth change 
relates to contract labour. It is now provided that in cases 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 701. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

where the employer engages a contractor who in his turn engages 
workmen to carry out the work he has taken on contract, the 
employer who employs the contractor will nonetheless remain 
responsible for the payment of the compensation. 

These are the principles which have been touched by the 
Select Committee in the changes which have been made. As the 
house will see, there are several amendments on the agenda to 
the Bill. Some of the amendments are matters of procedure and 
they have been put forth by Government largely for the purpose 
of meeting such criticism as was levelled against the Bill after 
it emerged from the Select Committee, and I hope there will not 
be much contention on these amendments. 

Sir, I do not think it is necessary for me to say anything 
further on this Bill. I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved. 

“ That the Bill to impose on employers a liability to pay 
compensation to workmen sustaining war injuries and to provide 
for the insurance of employers against such liability, as reported 
by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

k k k 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not 
think anything has emerged from the speeches which have 
been delivered by Honourable Members who have taken part in 
this debate which calls, for any detailed reply. As I scrutinise 
the points made, I find that there were certain points which 
could have been relevant only at the time when the Bill was 
read for the first time. I remember that they were raised and 
I also remember that I attempted to give what reply I could at 
that stage. I do not wish, therefore, to spend any more time in 
discussing the thing over again. 

With regard to the point that has been made with regard to 
certain specific clauses in the Bill as well as the amendments 
that are on the agenda paper, I think it would be best in the 
interests of economy of time that I should not devote any part 
of my speech to them at this stage. It would be germane, proper 
and relevant if the matter was taken up at the time when the 
amendments were moved. 

k k k 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 708. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


91 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 91 

*Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : 
Amendment moved: 

“ That for clause 6 of the Bill the following be substituted : — 

‘ 6 This Act shall apply to all those workmen to whom the 

Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, applies ’ 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am afraid I 
have to oppose this amendment. I think my Honourable friend 
Mr. Joshi will realise that my opposition is not based upon any 
want of sympathy for workmen. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: I did not say that. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I think my 
Honourable friend Mr. Joshi will realise that if his amendment is 
adopted, practically there would be a serious limitation imposed 
upon the number of workmen who would be entitled to the benefit 
of this Bill. First of all, Sir, as Mr. Joshi said, we must go rather 
cautiously in this matter because his Act presupposes that there 
is a body of organised employers on which this liability can be 
imposed. It is a question of collecting premia, and you cannot 
collect premia from people who are merely walking in the streets. 
You must have some organisation on which you can fasten this 
liability and one has therefore to go very cautiously in including 
the number of workmen that could be included in this Bill. The 
second difficulty that I feel is this, that really speaking the 
acceptance of the amendment of Mr. Joshi would not enlarge the 
category of workmen which are included at present in this Bill. 
Sir, I have very carefully examined the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act and I find that there are altogether nine different categories 
of workmen to which that Act applies. Comparing the categories 
of workmen to which we propose to apply this Act with the 
categories of workmen to which the Workmen’s Compensation Act 
applies, I find that there is only one difference. The Workmen’s 
Compensation Act applies to buildings and public works. That is 
the only category of workmen to which the present Bill does not 
apply. On others, both the Bills — the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act as well as this Bill — are on a parity. Then the other 
difference is this. If we apply the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 
as it stands, obviously that will bring in with it the definition 
of workmen which is given in the Workmen’s Compensation 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 710. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Act. My Honourable friend Mr. Joshi will remember that the 
definition of workmen in the Workmen’s Compensation Act is a 
very circumscribed and limited definition. It excludes from the 
category of workmen, workmen who are casual employees, and 
one does not know what would be the number of casual employees 
that may be employed in any particular industry to which this 
Bill applies. My Honourable friend Mr. Joshi will also recollect 
that the Workmen’s Compensation Act excludes the category of 
people who are employed in clerical capacity. Our Bill does not 
exclude either the casual employee or the people employed in 
clerical capacity. I think Mr. Joshi will agree that although on an 
examination he will find that some minor category of workmen 
has been omitted, the definition of workmen is much larger 
than what it is under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. I hope 
that my Honourable friend will, on this assurance, withdraw his 
amendment. 

WWW 

* Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
question is : 

“ That for clause 6 of the Bill the following be substituted : — 

‘ 6. This Act shall apply to all those workmen to whom the 

Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, applies’ ”. 

The motion was negatived. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My next amendment 
No. 5 is dependent upon clause 3 which the House now agreed 
that it should stand over. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Is this 
in sub-stitution of the other amendment? Do I understand that 
if this amendment is carried, then in that case, amendment No. 
3 to clause 3 will be unnecessary ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, Sir. It is 
necessary. Both are necessary. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): In that 
case, I do not see why you cannot move this amendment now. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I will move this 
amendment No. 5 now. Sir I move : 

“ That sub-clause (2) of clause 6 of the Bill be omitted.” 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 131h August 1943, p. 711. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


93 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 93 

Not much explanation is necessary in support of this 
amendment. As the House will recall, the clause as it stands 
makes the Bill exclude Government employees and railway 
servants from the application of this Bill. When I moved the first 
reading of the Bill I told the House that although this Bill did 
not apply to this category of workmen, Government had made 
ample provision to pay compensation to their own servants. 
Unfortunately my speech evidently did not carry conviction 
to some Members of the House, and they still persisted that 
instead of taking responsibility in an administrative manner, 
responsibility should be imposed by statute. Sir, I have thought 
it fit to accept the suggestion made and therefore I shall be at 
a later stage moving the amendment which stands in my name 
to clause 3. Sir, I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved: 

“ That sub-clause (2) of clause 6 of the Bill be omitted.” 

•k "k k 

* Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
question is: 

“ That clause 6, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 6, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move : 

“ That to part (g) of sub-clause (5) of clause 7 of the Bill the 
following further proviso be added : 

‘ Provided further that the rate of any periodic payment after 
the first shall not be higher than the rate estimated to raise the 
amount in the Fund after repayment of the advances, if any, paid 
into the Fund by the Central Government under sub-section ( 2 ) 
of section 11, to a sum of rupees fifteen lakhs ’ .” 

This Proviso is again intended to meet the fears of some of 
the Members representing the class of employers. It was feared 
by them that we might use the provisions of this clause as it 
stood originally to raise any amount of fund and to build it 
up when it was practically not necessary for the purpose for 
which that was intended. I had originally given an assurance 
on the floor of the House that it was not the intention of 
Government to use powers which they have got under this Bill 
to raise unnecessary fund to build it up and thereby inflict 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 712. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


94 


94 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a sort of injury upon the employers. There again, Sir, my 
statement did not satisfy them, and I have thought it best to 
give them the satisfaction by introducing this clause. As will 
be seen, a limit has been placed of rupees fifteen lakhs upon 
the balance on the fund, and I think this amendment will be 
accepted by them in the spirit in which it is intended, namely, 
to appease those who feel jealous about the Government’s power 
of taxation. Sir, I move. 

•k "k "k 

* Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved: 

“ That in sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill after the word 
‘fails’ occurring in the second line the words ‘after due notice’ 
be inserted.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I appreciate the 
force of the necessity of giving some notice, but I would like to 
inform the Honourable Member that there is a provision for notice, 
although that provision does not appear in the Bill itself. He 
will realize that the important words in the body of clause 9 are 
‘in accordance with the scheme’. If my Honourable friend were 
to turn to clause 9 — I am sorry that is the reason why he has 
moved this amendment — and see the terms of the scheme itself, I 
assure him that he will find there is a clause — which at present 
is clause 1 (viii) (a) of the draft scheme — which provides for 15 
days notice. I think my Honourable friend on this information 
will withdraw his amendment. 

•k "k "k 

fMr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved : 

“ That in sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill after the word 
‘ punishable ’ occurring in the fourth line the words ‘ after thirty 
days of grace from the due date of payment’ be inserted.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I rise 
to oppose the amendment. I do not see any necessity for 
conceding the point which my Honourable friend is trying 
to make. As I pointed out to the House, we have already 
made a provision for notice, which is a period of 15 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 713. 
t Ibid. p. 713. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


95 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 95 

days, and I do not understand why my learned friend should 
contend for an additional privilege which will extend a further 
period for a recal citrant employer. If we had not provided for 
notice in our scheme, I could have well understood the justice of 
a claim for a period of grace. But if my learned friend will allow 
me to say so I really see no distinction or it is rather a distinction, 
without difference, between period of notice and period of grace. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : Sir, I think the request which 
my Honourable friend, Mr. Abdur Rasheed Choudhury, made was 

a very fair one After all is said and done, in business life 

one has got to make arrangements and when we are bringing 
in so many people, I do feel that it will not matter very much if 
15 days notice and 15 days grace period is allowed. I like the word 
‘grace’ rather than the word ‘notice’ in all 30 days for the simple 
reason that grace 15 days is a thing which is absolutely a thing 
which the Government can give in their grace. Therefore I think 
in all fairness he will not be led by friends who believe that we 
in India are more dishonest than others in the world at large. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am prepared to 
allow them fifteen days grace in the scheme, Sir. 

k k k 

* Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is : 

“ That to sub-clause (1) of clause 11 of the Bill the following 
proviso be added : 

‘Provided that no payment from the Fund shall be made in 
discharge of any liability of the Crown to pay compensation to 
workmen employed by it 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move : 

“ That for sub-clause (3) of clause 11 of the Bill, the following 
be substituted : 

‘(3) If when all payments which have to be made out of the 
Fund have been defrayed, any balance remains in the Fund, 
the balance shall be constituted into a Fund to be utilised and 
administered by the Central Government for the benefit of 
workmen 

As I pointed out, the original position when the Bill was introduced 
was that the balance was to be utilised for general purposes of 
Government and was to merge in the general revenues of the 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, pp. 714-15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government. The Select Committee altered that clause and 
provided that the balance, if any, should go to the employers who 
have contributed to this fund, in proportion to their contribution. 
The amendment which I am moving is an amendment which is, 
if I may say so, a midway house between the two positions. It 
suggests that the fund shall not be utilised by the Government 
for its general purposes, nor shall it be returned to the employer, 
but it shall be treated as a sort of trust fund to be utilised 
and administered by the Central Government for the benefit of 
workmen. I thought that this was a very reasonable compromise 
and that the whole House would accept it without demur. But I 
find that there are still some in the House who are not satisfied 
with the position outlined in this amendment. The grounds 
on which I justify the amendment standing in my name are, 
in the first instance, these. I think it will not be denied that 
whatever contributions the employers may make to the insurance 
fund, it will be treated by the Finance Department as revenue 
which will be revenue for which credit will be given by the 
Finance Department. It is really revenue which would in the 
ordinary circumstances go to the Government of India in the 
form of income-tax and excess profits tax. Therefore I have no 
hesitation in submitting that a very large bulk of this fund is 
really intended that they would get and utilise what is theirs, I 
do not think there was anything very serious to challenge that 
position. But as I stated, I have receded from that position, and 
I am prepared to allow this fund to be treated, not as general 
revenues, but as a credit fund to be utilised for the benefit of 
workmen. The argument which I have heard in the lobby and 
which seems to have prevailed upon some Honourable Members 
who are not satisfied with the position-taken here, appears to me 
to be this. They seem to think that this is the thin end of the 
wedge, that the Government is really establishing a precedent 
for making a levy on the industry for the benefit of labour. I 
do want to disabuse the minds of Members who entertain that 
sort of fear. I have assured them before this, that Government 
has no intention of making unfair use of this clause by taxing 
an industry with the object of raising a fund for purposes for 
which it is not mainly required ; and I would also like to assure 
Honourable Members who entertain that kind of fear that it is 
unnecessary for Government to seek or to make any clandestine 
attempt to establish a precedent. Government has ample 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


97 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 97 

power and there are precedents which have been laid down already 
by laws, both here and in England, whereby it is possible for 
the State to impose a special cess for the benefit of labour. We 
have got in this country the coal cess and the coke cess, which 
is a levy on industry and which is utilised for the purposes of 
the industry or those who are being served by that industry. In 
England we have a case in the Coal Mines Act whereby a specific 
levy is made on the industry ; the fund collected by the levy is 
kept aside for the purposes of labour welfare. Therefore I do 
want to assure Honourable Members that there is no intention 
to attempt in a clandestine manner to establish a precedent. 
Our intention is to support labour and I do not understand why 
many employers who have always exhibited such kind interest 
in supporting schemes for the welfare of workmen serving them 
should in any way hesitate to accept the amendment which I 
am moving. Sir, I move. 

WWW 

* The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, the point made 
by my Honourable friend, Mr. Chapman-Mortimer seems to be this. 
He says that we are changing our purpose. Originally the fund 
was intended to be used for the purpose of paying compensation. 
We now propose to use the balance of it for welfare. No doubt this 
is a change of purpose but I still maintain that there is nothing 
improper in that. If I understood him correctly, the position of 
Mr. Mortimer seems to be this. He seems to be following what 
I must concede is a well established principle in the budgetary 
arrangement, namely, that when money has been sanctioned by 
the legislature for a particular purpose it ought not to be spent 
for another service not included within that purpose. I entirely 
agree but that is a matter which relates to executive action. I do 
not propose to use the fund by executive action but it is because 
I do not wish to be guilty of any impropriety that I have come 
to the house for asking it to be guilty of any impropriety that 
I have come to the House for asking its sanction for allowing 
the balance to be used for some other purpose which the House 
entirely agrees to be a beneficial purpose. I, therefore, submit 
that there is no impropriety in changing the purpose inasmuch 
as we are asking for the legislative sanction of this House for 
the change of purpose. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 718. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Then, the point has been raised that the word ‘welfare’ is an 
omnibus word, I agree that it is an omnibus word and I do not 
know if I am in a position to specify items which will be included in 
the term “welfare” on which there can be expected to be unanimity 
in this House. I shall, therefore, not venture to particularise what 
would come under the term “welfare”. But I would say this to those 
Honourable Members who do not know what is meant by “welfare” 
as well as to those Honourable Members who think that Government 
ought not to be entrusted with a responsibility for administering 
this Fund that they will realise that the matter, with all this, is 
still left in the hands of the House. The House will have many 
more opportunities on various occasions to raise this question as to 
how this money is to be utilised and I am sure many Honourable 
Members who know what is “welfare” or who have ideas on it will 
use that opportunity to inform Government as to how that money 
would be utilised. Sir, I think the house will be well advised in 
accepting my amendment. 

* =1= * 

* Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“ That to sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill, the following 
proviso be added : 

* Provided that where an employer has taken out a policy of 
insurance as required by sub-section ( 1 ) of section 9 and has made 
all payments by way of premium thereon which are subsequently due 
from him in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme, or whereby 
the provisions of the sub -section (2) of section 12 the employer is 
not required to insure, the Central Government shall assume and 
discharge on bahalf of the employer the employer’s liability to pay 
compensation under this sub-section 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir I move : 

“ That to clause 3 of the Bill the following new sub-clause be added : 

‘ (3) This section shall be binding on the Crown 

I have already explained that we are now seeking to make the 
Crown statutorily liable for the provisions of this Bill. With these 
remarks, I move. 

k k k 

fMr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Amendment 
moved: 

“ That in sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill, part (b) be omitted.” 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 13th August 1943, p. 719. 
t Ibid., p. 721. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


99 


THE WAR INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) BILL 99 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I may not 
have sufficient amount of culture, but I claim average amount 
of intelligence. Sir, applying such amount of intelligence as I 
possess to this clause, I think my Honourable friend has entirely 
misunderstood the purpose of it and the necessity for it. The 
purpose of the clause is really not to levy distress or to take a 
warrant, but the purpose of the clause is to obtain information 
and search for information. Now, Sir, my Honourable friend 
has not understood why accurate information in this case is 
absolutely important. I would like to tell him that information 
is important not only from the point of view of the Government, 
but information is important from the point of view of employers 
themselves. Sir, it is perfectly possible for a fraudulent employer, 
for instance, to submit faulty information, wrong information, 
information understating his wages bill, information understating 
the number of employees who are working under him. The 
premia shall have to be based upon information that has been 
submitted. It would be perfectly possible for good employers being 
penalised and they have to pay more for the fault of fraudulent 
employers who by passing false information might try to escape 
liability of the law imposed upon them. Therefore, this clause is 
absolutely necessary, necessary in the interests of the employers 
themselves. I cannot understand how there can be any objection 
merely because the law provides that when there has been a case 
where it is suspected or where Government have information that 
accurate information has not been supplied that Government 
should have the power to get accurate information which, as I 
submit, is the very rock on which this sytem is founded. Sir, I 
oppose the amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


100 


19 


* First Session of Plenary Labour Conference 


Dr. Ambedkar on Social Security 

Following is the full text of the speech delivered by the 
Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Member for Labour, at the 
first session of the Plenary Labour Conference in New Delhi, 
Monday, September 6 : — 

I welcome you to the first session of the Plenary Labour 
Conference. Thirteen months ago, on August 7 last year, the 
representatives of the Provincial Governments, Indian States, 
Employers and Employees were invited by the Government 
of India to meet in Delhi in a Tripartite Labour Conference. 

The motive for calling such a Conference was twofold. 
For a long time the conviction had gained ground that the 
industrial problems and problems of Labour Welfare could not 
be solved unless the three parties — Government, Employers 
and Employees — developed a sense of responsibility towards 
one another, showed more respect for the views of one another 
and agreed to work in a spirit of give and take and that 
there was not much chance of such a sense of mutual respect 
and responsibility growing up so long as one was engaged in 
talking at the other. A plan to bring them together and to 
let them talk to each other across the table was felt to be 
necessary for the realization of this purpose. 

Although the idea of such Tripartite Organization was 
there, it is doubtful if it would have taken concrete shape so 
quickly if the war had not made the maintenance of Labour 
Morale an urgent and immediate necessity. The war has 
hastened the implementation of the Tripartite Organization 
in another way. 


Indian Information, September 15, 1943, pp. 143-44. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


101 


FIRST SESSION OF PLENARY LABOUR CONFERENCE 101 

Bold Policy 

Under the stress of the war, the Government of India was called 
upon in increasing degree to deal with industrial problems and 
problems of Labour Welfare and I am glad to be able to say that 
it did not hesitate to take a very bold line of action. 

It undertook the task of converting unskilled men by giving 
them technical training and establishing numerous training 
schools. 

It introduced two new principles in the prevailing Labour 
Code which are of far-reaching importance and which mark a 
significant departure from tradition. 

It took upon itself as its duty and responsibility the right to 
prescribe fair wages and fair conditions of service. 

It also took upon itself as its duty and responsibility to 
compel employers and employees to submit their disputes to 
arbitration. This is not all. The Government of India undertook 
the responsibility for ensuring the welfare of Labour, not merely 
by directing what should be done for the well-being of the 
workers but also by appointing an agency of its own to see if 
the directions issued by it are carried out or not. 

This bold policy was taken on its own initiative and judgment. 
It was, however, felt that it would be better for the Labour policy 
of the Government of India if a machinery was created to enable 
it to obtain advice from Provincial and State Governments, from 
Employers and Employees to enable it to act confidently in the 
discharge of the new duties which had fallen upon it. 

Two Bodies Constituted 

It was for this double purpose that the Tripartite Labour 
Conference was called. It was put to the Conference whether 
the time had not arrived for establishing a permanent and a 
representative body to discuss industrial problems of Labour 
Welfare both in their legislative and administrative aspects and 
also to advise the Government of India as to the most satisfactory 
line of action in dealing with those problems. The representatives 
who were then present unanimously accepted the proposal and 
resolved to constitute two bodies, one bigger to be called the 
Plenary Labour Conference and the other smaller to be called 
the Standing Labour Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Tripartite Labour Conference has its genesis in the 
exigencies of war. But I am happy to say that it is to last 
beyond the war. It is going to be an institution which will have 
a permanent place in the economic structure of the country. 

Nobody, I am sure, will have any doubt as to the wisdom 
of the decision taken in favour of having such a representative 
forum for the discussion of industrial and labour problems. 
A survey of the work done during the last 13 months will be 
sufficient to remove it. 

Since August 7, 1942, when these two bodies came into being 
there have been three meetings of the Standing labour Committee. 
The Agenda of the first meeting of the Standing Labour Committee 
comprised subjects such as Wartime Labour Legislation, Problems 
of production such as settlement of disputes, absenteeism, Hours 
of work, Industrial Fatigue, Health Research Boards, Earnings of 
Labour, Dearness Allowances, Profit Bonuses, Savings, Questions 
of Welfare, Cost-price grain shops, Joint Committee for A.R.P. 
and Welfare work ; and Rounding-off Wage Payments in view 
of the shortage of small coins. 

The Agenda for the second meeting covered subjects like : 
Supply of Essential food articles to Labour, Joint Adjudication 
under Defence of India Rule 81-A, and Deferred Bonuses. 

The third meeting was devoted to the consideration of a 
fair wage clause in Government Contracts, Joint Production 
Committees, Appointment of Labour Officers in Industrial 
undertakings, Working of the Defence of India Rule 81-A, 
Establishment of Employment Exchanges, and Collection of 
Statistics under the Industrial Statistics Act. 

This will give an idea of the very wide range of the subjects 
which have been discussed by the Standing Labour Committee. 
It has not been possible to come to unanimous decisions on 
matters which have been discussed. 

Extremely Useful 

But the discussions have been extremely useful and the Government 
of India having been greatly benefitted by them. Owing to want of 
unanimity the Government of India could not take positive action on 
most of the matters that were discussed. But where there has been 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


103 


FIRST SESSION OF PLENARY LABOUR CONFERENCE 103 

unanimity the Government of India has not been slow to accept 
those decisions and give effect to them. In support of this I would 
refer here to certain items such as the War Injuries (Compensation 
Insurance) Act and the National Service (Technical Personnel 
Amendment) Ordinance. Other instances would be the Industrial 
Statistics Act and the Employment Exchanges Scheme. Action 
in consonance with the decisions of the Conference under both 
these will be taken very soon. 

Fundamental Change In Outlook 

There may be many to whom this progress may appear to be very 
meagre. To them I would say that theirs is the wrong perspective. 
There are no short cuts to progress and one cannot be sure that 
short cuts will be right cuts. Progress by peaceful means is 
always a slow process and to impatient idealists like myself it 
is sometimes painfully slow. In an old country like India, with 
no tradition of collective action and no trace of social conscience 
progress is bound to be slower. No one need be disheartened by 
this. For to my mind what matters is not so much the rate of 
progress as the nature of the outlook. 

Looking at the Tripartite Conference from this point of view 
I have no hesitation in saying that the great achievement of the 
Tripartite Conference is the fundamental change it has brought 
about in the outlook of Government and of Employers and of 
Employees on labour problems. No one who has participated in 
these Conferences could have failed to sense it. Assured of a 
healthy and wholesome change in the outlook we can confidently 
hope for acceleration in the rate of our progress. 

ITEMS ON AGENDA 

The Agenda of this Plenary Labour Conference include eight 
items. They are: — 

(i) Involuntary unemployment, due to shortage of coal, raw 
materials etc. 

(ii) Social Security; Minimum wages. 

(iii) Principles of fixing dearness allowance. 

(iv) Provisions for standing orders on the lines of the provisions 
in Chapter V of the Bombay Industrial Disputes Act, in 
large industrial concerns. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(v) Adoption of the Rules of Procedure for the Plenary 
Conference. 

(vi) Setting up of Tripartite Organizations in Provinces. 

(vii) Representation of Labour in the Legislatures and other 
Bodies. 

(viii) Model Rules for Provident Funds. 

Of these items, there are two the importance of which I 
am sure will not escape you. I refer to Social Security and 
the Representation of Labour. They are inseparable. What is 
significant is that they are inescapable. They are matters of 
serious consideration all over the world and the Beveridge Report 
is only one instance of the general interest which the problem 
has aroused all over the world. We in India cannot shut our eyes 
to them. It is not for me to tell you how you should deal with 
them or what would be the correct attitude to take in regard to 
them. But you will permit me to make two observations which 
are germane to the issues which they cover. The first is this. 

Two Contradictions 

Those who are living under the capitalistic form of industrial 
organization and under the form of political organization called 
Parliamentary Democracy must recognize the contradictions of 
their systems. The first contradiction is between fabulous wealth 
and abject poverty not in its simple form but in its aggravated 
form in which we see it, wealth to those who do not work and 
poverty for those who do. 

The second contradiction lies between the political and the 
economic systems. In politics, equality ; in economics, inequality. 
One man one vote, one vote one value is our political maxim. 
Our maxim in econimics is a negation of our political maxim. 
There might be differences of opinion in the matter of resolving 
these contrasts. But there can be no difference of opinion on the 
point that these contradictions do exist. 

It is true these contradictions, though glaring, passed 
unnoticed by the mass of the people. But today the situation 
has changed and the contrasts which even the keenest was not 
aware of are now brought home even to the dullest. 

The second observation I wish to make is this. Ever since the basis 
of social life was changed from status to contract insecurity of life has 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


105 


FIRST SESSION OF PLENARY LABOUR CONFERENCE 105 

become a social problem and its solution has occupied the thoughts 
of all those who believe in the betterment of human life. There 
has been an enormous energy spent in enunciating the rights of 
man and the different sorts of freedom which must be regarded 
as his inalienable birthright. All this, of course, is very good, 
very cheering. What I wish to say is that there will be very 
little security unless and until, to use the words of the Report 
of the Economic Group of the Pacific Relations Conference, these 
rights are translated into terms which the common man can 
understand, namely, peace, a house, adequate clothing, education, 
good health, and, above all, the right to walk with dignity on 
the world’s great boulevards without the fear of a fall. 

For Dignified Existence 

We, in India, cannot fail to recognize these problems or bypass 
them. We must be prepared for the revaluation of values. It will 
not be enough to make industrial development of India as our 
goal. We shall have to agree that any such industrial development 
shall be maintained at a socially desirable level. It will not be 
enough to bend our energies for the production of more wealth 
in India. We shall have to agree not merely to recognise the 
basic right of all Indians to share in that wealth as a means for 
a decent and dignified existence but to devise ways and means 
to insure him against insecurity. 

Before I conclude there is one matter to which I would like 
to make reference. Discussions at our meetings have sometimes 
tended to be rather discursive and unbusinesslike. 

I have no intention to be over-critical in this matter, but I 
would ask delegates to be as brief as possible and to keep to 
the point at issue. I do not wish to restrict the opportunities of 
any delegate to participate in the discussion and to make his 
contribution but I would ask you to remember that what we want 
to get at is the view of the delegate. He is welcome to explain 
his views. But the statement of his views need not always be 
accompanied by an elaborate chain of reasoning, at any rate 
where the reasoning is of the obvious kind. I am sure every one 
of you is as anxious as I am to make our proceedings thoroughly 
businesslike and thereby avoid laying ourselves open to the 
charge which Carlyle levelled against the House of Commons. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


106 


20 


* Labour and Parliamentary Democracy 


[Speech delivered at the concluding session of the All India 
Trade Union Workers’ Study Camp held in Delhi from 8th 
to 17th September 1943 under the auspices of the Indian 
Federation of Labour .] 

I appreciate very much the kind invitation of your Secretary 
to come and address you this evening. I was hesitating to 
accept this invitation and for two reasons. In the first place I 
can say very little which can bind the Government. Secondly 
I can say very little about Trade Unionism in which you are 
primarily interested. I accepted the invitation because your 
Secretary would not take a ‘ No ’ from me. I also felt that 
this was probably the best opportunity I can have to speak 
out my thoughts on Labour organization in India which have 
been uppermost in my mind and which I thought may even 
interest those who are primarily interested in Trade Unionism. 

The Government of human society has undergone some very 
significant changes. There was a time when the government 
of human society had taken the form of autocracy by Despotic 
Sovereigns. This was replaced after a long and bloody 
struggle by a system of government known as Parliamentary 
Democracy. It was felt that this was the last word in the 
frame work of government. It was believed to bring about 
the millennium in which every human being will have the 
right to liberty, property and pursuit of happiness. And there 
were good grounds for such high hopes. In Parliamentary 
Democracy there is the Legislature to express the voice of 
the people; there is the Executive which is subordinate to 
the Legislature and bound to obey the Legislature. Over 
and above the Legislature and the Executive there is 
the Judiciary to control both and keep them both within 


* Speech published by the Indian Federation of Labour, 30 Faiz Bazar, Delhi. Copy 
spared by Shri R. T. Shinde of Bombay. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


107 


LABOUR AND PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY 107 

prescribed bounds. Parliamentary Democracy has all the marks 
of a popular Government, a government of the people, by the 
people and for the people. It is therefore a matter of some 
surprise that there has been a revolt against Parliamentary 
Democracy although not even a century has elapsed since its 
universal acceptance and inauguration. There is revolt against 
it in Italy, In Germany, in Russia, and in Spain, and there are 
very few countries in which there has not been discontent against 
Parliamentary Democracy. Why should there be this discontent 
and dissatisfaction against Parliamentary Democracy ? It is a 
question worth considering. There is no country in which the 
urgency of considering this question is greater than it is in India. 
India is negotiating to have Parliamentary Democracy. There is 
a great need of some one with sufficient courage to tell Indians 
“Beware of Parliamentary Democracy, it is not the best product, 
as it appeared to be.” 

Why has Parliamentary Democracy failed ? In the country 
of the dictators it has failed because it is a machine whose 
movements are very slow. It delays swift action. In a Parliamentary 
Democracy the Executive may be held up by the Legislature which 
may refuse to pass the laws which the Executive wants, and if 
it is not held up by the Legislature it may be held up by the 
Judiciary which may declare the laws as illegal. Parliamentary 
Democracy gives no free hand to Dictatorship, and that is why 
it is a discredited institution in countries like Italy, Spain and 
Germany which are ruled by Dictators. If Dictators alone were 
against Parliamentary Democracy it would not have mattered 
at all. Their testimony against Parliamentary Democracy would 
be no testimony at all. Indeed Parliamentary Democracy would 
be welcomed for the reason that it can be an effective check 
upon Dictatorship. But unfortunately there is a great deal of 
discontent against Parliamentary Democracy even in countries 
where people are opposed to Dictatorship. That is the most 
regrettable fact about Parliamentary Democracy. This is all 
more regrettable because Parliamentary Democracy has not 
been at a standstill. It has progressed in three directions. It 
has progressed by expanding the notion of Equality of Political 
rights. There are very few countries having Parliamentary 
Democracy which have not adult suffrage. It has recognized 
the principle of Equality of Social and Economic opportunity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


108 


108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

And thirdly it has recognised that the state cannot be held at 
bay by corporations which are anti- social in their purpose. With 
all this, there is immense discontent against Parliamentary 
Democracy even in countries pledged to Democracy. The reasons 
for discontent in such countries must obviously be different 
from those assigned by the dictator countries. There is no time 
to go into details. But it can be said in general terms that 
the discontent against Parliamentary Democracy is due to the 
realization that it has failed to assure to the masses the right 
to liberty, property or the pursuit of happiness. If this is true, it 
is important to know the causes which have brought about this 
failure. The causes for this failure may be found either in wrong 
ideology or wrong organization, or in both. I think the causes 
are to be found in both. As an illustration of wrong ideology 
which has vitiated Parliamentary Democracy I can only deal with 
only two. I have no doubt that what has ruined Parliamentary 
Democracy is the idea of freedom of contract. The idea became 
sanctified and was upheld in the name of liberty. Parliamentary 
Democracy took no notice of economic inequalities and did not 
care to examine the result of freedom of contract on the parties 
to the contract, should they happen to be unequal. It did not 
mind if the freedom of contract gave the strong the opportunity 
to defraud the weak. The result is that Parliamentary Democracy 
in standing out as protagonist of Liberty has continuously 
added to the economic wrongs of the poor, the downtrodden 
and the dis-inherited class. The second wrong ideology which 
has vitiated Parliamentary Democracy is the failure to realize 
that political democracy cannot succeed where there is no social 
and economic democracy. Some may question this proposition. 
To those who are disposed to question it, I will ask a counter 
question. Why Parliamentary Democracy collapsed so easily in 
Italy, Germany and Russia ? Why did it not collapse so easily 
in England and the U. S. A. ? To my mind there is only one 
answer — namely, there was a greater degree of economic and 
social democracy in the latter countries than it existed in the 
former. Social and economic democracy are the tissues and the 
fiber of a Political Democracy. The tougher the tissue and the 
fiber, the greater the strength of the body. Democracy is another 
name for equality. Parliamentary Democracy developed a passion 
for liberty. It never made even a nodding acquaintance with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


109 


LABOUR AND PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY 109 

equality. It failed to realize the significance of equality, and did 
not even endeavour to strike a balance between Liberty and 
Equality, with the result that liberty swallowed equality and 
has left a progeny of inequities. 

I have referred to the wrong ideologies which in my judgment 
have been responsible for the failure of Parliamentary Democracy. 
But I am equally certain that more than bad ideology it has 
bad organization which has been responsible for the failure of 
Democracy. All political societies get divided into two classes — 
the Rulers and the Ruled. This is an evil. If the evil stopped 
here it would not matter much. But the unfortunate part of it 
is that the division becomes stereotyped and stratified so much 
so that the Rulers are always drawn from the Ruling Class and 
the class of the Ruled never becomes the Ruling class. People do 
not govern themselves, they establish a government and leave 
it to govern them, forgetting that is not their government. That 
being the situation. Parliamentary Democarcy has never been 
a government of the people or by the people, and that is why 
it has never been a government for the people. Parliamentary 
Democracy, notwithstanding the paraphernalia of a popular 
government, is in reality a government of a hereditary subject 
class by a hereditary ruling class. It is this vicious organization 
of political life which has made Parliamentary Democracy such a 
dismal failure. It is because of this that Parliamentary Democracy 
has not fulfilled the hope it held out the common man of ensuring 
to him liberty, property and pursuit of happiness. 

The question is who is responsible for this ? There is no doubt 
that if Parliamentary Democracy has failed to benefit the poor, 
the labouring and the down trodden classes, it is these classes 
who are primarily responsible for it. In the first place, they have 
shown a most appalling indifference to the effect of the economic 
factor in the making of men’s life. Someone very recently wrote 
a book called the ‘End of the Economic Man’. We cannot really 
talk of the End of the Economic Man for the simple reason 
that the Economic Man was never born. The common retort to 
Marx that man does not live by bread alone is unfortunately a 
fact. I agree with Carlyle that the aim of civilization can not 
be merely to fatten men as we do pigs. But we are far off from 
that stage. The labouring class far from being fat like pigs are 
starving, and one wishes that they thought of bread first and 
everything else afterwards. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Marx propounded the doctrine of the Economic interpretation 
of History. A great controversy has raged over its validity. To my 
mind Marx propounded it not so much as doctrine as a direction 
to Labour that if Labour cares to make its economic interests 
paramount, as the owning classes do, history will be a reflection 
of the economic facts of life more than it has been. If the doctrine 
of Economic interpretation of History is not wholly true it is 
because the labouring class as a whole has failed to give economic 
facts the imperative force they have in determining the terms of 
associated life. The Labouring classes have failed to acquaint itself 
with literature dealing with the government of mankind. Everyone 
from the Labouring Classes should be acquainted with Rousseau’s 
Social contract, Marx’s Communist Manifesto, Pope Leo XIII’s 
Encyclical on the conditions of Labour and John Stuart Mill on 
Liberty, to mention only four of the basic programmatic documents 
on social and governmental organization of modern times. But the 
labouring classes will not give them the attention they deserve. 
Instead labour has taken delight reading false and fabulous stories 
of ancient kings and queens and has become addicted to it. 

There is another and a bigger crime which they have committed 
against themselves. They have developed no ambition to capture 
government, and are not even convinced of the necessity of 
controlling government as a necessary means of safeguarding their 
interests. Indeed, they are not even interested in government. Of 
all the tragedies which have beset mankind, this is the biggest 
and the most lamentable one. Whatever organization there is, it 
has taken the form of Trade Unionism. I am not against Trade 
Unions. They serve a very useful purpose. But it would be a great 
mistake to suppose that Trade Unions are a panacea for all the 
ills of labour. Trade Unions, even if they are powerful, are not 
strong enough to compel capitalists to run capitalism better. Trade 
Unions would be much more effective if they had behind them a 
Labour Government to rely on. Control of Government must be 
the target for Labour to aim at. Unless Trade Unionism aims at 
controlling government, trade unions will do very little good to the 
workers and will be a source of perpetual squables among Trade 
Union Leaders. 

The third besetting sin of the labouring classes is the easy way which 
they are lead away by an appeal to Nationalism. The working classes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


111 


LABOUR AND PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY 111 

who are beggared in every way and who have very little to spare, 
often sacrifice their all to the so-called cause of Nationalism. 
They have never cared to enquire whether the nationalism for 
which they are to make their offerings will, when established, 
give them social and economic equality. More often than not, the 
free independent national state which emerges from a successful 
nationalism and which reared on their sacrifices, turns to be the 
enemy of the working class under the hegemony of their masters. 
This is the worst kind of exploitation that Labour has allowed 
itself to be subjected to. 

If the working classes have to live under a system of 
Parliamentary Democracy then it must devise the best possible 
means to turn it to their benefit. As far as I can see, two things 
are necessary if this object is to be achieved. First thing to do is 
to discard mere establishment of Trade Unions as the final aim 
and object of Labour in India. It must declare that its aim is to 
put labour in charge of Government. For this it must organize 
a Labour Party as a political party. Such a party will no doubt 
cover Trade Unions in its organization. But it must be free 
from the narrow and cramping vision of Trade Unionism, with 
its stress on the immediate gain at the cost of ultimate benefit 
and with the vested right of Trade Union officials to represent 
Labour. It must equally dissociate itself from communal or 
capitalistic political parties such as the Hindu Mahasabha or 
the Congress. There is no necessity for Labour to submerge 
itself in the Congress or the Hindu Mahasabha or be the camp 
followers of either, simply because these bodies claim to be 
fighting for the freedom of India. Labour by a separate political 
organization of its ranks can serve both the purposes. It can 
fight the battle of India’s freedom better by freeing itself from 
the clutches of the Congress and the Hindu Mahasabha. It can 
prevent itself from being defrauded in the name of nationalism. 
What is most important is that it will act as a powerful check on 
the irrationalism of Indian politics, Congress politics is claimed 
to be revolutionary. That is why it has secured a large number 
of followers. But it is also a fact that Congress politics has 
brought nothing but frustration. The reason is Congress politics 
is so irrational and it is irrational largely because Congress 
has no rival. A Labour Party in India would be most welcome 
corrective to this irrationalism which has dominated Indian 
politics for the last two decades. The second thing for Labour 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in India to realize is that without knowledge there is no power. 
When a Labour Party is formed in India and when such a 
party puts forth its claim to be installed on the Gadi before 
the electorate, the question, whether Labour is fit to govern, is 
sure to be asked. It would be no answser to say that Labour 
could not govern worse or display greater bankruptcy in home or 
foreign affairs than the other classes. Labour will have to prove 
positively that it can govern better. Let it not also be forgotten 
that the pattern of Labour Government is a very difficult one 
than that of the other classes. Labour government cannot be a 
government of laissez faire. It will be a government which must 
essentially be based on a system of control. A system of control 
needs a far greater degree of Knowledge and training than a 
laissez faire government does. Unfortunately, Labour in India 
has not realized the importance of study. All that Labour leaders 
in India have done, is to learn how best to abuse Industrialists. 
Abuse and more abuse has become the be-all and end-all of his 
role as a labour leader. 

I am therefore very glad to find that the Indian Federation 
of Labour has recognized this defect and has come forward to 
open these study circles for the Labouring Classes. They are 
going to be the most effective means of making Labour fit to 
govern. I hope the Federation will not forget the other necessity 
namely to inaugurate a Labour Party. When this is done, the 
Federation will deserve the thanks of the Labouring Classes to 
have raised them to the status of a governing class. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


113 


21 


* The Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move: 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Indian Trade Unions 
Act, 1926, be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion 
thereon. ” 

The motion is merely for circulation for the purpose of 
eliciting public opinion on this measure. That being so, it 
seems to me unnecessary to take the time of the House to 
deal in any detailed manner with the provisions which are 
embodied in this Bill. It is enough, I think, to tell the House 
what are the main features of the Bill and what has led 
Government to undertake this particular piece of legislation. 

The Bill has three important features. In the first place, the 
Bill seeks to compel an employer to recognise a trade union. 
In the second place, the Bill imposes certain conditions on a 
trade union in order to make the trade union, if I may say 
so, worthy of recognition by an employer. The third feature 
of the Bill is to make non-recognition by an employer of a 
trade union, which has observed all the conditions prescribed 
in this measure and which has therefore qualified itself for 
recognition, an offence which is made punishable by law. 

As I said, it is unnecessary to discuss the merits of this 
measure. The motion is for circulation which obviously means 
that the provisions embodied in the Bill by the Government at 
the present stage are only tentative. There is no finality about 
it, and Government do not propose to make these provisions 
final unless they have received the opinions of leaders of labour, 
employers, Provincial Governments and other parties who are 
concerned in this measure. The Bill may therefore be quite 
different from what it is now, when Government has applied its 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV (1943), 13th November 1943, pp. 
252-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


114 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

mind to the various suggestions that it hopes to receive as a 
result of circulation. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi (Nominated Non -official): I hope it will be 
better. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I hope so from 
everybody’s point of view. All that therefore I propose to say is 
to tell the House what has led the Government of India to take 
this responsibility upon its shoulders. 

The House will recall that this matter was considered and 
great deal of attention was devoted to the question of the 
recognition of trade unions by employer, and all those Honourable 
Members who have read the Report of the Royal Commission on 
Labour will realise what great emphasis the Royal Commission 
laid on the recognition of trade unions as a measure for the 
healthy growth of trade unions and for amicable relations between 
employers and workers. The House will also remember that the 
Royal Commission at that stage stated that they would very much 
desire if the recognition was achieved voluntarily by the consent 
of the employers without any legal obligation upon them. The 
House will also remember that the Royal Commission reported 
in 1929, — practically 12 years have elapsed — and there has 
been no willingness on the part of employers to recognise trade 
unions voluntarily. Indeed the objections which the employers 
made before the Royal Commission for opposing the recognition 
of trade unions are still the objections which the employers are 
pressing for non-recognition. Consequently the situation has 
certainly not improved. 

As Honourable Members will remember, this question was 
taken up after 1937 when provincial autonomy came into being, 
by most of the Provincial Governments which came and took 
office under the new Act. There were both private measures 
and measures introduced by the Ministries in order to bring 
about recognition of trade unions by employers. For instance, 
in Madras there was a private Bill brought in, there was also a 
Government measure brought in by the Ministry of the day. In 
Bombay, Government brought in a measure called the Bombay 
Trade Disputes Act. In C.P. an Act was contemplated and a draft 
was prepared and the same was done in the province of the U.P. 
Unfortunately, except in the case of Bombay, the Ministries in other 
provinces resigned before their projects could assume a statutory 
character. However, the Government of India, after provincial 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


115 


THE INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 115 

autonomy had come into existence, had inaugurated a system 
of collaboration between the centre and the provinces and one 
of the means adopted for collaboration was to inaugurate what 
were called Labour Ministers’ Conferences. The First Labour 
Ministers’ Conference was held in 1940 when this subject was 
discussed between the Provincial Governments and the Central 
Government. It was then decided that there was not enough 
material before the Conference to come to any definite conclusion 
on the matter and the Conference gave instructions to the Central 
Government that the matter should be referred to the Provincial 
Governments in order to elicit opinion from the Provnicial 
Governments as well as leaders of labour and employers and 
that the material should be placed at the second session of the 
Labour Ministers’ Conference which was proposed to be held in 
the year 1941. Accordingly the Government of India addressed 
a letter to the Provincial Governments asking them to collect 
the opinions of the different parties relating to this measure, 
and a very large body of opinion was collected by the different 
Provincial Governments and forwarded to the Central Government 
with the opinions of the different provinces on them. The whole 
of this was placed before the Labour Ministers’ Conference held 
in 1941 and the conclusion reached then was that the Central 
Government should undertake legislation, that that legislation 
should not be purely provincial and that draft should be prepared 
on the basis of the replies that were received from the Provincial 
Governments and from the various parties which were concerned 
with this matter. As a result of this the Government of India 
undertook the task and the present Bill is really the result of 
the sifting of the information which the Central Government 
received and the opinions which were expressed by the various 
parties concerned. This is the origin of the measure. This will 
explain why, although labour legislation is a provincial subject, 
the Central Government has come in with this measure. 

I do not think that it is necessary for me to say anything 
further on this measure. As I have said, the proposals are 
tentative, there is no finality, and there cannot be any finality 
unless and until we receive opinions on the draft Bill as it 
stands. All that I say is that it is one of the most important 
measures which this Legislature has been invited to undertake. 
It is also a unique measure. Except in the case of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

United States and Sweden, recognition of trade unions in other 
countries has been left to voluntary effort. I hope this will not be a 
controversial measure. In any case I do not wish to say more than 
what I have said in view of the fact that I prefer to submit the Bill 
to public scrutiny before I undertake to make myself responsible for 
any of the provisions contained in the Bill. Sir, I move : 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion moved : 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Indian Trade Unions Act, 

1926, be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon. ” 

k k k 

* Mr. P.J. Griffiths (Assam : European): Mr. President, the 
motion at present before the House is that this Bill be circulated 

for eliciting opinion thereon Let me remind my Honourable 

Friend too that trade unions have many enemies. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Employers are one 
of them. 

k k k 

@ The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, the Bill, 

which I have the honour to move for circulation has given rise to 

controversy. This is, of course, not unexpected. As I said in my 
opening observations, the Bill is undoubtedly a controversial measure 
but I also stated in the course of my opening observations that I do 
not propose to enter into the controversy today and to reply to the 
various points that have been made. I do not do so in any spirit 
or discourtesy to Honourable Members who have taken part in this 
debate and presented their point of view. I assure them that I will 
bear their points in mind and consider their validity on the occasion 
when such occasion will arise. 

If I rise at this stage, as I said, it is not to reply to the various 
points that have been made but I do feel that I am bound to meet 
certain points of criticism which were made by my Honourable 
friend, Mr. Griffiths. There is one point which he made which, 
if he will permit me to say so, I think was very unfair. He said 
that I have brought in a measure which was vague in some way 
and which contained, if I may use the phrase, empty clauses. His 
criticism was that I was not justified and that it was unfair on 
my part to ask the House to consider a Bill which contained such 
vague and empty clauses. I do not accept that criticism and I do 
say that it was entirely misconceived and unfounded. I do not 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV (1943), 13th November 1943, p. 
256. ® Ibid., p. 276. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


117 


THE INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 117 

admit in the first instance that there are any clauses in this Bill 
which are vague or that there are any clauses in this Bill which 
are empty, so empty as not to enable anybody to understand 
what the Bill aims at. But assuming for a moment that there 
are certain clauses which are vague and other clauses which 
require content to be put in I do not think that the criticism 
was valid. If I asked the House to proceed to enact the measure 
in the form in which it was presented, I could have understood 
the point of the criticism but that is not what I am doing. I am 
asking merely the permission of the House that this Bill, such 
as it is, may be circulated for the purpose of eliciting further 
opinion, so that Government may have guidance from such 
parties as can give guidance and Government in the end may 
be able to fill in the gaps and make definite what is vague. I 
therefore submit that there was no point in that criticism which 
Mr. Griffiths made. 

Mr. Griffiths then said that the Bill in his opinion was 
unsound in principle. Well, that is a matter of opinion. We have 
heard people on the other side saying that there is a perfectly 
sound principle in the Bill and that it ought to be embodied in 
an Act. Therefore I shall not dwell on that point of his criticism. 

The second point that he made was that I have somehow not 
stated what a representative trade union was. Without meaning 
any offence, if I may say so, he has either not read the clauses 
of the Bill, or if he has read them he has not understood them. 
It is perfectly clear from the provisions that are set out in this 
Bill that there are two principal conditions laid down. One is 
this — that a trade union before it can be recognised must fulfil 
certain conditions. The second condition which has been laid 
down is this — that mere fulfilment of the conditions laid down 
is not a qualification enough for recognition but that the trade 
union, in addition to fulfilling these qualifications, will have to 
undergo the test of a certification by a Board. In fact, if I may say 
so, the principle of the Bill — the fundamental part of it — is that 
the representative character of the Union will depend primarily 
subject to other conditions on the certificate that a tripartite 
board, representing Labour, Government and the Employers, will 
be able to give. My friend then made great play of sub-clause 
( g ) of clause 28D which says : any further conditions that may 
be prescribed. I cannot understand how Mr. Griffiths could have 
so completely misunderstood the purport of that clause. The 
position of the Government is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : On a point of personal explanation. I 
did not refer to sub-clause (g ) at all. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am very sorry if I 
misunderstood the Honourable Member. That is what I took down. 
What I would like to say is this. The position of the Government 
is perfectly plain and may be stated briefly. On the basis of the 
views that were communicated to us in 1941 and on the basis 
of the views that were communicated to us from the various 
organisations representing labour and capital, Government came 
to the conclusion that the positive conditions which they have 
laid down ought to be sufficient. But Government does not wish 
to dogmatise about it and Government does feel that there might 
be certain conditions which either the Provincial Government or 
the employers of labour or capital may find to be necessary to 
be introduced in this Bill before recognition is granted. It is to 
make provision for a contingency of that kind we have introduced 
these clauses wherever it is stated that further conditions may 
be prescribed. It is a loophole, it is an opportunity which we 
have left and designed to take to ourselves the benefit of any 
advice that we might receive. There is certainly no vagueness 
and no uncertainty with regard to the provisions of the Bill as 
to what a representative character means. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : On a point of information. Would you 
explain to the House the meaning of the new clause 28D, sub- 
clause (e) “ that it is a representative Trade Union ” ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It means a Union 
which has been certified by the Board as a representative Trade 
union. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : Of their own free will ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Board will 
make an investigation and that was the point of comment of my 
friend, Mr. Joshi, who said that the Board is authorised to ask 
for all sorts of information including the views of the private 
members. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : Is it the intention that the Board shall 
have some guidance as to what is meant by “ representative ” ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We propose to. 
On that point we would like to have a suggestion from various 
parties as to what sort of instructions they would like us to give 
to the Board. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths: So, you have a blank mind on the subject. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


119 


THE INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 119 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not a blank 
mind; it is an open mind. That is the way I would like to define 
my position correctly. 

Mr. Griffiths as well as other Members who spoke on the Bill 
said that the Government was not justified or rather, to use their 
own words, Government was illogical in applying clause 27J by 
exempting Government undertakings from the operation of this Bill. 

Now, Sir, the first point that I would like to make in reply to 
the contention is that Logic is certainly not always life. There are 
many occasions when illogicality would reduce ourselves to extremism 
and I do not think any man would prefer extremism to illogicality. 
Personally myself, I think, if anything could be said with regard to 
clause 28J, it could be said that Government is not timid, Government 
is not illogical; Government is wise and Government is cautious. I 
think that this clause has been somewhat misunderstood. There is 
no intention to exempt Government from the provisions of this Bill. 
All that is said is this that a date will be fixed when the provisions 
of this Bill will be applied to Government undertakings. Therefore, 
if there is any discrimination made in favour of the Government, it 
is not with regard to the application of the Bill but with regard to 
the date on which it will become applicable to Government. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : Why is that made ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There may be necessity 
for it. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths : What is it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, I do not 
want to enter into controversy at this stage and as the Secretary of 
the Posts and Telegraphs Department said, Government feels that, 
at any rate for the present, the Government Departments who are 
employers of labour have made sufficient provision for the recognition 
of their trade unions. And in view of the fact that Government 
has certainly been far more ready to recognise Trade Unions than 
private employers, I do not think that the interests of labour will 
suffer if the date for the application of this Bill is postponed. Sir, I 
have nothing more to say. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The question 
is: 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Indian Trade Unions Act, 

1926, be circulated for the purpose of eliciting opinion thereon. ”. 

The Motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


120 


22 


* Post-war Development of Electric Power 

in India 


Dr. Ambedkar’s Address 

Problems relating to the post-war development of electric 
power in India were discussed by the Reconstruction Policy 
Committee which met in New Delhi on October 25, the Hon’ble 
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Member for Labour, Government of 
India, presiding. A number of delegates from the Provincial 
Governments, leading power States and engineering interests 
attended the meeting on the invitation of the Central Government. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, addressing the 
Committee, said: 

Gentlemen, I welcome you to this meeting of the Policy 
Committee of the Reconstruction Committee No. 3C. A Chairman 
has both the obligation and the privilege of making an opening 
speech. The obligation I accept. But I do not wish to abuse the 
privilege by inflicting upon you a long speech. All I propose to do 
is to put certain relevant facts into focus so that our attention 
may be riveted upon them. 

For the information of those of you who do not know the 
machinery set up by the Government of India to study the 
various problems of reconstruction but whose participation is 
necessary I would like, if I may briefly, to refer to the plan of 
work which has been adopted for the better and most expeditious 
way of carrying out the work taken up by the Reconstruction 
Committee of Council. 

Five Committees 

It is, I am sure, within your knowledge that the ex-Viceroy, Lord 
Linlithgow in March last decided to have a Reconstruction Committee 


Indian Information, November 15, 1943, pp. 279-81. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


121 


POST-WAR DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRIC POWER IN INDIA 121 

of Council under the chairmanship of my gallant friend and 
colleague the Hon’ble Sir J. P. Srivastava. The Reconstruction 
Committee of Council has set up five different Reconstruction 
Committees. Committee No. I deals with Re-Settlement and 
Re-Employment, Committee No. II with Disposals, Contracts 
and Government Purchases. The work of Committee No. Ill 
is partitioned among three Committees — Committee No. 3A 
deals with Transport, No. 3B with Posts, Telegraphs and Air 
Communications, and No. 3C with Public Works and Electric 
Power. Committee No. IV is concerned with Trade and Industry, 
and Committee No. V with Agriculture. 

Each of these Committees has a Policy Committee which works 
under the presidentship of a Member of Council which is composed 
of the representatives of the Central Government, Provincial 
Governments, State Governments, and such representatives 
of trade, industry and commerce as are considered necessary. 
Each has also an official committee which works under the 
chairmanship of the Secretary to the Department and is composed 
of the Secretaries of other Departments concerned. 

In addition to these two sets of Committees, some of the 
Reconstruction Committees have a third committee called Subject 
Committee to deal with technical subjects arising within its 
field. In addition to these there is an official committee on Social 
Services and a Consultative Committee of Economists. Such is 
the plan of work devised by the Central Government to deal 
with the problems of Reconstruction. Ours is a meeting of the 
Policy Committee of the Reconstruction Committee No. 3C. The 
task of this Committee is to study the problems connected with 
electric power and to make a recommendation as to the best 
way of solving them. 

Before I enter upon an analysis of the problems, there is one 
question relating to generation of electric power to which I wish 
to make a reference at an early stage as I wish to get it out of 
the way. It relates to the question of procurement of machinery, 
tools and plants that would be necessary for the generation of 
electrical power. That machinery will have to be obtained from 
outside, mostly from Great Britain. The prospect of obtaining 
such machinery is not free from difficulty. Great Britain would 
require a great deal of her productive capacity to be reserved 
for her own needs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There are other European and Asiatic countries which would 
be in the British and American markets to acquire the necessary 
stock of tools and plants. In this competition India may find it 
difficult to obtain the quota she will need. To safeguard India’s 
position it would be desirable if India could register her orders 
for tools and plants as early as possible and secure as great a 
priority as can be done. The difficulties regarding priority may 
not be very great. I feel quite certain that we can depend upon 
His Majesty’s Government to secure for India high priority in 
view of the aid she has rendered in this War. But there are 
other difficulties mainly arising from making up the indents and 
placing them with the manufacturers as firm orders. 

In the first place, electricity is a purely provincial subject. 
The estimates as to tools and machinery must, therefore, come 
from the Provinces. The Centre can only sum them up. 

In the second place, the type of machinery will depend upon 
the decision as to the prime mover that is to be used for the 
generation of electricity, whether water, steam, oil, etc. 

The third difficulty arises out of the uncertainty of the 
attitude of the governments which will come into existence 
after the war. Will the future Government accept the plans and 
programmes set out by the present Government ? Will the future 
Governments maintain the level of taxation which the plans and 
the programmes made by the present Government will require ? 
On these questions one cannot be sure. All the same it seems 
that this Government would be failing in its duty if it did not 
make secure the prospect of India getting the tools and plants 
necessary for electrification at the end of the war. 

Functions Of Policy Committee 

I mention this matter as being urgent and important. But I 
am sure you will understand that this is not the matter with 
which this Committee is primarily concerned. This is a Policy 
Committee and our primary concern is to deal with the problems 
arising out of the administration, production and distribution of 
electricity and to recommend what we regard as the principles 
which should guide the future Government of India. We have 
taken advantage today of our meeting of our Policy Committee 
to ask Provincial Governments and State Governments to send 
representatives to this meeting to give us the benefit of their views. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


123 


POST-WAR DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRIC POWER IN INDIA 123 

The treatment of electricity as a matter of public concern 
has passed through many vicissitudes. The Government of India 
seems to have become aware of it for the first time in 1905 
when, I find, a circular letter was issued by it to the Provincial 
Governments. Thereafter both the Provincial Governments and 
the Central Government seem to have gone to bed. They woke up 
when the urgency of active interest in electricity was emphasized 
by the Report of the Indian Industrial Commission published in 
1918 and the Report of the Indian Munitions Board which came 
out a year later. 

The Industrial Commission recommended the necessity for a 
Hydrographic Survey of India to be undertaken by Government 
rather than by private enterprise. The Government of India 
accepted this recommendation and appointed the late Mr. G.T. 
Barlow, C.I.E., then Chief Engineer, Irrigation Branch, the 
United Provinces, to take charge of the Hydrographic Survey as 
Chief Engineer, associating with him in the enquiry Mr. J. M. 
Mcarcs, M.I.C.E., Electrical Adviser to the Government of India. 
Soon after Mr. Barlow died, and his work was carried on by Mr. 
Mcares who produced three most excellent reports between 1919 
and 1922 containing information Province by Province regarding 
the possibilities of Power Supply under five heads — (1) water 
power already developed, (2) plants under construction, (3) areas 
investigated but not developed, (4) known sites of which detailed 
examination is desirable, and (5) areas and sites not investigated. 

Electricity — A Provincial Subject 

Unfortunately under the changes made in the Government of 
India in consequence of the Act of 1919, Electricity became 
a Provincial subject. That Act unfortunately did not contain 
a provision as the present Act does of permitting the Central 
Government to spend its revenues on matters which it felt fit 
and proper although they were outside its field of administration. 
The result was that it became impossible for the Government 
of India to finance the Hydrographic Survey. A good, great 
and necessary piece of work for providing India with supply of 
electrical power came to an end. 

There is no officer at the Centre in charge of the development of 
electricity in India with the result that we at the Centre had till recently 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no data as to the production, distribution and administration of 
electricity in India. 

I am, therefore, glad that the subject of electricity in India has 
come up again for serious consideration. So far as I am able to 
visualize, the questions which this Committee must concern itself 
with are : — 

(1) Whether electricity should be privately owned or whether it 
should be State-owned ? 

(2) If it is to be privately owned, are there any conditions which 
it is necessary to impose so as to safeguard the interests of 
the public ? 

(3) Whether the development responsibility for electricity should 
belong to the Central Government or to the Provincial 
Government ? 

(4) If the responsibility is to be of the Central Government, what 
is the most efficacious method of administering it so as to 
provide cheap and abundant supply of electricity and avoid 
waste of resources ? 

(5) If the responsibility is to be of the Provinces, whether the 
administration by the Provinces should be subordinate to an 
Inter- Provincial Board with powers to advise and co-ordinate ? 

Three Considerations 

Every one of these questions has two sides. Each side has its 
protagonists. I do not wish to express my opinion at this stage. 
I have an open mind. But it is not an empty mind. All I wish to 
say is that in coming to our conclusions as to which is the better 
way of developing electricity we shall have to bear in mind three 
considerations : — 

(1) Which of the two will give us power not at a cheaper but at 
the cheapest price, 

(2) Which of the two will give us power which will not merely 
be sufficient but which will be abundant, 

(3) Which of the two will enable India to be equipped with 
electricity by treating it on the same basis as a strategic 
Railway, that is to say, as an undertaking which must be 
started without consideration of immediate profit. 

I emphasize these considerations because what India wants 
is an assured supply of power, cheap power and abundant 
power. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


125 


POST-WAR DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRIC POWER IN INDIA 125 

These are primary questions. There may be some hesitation 
lurking in the minds of some of you to deal with them on the 
ground that most of them raise the question of changes in the 
Constitution. Speaking for myself I feel no such hesitation. 
There is a difference between deciding a constitutional issue 
and expressing an opinion on it. We shall not be deciding upon 
constitutional questions. We shall be only expressing our opinion 
as regards them. We are not debarred from considering them for 
the reason that they are of a constitutional nature. I feel quite 
certain that we cannot avoid them if we want to do justice to 
the subject which is placed in our charge. 

Power Supply Department 

Besides these primary questions there are others which are by no 
means secondary. If electrification is to be a success wc cannot 
leave them out of our consideration. They are : — 

(1) Whether it is necessary to establish a Power Supply 
Department at the Centre whose duty would be to make 
a systematic survey of the available sources of power, 
namely, coal, petrol, alchohol and running water, etc., 
and to suggest ways and means of increasing generating 
capacity. 

(2) Whether it is necessary to establish a Power Research 
Bureau at the Centre to study problems connected with the 
relation between the sources of power and the machinery 
in order to promote the most efficient use of available 
power. 

(3) Whether it is necessary to adopt some means to train 
Indians in electrical technology so that India will have 
a staff to plan and to carry out schemes of construction, 
maintenance and improvement in electrical plant and 
machinery. 

Before I conclude may I make a few observations pointing 
out the significance of and the ultimate objective that lies behind 
the need for electrical development in India ? It is necessary 
that those who are placed in charge of the subject should have 
the fullest realization of its significance and its objective. If 
you agree with me in this I will request you to ask yourselves 
the question, ‘Why do we want cheap and abundant electricity 
in India ?’ The answer is that without cheap an abundant 
electricity no effort for the industrialization of India can 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

succeed. This answer brings out only a part of the significance 
of the work this Committee has to undertake. 

Ask another question, ‘ Why is industrialization necessary ? ’ 
and you will have the full significance made clear to you at once ; 
for the answer to the question is, we want industrialization in 
India as the surest means to rescue the people from the eternal 
cycle of poverty in which they are caught. Industrialization of 
India must, therefore, be grappled with immediately. 

Industrialization Of India 

Industrialization of India has been in the air for many years. 
But one fails to notice any serious drive to bring about 
industrialization. There are still some who pay only lip service 
to it. Others look upon it as a fad, if not a craze. There are 
very many who are never tired of preaching that India is an 
agricultural country and therefore the best thing to do is to 
devote all energy to improve agriculture and not to run after 
industrialization. Nobody needs to be told that India is primarily 
an agricultural country. Everybody knows it. What is surprising 
is that very few people seem to realize what a great misfortune it 
is. I know this will not be readily admitted. What more evidence 
is wanted to prove that this is a misfortune than the famine 
which is stalking Bengal and other parts of India and where 
so many from the agricultural population are dying daily from 
want of food or from want of purchasing power ? 

To my mind there can be no greater proof necessary to 
show that India’s agriculture has failed and failed miserably 
when it is as plain as anything could be that India which 
is engaged in producing nothing but food does not even 
produce sufficient food to feed its people. What is this due 
to ? The poverty of India, to my mind, is due entirely to its 
being made dependent upon agriculture. 

Population in India grows decade by decade in geometrical 
progression. As against this unlimited growth of population what 
is available for cultivation is not merely a limited amount of land 
but a liimited amount of land whose fertility is diminishing year 
by year. India is caught between two sides of a pinccr, the one 
side of which is a progressive increase in population and the 
other is a progressive increase in the deterioration of the soil. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


127 


POST-WAR DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRIC POWER IN INDIA 127 

“A Rot Has Set In” 

The result is that at the end of a decade we are left with a negative 
balance between population and production and a constant 
sqeezing of the standard of living. At every decade this negative 
balance between population and production is increasing in an 
alarming degree, leaving India with the inheritance of poverty, 
more poverty and chronic poverty. A rot has set in. This rot, I 
feel sure, is not going to be stopped by organizing agricultural 
exhibitions or animal shows or by propaganda in favour of better 
manuring. It can stop only when agriculture is made profitable. 
Nothing can open possibilities of making agriculture in India 
profitable except a serious drive in favour of industrialization. 
For it is industrialization alone which can drain away the excess 
of population which is exerting such enormous pressure on land 
into gainful occupations other than agriculture. 

To sum up, our Reconstruction Committees are no doubt 
modelled, so far as intention and purpose is concerned, on the 
Reconstruction Committees which have come into existence in 
most European countries whose industrial organization has been 
destroyed by the Germans. The problems of reconstruction differ, 
and must differ from country to country. In some countries 
the problem of reconstruction is a problem of reconditioning of 
rundown plant and machinery. 

Nature Of Problem In India 

In some countries the problem of reconstruction is a problem of 
replacement of tools and plants which have been destroyed in 
the war. The problem of reconstruction in India must include 
consideration of all the questions with which other countries 
engaged in war are concerned. 

At the same time we must not forget that the problem of 
reconstruction in India is essentially different from the problem of 
reconstruction in other countries. In other countries the problem 
of reconstruction is a problem of rehabilitation of Industry which 
has been in existence. 

The problem of reconstruction in India, as I see it, is a problem 
mainly of the industrialization of India as distinguished from 
the rehabilitation of industry and industrialization but in the 
ultimate sense the removal of chronic poverty. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


128 


128 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I, therefore, hope that we shall tackle the problems connected 
with electricity in an earnest and in a statesmanlike manner thinking 
it terms of human life and not in terms of the competing claims of 
the Centre versus the Provincial Government. 

I do not like to end on a note of pessimism though the memory 
of the past efforts of reconstruction is nothing but sad. War seems 
to give birth to an urge for Reconstruction for the same reasons 
that necessity gives rise to invention or adversity to belief in God. 
The pity of it is that this urge which is born out of the war seems 
to the with peace. That did happen in India with the reconstruction 
scheme put forth by the Indian Industrial Commission and the Indian 
Board of Munitions after the last war. I have faith that this time 
the reconstruction plan will not be allowed to languish and fade 
away. We have in this war the compelling force of what William 
James called “the pungent sense of effective reality” of what poverty 
in India is, which the statesmen of the last War did not have. 

•k "k 

* Help for Scheduled Castes Students and Indian Evacuees 

Proposals Approved by Standing Finance Committee 

Grant of scholarships to scheduled castes students pursuing 
education in scientific and technological subjects and expenditure 
on Indian evacuees from war zones and dependants of persons 
detained there, were the two important proposals approved by the 
Standing Finance Committee at its meeting held in New Delhi on 
November 20, 1943, with the Hon’ble Sir Jeremy Raisman, Finance 
Member to the Government of India, in the chair. 

The former proposal will involve an annual grant of Rs. 3 lakhs 
for 5 years and the latter is expected to entail an expenditure of 
Rs. 225 lakhs in 1944-45. 

Scholarships 

It was stated that in order to assist members of the scheduled 
castes, who had reached the high school stage, to obtain higher 
education, it was proposed to grant scholarships to the extent of 
3 lakhs a year for five years. The scholarships would be awarded 
for scientific and technological studies both in India and abroad. 

The Committee approved the proposal. 

• • 


Indian Information, December 15, 1943, p. 337. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


129 


23 


* Labour Member’s visit to Jharia Coalfields 

The Hon’ble Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, the Hon’ble 
Mr. H.C. Prior, Secretary, Labour Department, and Mr. R.S. 
Nimbkar, Labour Welfare Adviser to the Government of India, 
visited Dhanbad recently to study working conditions in the 
coalfields. 

During their stay at Dhanbad, they discussed with employers 
and employees, proposals to increase the production of coal and 
to deal with the situation arising out of the labour shortage in 
the fields. 

With the reintroduction of the employment of women 
underground, the question of giving concessions to colliery labour 
and to improve welfare conditions in the fields has assumed 
additional importance. It is learnt that the Central Government 
are taking immediate steps to secure food and other concessions 
for the workers. Difficulties arising out of insufficiency of food 
supplies in Bengal and insufficient concessions to workers, both in 
Bengal and Bihar, have been under the consideration of Labour 
Department for some time. 

The question was discussed at the recent Coal Conference 
held in New Delhi, and it is understood that further consultations 
took place with the industry during the Labour Member’s stay 
at Dhanbad. 

• • 


Indian Information, December 15, 1943, p. 336. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


130 


24 


* Labour Member visits Coalmines 

Inspects Working Conditions and Miners’ Home 

The Hon’ble Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Member for Labour, 
Government of India, arrived at Dhanbad on Thursday, 
December 9 to study working conditions in the coalfields. Among 
those present to receive him were a number of local officials, 
including Mr. S. N. Mazumdar, Labour Commissioner, Bihar, 
and Mr. W. Kirby, Chief Inspector of Mines, and representatives 
of various Mining Associations and colliery owners. Mr. H. C. 
Prior, Secretary, Labour Department, and Mr. R. S. Nimbkar, 
Labour Welfare Adviser to the Government of India arrived 
earlier in the day. 

Immediately after arrival the Labour Member, accompanied 
by the Chief Inspector of Mines, colliery owners, Mr. Prior 
and Mr. Nimbkar, drove to Bhulanbararee Colliery. The 
representatives of workers, Mr. Karnik, representing the Indian 
Federation of Labour, and Miss Shanta Bhall Rao, representing 
‘the All-India Trade Union Congress, also accompanied the party 
to study working conditions in the coalfields. The programme 
included inspection of both surface and underground conditions 
of work. 

400 Feet Underground 

Wearing “Safety hats” very much resembling well-known 
Army tin hats in shape, the Labour Member and party 
went 400 feet underground in two batches where they saw 
workers cutting coal. There were some women workers who 
had been recently employed in the colliery as a result of the 
removal of prohibition on employment of women in mines. 
The Labour Member, Mr. Nimbkar and others in the party 


Indian Information, January 1, 1944, pp. 39-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


131 


LABOUR MEMBER VISITS COALMINES 131 

asked the workers a number of questions concerning their wages 
and earnings. 

At another stage during the inspection of Bhulanbararee 
Colliery, the party saw stowing operations in progress. During 
the course of the surface inspection, Dr. Ambedkar had friendly 
chats with workers regarding their wages and earnings. 

The Labour Member then proceeded to the workers’ quarters 
in the vicinity of the colliery. Ham ander a sakte hain — with these 
polite words in Hindustani the Labour Member took permission 
of the occupant to enter his house, which was readily given. 
He inspected the furniture and other contents of the house and 
looked round to see the ventilation arrangements. 

The party were then taken to a well-equipped and cleanly- 
kept hospital, maintained by owners of this colliery, where the 
Labour Member chatted with a few indoor patients. He was also 
taken round a special ward for women workers. 

At Workers’ Colony 

The party then drove to the Digwadih Colliery where they saw 
modern plant and equipment used for the production of coal. 
Here the Labour Member spent about an hour in the workers’ 
colony and saw various types of houses built by the proprietors 
for their workers. He took great interest in the methods and 
channels of recruitment for colliery labour. The programme for 
the day included inspection of the Tisra Colliery. The inspection 
began with the examination of rates of wages paid by employers 
of the colliery to workers. It was late in the evening when the 
party came out to make surface inspection of the colliery. The 
workers were leisurely returning to their homes, carrying spades, 
pick-axes and kerosene safety lamps. The Labour Member thus 
had an opportunity of seeing workers and their womenfolk 
preparing their evening meals in their homes. He was very keen 
on acquainting himself with the quantity and nature of food 
available to and consumed by workers. At the Tisra Colliery 
he also saw a few quarries where men and women were doing 
surface work. 

Visit To Raniganj Coalfields 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and party devoted Friday to studying 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

working conditions and methods of coal production in some 
Raniganj coalfields. 

The inspection began with an examination of the 
arrangements being made by proprietors of the Sivapur Colliery 
for the welfare and medical care of their miners. The party 
were taken round a quadrangular single-storied white hospital 
building containing modern X-ray equipment and other surgical 
apparatus. It was learnt that the hospital would start working 
shortly. 

Later in the day, the Labour Member was taken to a Leper 
Welfare Centre where leprosy in its earlier stages can effectively 
be treated. Dr. Ambedkar also visited a small compact building 
accommodating a baby welfare centre where he saw frailbodied 
children of miners, who were being looked after by ayahs. The 
Labour Member expressed appreciation of these welfare efforts 
but asked why the children were frail and rickety. He was told 
that it was due to a deficiency of nutritive food. 

School For Miners’ Children 

Winding their way along the road to Sitapur Colliery, the party 
visited a primary school where workers’ children garlanded 
Dr. Ambedkar. The Labour Member chatted with a seven year- 
old boy — a miner’s son — who answered questions regarding the 
earnings of his family in halting but understandable English. 

Earlier in the day the party inspected the Sodhpur Stowing 
Plant — a huge mechanical structure drawing 200 tons of sand 
per hour from the Damodar basin in the vicinity and conveyed 
to the mines by automatic ropeways. 

The party also inspected underground conditions of work in 
Sitapur colliery. They descended about 1,000 feet and saw coal 
being raised by up-to-date coal-cutting machinery. 

On the way back to Dhanbad the Labour Member 
visited the “dhowras” (one-room tenements) in the Workers’ 
colony at the Begunia collieries. The rooms were dark and, 
in one case, a calf, lazily chewing dry grass, was seen in 
the small verandah- sharing with the inmates their scanty 
accommodation. Dr. Ambedkar chatted with the inmates. It 
was learnt that workers get coal free of charge in sufficient 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


133 


LABOUR MEMBER VISITS COALMINES 133 

quantities for domestic use. He made further enquiries regarding 
food, clothing and health of the workers. 

Labour Problems Discussed At Dhanbad 

The reason for the present shortage of coal and the measures 
to overcome it were discussed on Saturday at Dhanbad at 
a conference attended by representatives of the Central 
Government, the Governments of Bengal and Bihar, the three 
Mining Associations and spokesmen of Labour. The Hon’ble 
Dr. Ambedkar Labour Member, presided. 

In a short opening speech the Chairman compared the 
conference with the Tripartite Labour Conferences at which 
questions relating to industrial labour are discussed. He 
emphasised the importance of producing more coal both 
for India’s industries and war effort and hoped that the 
representatives of employers and employees would be able to 
give their best advice on the matter. 

The reasons for the fall in labour were given as the 
exceptionally good harvest, which required more labour than 
usual owing to the “Grow More Food Campaign” and the 
competition of military work. Measures to meet the situation 
were considered, and employers’ representatives asked for more 
petrol and tyres to help in bringing labour from neighbouring 
villages to the collieries. 

A rationing scheme, proposed by the Central Government 
some time ago, and aiming at providing miners (both men and 
women) with an adequate ration, was the next item on the 
agenda. During the discussion, the possibility of the introduction 
by the Bihar Government of a rationing scheme in the area 
was mentioned and it was decided that the scheme introduced 
for the mines would have to be reconsidered if this occurred. 

The scheme for miners’ supplies includes provision for 
food for mine-workers’ dependants. While fixing five days as 
the minimum number of days that must be worked to ensure 
the full week’s ration, the scheme also provides for adequate 
supplies for those who work fewer days. It was agreed that 
rice should be sold initially to workers at six seers per rupee, 
and that necessary quantitities of dal should also be sold at 
the same price. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Conference also considered a scheme proposed by the 
Central Government for the supply of other commodities like 
salt, mustard oil, standard cloth and other consumer goods to 
workers — the intention is that bulk supplies should be placed 
at the disposal of Mining Associations for distribution to 
collieries. Among other measures put forward by Government 
for consideration as measures to promote the welfare of colliery 
labour, was a scheme for a Welfare Cess to be imposed forthwith 
to create a fund from which expenditure on welfare would be 
incurred and a proposal to appoint Labour Officers in all collieries 
with a production of over 100,000 tons. 

Increase In Wages 

The Conference agenda also included a number of items relating 
to wages of colliery workers, and Mining Associations seemed 
ready to make a further increase in the wages prevailing in 
1939, bringing the temporary war increase to a total of 50 per 
cent above pre-war wages. They were, however, apprehensive 
that this increase would be wasted unless adequate stocks of 
consumer goods were available in the coalfields and the necessity 
of ensuring this was recognised. 

Other items discussed included the possibility of applying 
the Payment of Wages Act to coalmines and certain difficulties 
of its application to the coal industry were noted. Requests from 
the industry in regard to assistance in matters of Excess Profits 
Tax and provision of machinery were also considered. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


135 


25 


* Promotion of Labour Welfare in India 

Question relating to dearness allowance for industrial workers, 
absenteeism, maintenance of service records and canteens were 
among the subjects discusssed at the fourth meeting of the 
Standing Labour Committee which was held on January 25 and 
26 in Lucknow. 

The meeting was held at the Council House, the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, Government of India, 
presiding. Five delegates each of employers’ and workers’ 
organisations, five delegates of Provincial Governments and three 
delegates representing the Indian States attended. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s Speech 

In his opening remarks, the Chairman, referring to the steps 
which are being taken by the Central Government to implement 
the decisions taken at an earlier session of the Standing Labour 
Committee, indicated that the Government had decided to 
introduce the Fair Wages Clause in contracts entered into by the 
Central Public Works Department. The question of introducing 
a similar clause in contracts entered into by other Departments 
of the Central Government, he said, was under consideration. 

The Chairman also announced that in pursuance of the 
resolution passed at the last Plenary session of the Labour 
Conference, the Government of India had appointed a Labour 
Investigation Committee for the investigation of wages, earnings 
and other conditions of labour. The question of extending the 
enquiry in a suitable manner to agricultural wage earners, he 
said, was also being considered in consultation with the Provincial 
Governments. 

The Committee then discussed the method of Statutory Wage 
Control in India if and when such statutory control was found 
necessary. 

*Indian Information, February 15, 1944, pp. 151-52. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It appeared that the delegates generally considered that Wage 
Boards, when a decision was taken to set them up, should be on 
a Provincial basis and deal with individual industries. 

After a brief discussion on the Employment Exchanges Scheme 
and statements by Provincial Government representatives on 
the progress of the Scheme in the provinces, the Committee 
considered Model Provident Fund Rules circulated by the Central 
Government for eliciting the opinion of the delegates as well 
as some details regarding the management of the Fund, the 
contribution of Employees and Workers and Advances from the 
Fund. 

Dearness Allowance 

The Committee also considered the report on Dearness Allowance, 
submitted by the Gregory Committee which was constituted by 
the Chairman of the Tripartite Labour Conference in pursuance 
of a resolution passed at the last session of the Conference. 
Among other points arising out of the report questions relating 
to general principles for fixing dearness allowance, the nature 
of these principles, the desirability of having different rates 
for different industries or different regions, and the relation of 
dearness allowance to rising or falling Cost of Living Indices, 
were discussed. 

The Committee, it is understood, agreed that general principles 
should, to the maximum extent possible, be laid down by the 
Government for dealing with the question of dearness allowance 
paid or to be paid by industrial concerns. Agreeing that the 
report of the Subcommittee would serve as a useful guide to 
Government in laying down principles for dearness allowance, 
the Committee decided to forward the report to the Government 
of India for consideration in the light of opinions expressed by 
the delegates. 

Absenteeism 

A draft scheme for a sample survey into absenteeism in industrial 
undertakings especially undertakings engaged on war production 
was one of the items on the agenda. The Scheme aims at a 
factual survey of the problem including investigation of causes 
like sickness, accident, leave, social or religious reasons, transport 
difficulties, lateness which result in absenteeism. It is learnt that 
the scheme was generally agreed to with some amendments. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


137 


PROMOTION OF LABOUR WELFARE IN INDIA 137 

Earlier during the Session, the Committee reviewed the 
progress achieved in respect of opening cooked food and 
refreshment canteens for workers in industrial concerns. It 
was revealed that in spite of difficulties such canteens were 
functioning in considerable numbers and were proving popular 
among the workers. 

k k k 

*Coal Mines Labour Welfare Ordinance, 1944 

An ordinance entitled “The Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
Ordinance, 1944,” has been promulgated today, constituting a 
fund for financing activities to promote the welfare of labour 
employed in the coal mining industry. The Ordinance extends 
to the whole of British India and comes into force at once, said 
a Press Note issued by the Labour Department, Government 
of India, on January 31. It continued : 

To create the fund, the Central Government will levy a 
cess on all coal and soft coke despatched by rail from collieries 
in British India, at a rate to be fixed from time to time by 
notification in the Gazette of India after consultation with 
an Advisory Committee. This duty will not be less than one 
anna and not more than four annas per ton. The duty will be 
collected, on behalf of the Central Government, by the Railway 
Administration by which coal or soft coke is carried. 

While the Ordinance generally provides that the proceeds 
thus realised will be credited to a Labour Welfare Fund to 
meet expenditure on measures “necessary or expedient to 
promote the welfare of labour employed in the coal-mining 
industry”, it specifies a number of items for which the fund 
may in particular be utilised. The labour welfare programme 
to be financed from the Fund aims at providing housing, water 
supplies, facilities for washing, improvement of educational 
facilities and standards of living among the workers, including 
nutrition, amelioration of social conditions and the provision 
of recreation and transport facilities. 

The improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention 
of disease, the provision of medical facilities and the improvement of 


Indian Information, February 15, 1944, pp. 153-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


138 


138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

existing facilities are also included. Provision has also been made 
for giving grants out of the fund to a Provincial Government, 
a local authority, or the owner, agent or manager of a coal 
mine in aid of any scheme for the welfare of labour which is 
approved by the Central Government. This provision will ensure 
that the fullest use is made of existing organisations with such 
strengthening as may be necessary, and of existing approved 
welfare schemes to which support can be given from the fund. 

Advisory Committee 

The Ordinance further empowers the Central Government to 
set up an Advisory Committee whose members will include, 
among others, an equal number of members representating 
colliery owners and workmen employed in the coal mining 
industry. One member of the Advisory Committee must be a 
woman. The Committee will advise the Central Government on 
matters on which the Central Government is required by the 
Ordinance to consult it and on any other matters arising out of 
the administration of the Ordinance. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


139 


26 


* Lifting of Ban on Employment of Women 
on Underground Work in Coal Mines 


The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I am happy that our Lady Member thought it fit to bring 
forth this adjournment motion. I am glad because it gives me 
an opportunity to explain to the House a matter which has been 
weiging very heavily on my mind. I do like to say at the very 
outset in order that the house may understand my feelings in 
the matter that I do regard this decision of the Government 
of India as a great misfortune. I am not happy about it. All 
that I am saying is that given the circumstances in which the 
Government of India was forced, I do not regard that this is 
a mistake on our part. I think the House will understand the 
distinction that I am making. 

The debate to which I have listened has rather impressed 
me that the lines on which most of the Honourable Members 
have spoken have been mostly of a humanitarian character. 
They have been, in my humble judgment, greatly removed 
from what I would call the plane of reality. And when I speak 
in this debate, I propose to stick to what I call the realism of 
the situation. I would also like to say that many points have 
been brought in during the course of the debate as though 
they were the points on which the decision of the House was 
called for. I would particularly say that reference was made 
to the wages prevalent in the coal mines. Reference was also 
made to the prevalence of unfair welfare conditions in the coal 
mines and I shall have something to say about them in the 
course of the observations that I will make. But I think I am 
justified in saying that having regard to the terms of the motion, 


'Legislative Assembly Debates, Vo. I, 8th February 1944, p. 131. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


140 


140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

these are rather incidental matters and not matters on which 
the House is called upon to record its judgment. 

Having made these preliminary observations, the first point 
that I would like to make is that some Honourable Members have 
given to me the impression that the Government of India was 
never serious with regard to this convention of preventing women 
working underground to which they had given their consent in 
the year 1939 and had within four years withdrawn from it. 
Sir, I would like to make a few observations on the point in 
order to put the matter in the right perspective. The House will 
recall that the Government of India had accepted the principle 
of prohibiting women working undergroung long before the 
Convention came into existence. The matter, so far is my study of 
it goes, was first bdebated in the year 1923 when the Government 
of India brought in a Bill for the amendment of the Indian Coal 
Mines Act. I would like to remind the house that the original 
purpose of the Bill was very limited one. It was a purpose merely 
to introduce safety measures in coal mines, but when the measure 
was taken to the Select Committee, the Select Committee in 
its judgement thought that the Government of India ought to 
go forward and take a bold step and claim powers in the Act 
in order to prohibit the working of women underground. In the 
Select Committee the Government of India accepted the principle. 
Not only did the Government of India accept the principle but 
they framed regulations with the definite and deliberate object 
of eliminating women labour from working underground. As 
the House will know, the Government of India had laid down a 
definite programme of annual decrease in women underground. 
So much so, that two years before the ratification took place in 
this house, we had, under the policy of the Government of India, 
no woman labour working in the mines at all. Sir, that fact was 
referred to by the Honourable the Mover of the Motion. But I 
was sorry to find that she did not draw the obvious inference 
which I think I may legitimately draw that the Government of 
India, long before the convention came into existence, has been 
very definitely of the opinion that women should not work in 
the mines and has taken definite steps to bring that state of 
situation to a close. 

The Government of India has been blamed for lifting the ban now 
on the supposed ground that there has been no justification. I must 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


141 


LIFTING OF BAN ON EMPLOYMENT WORK IN COAL MINES 141 

confess that I was rather surprised at a statement of that kind. 
Sir, I would like to point out to the House two considerations, 
and I would beg of the House to consider whether the two points 
that I am placing before them do not constitute what I regard 
as an emergency. Sir, the lifting of the ban on women working 
underground has a direct reference to coal. That is an indisputable 
fact. I would like the Honourable members of the House to consider 
whether coal could not be called a strategic material from every 
point of view. I ask the House to consider whether it is not a 
strategic material from the standpoint of the industry, I would 
ask the House to consider whether it is not a strategic material 
from the standpoint of transport, whether it is not a strategic 
material from the point of civil consumption. We are not dealing, 
I want to emphasise this fact, with an article the use of which 
we could avoid at our option. It is a thing which we must have, 
and I submit it is a thing which we must have before we have 
food or before we have anything else. That is one point I want 
the House to consider. The second point that I want the House to 
consider is this. Would it have been possible for the Government 
of India to wait until the situation had righted out itself. I know 
very well, as most Honourable Members know, that coal would 
have been produced in the ordinary course. It may not have been 
produced in 1943, it may not have been produced in 1944, but 
it may have been produced in 1945. But the question which I 
would like the House to consider is this : is it a case in which 
we could wait ? Is it a case in which we could allow the natural 
course of things to take its place ? Sir, I make bold to say that 
this is one of those cases which is of such urgent and immediate 
importance that steps may be taken and a Government which 
does not take the steps to right the situation immediately is not 
a Government worthy of its name. Therefore, let us not forget 
that we are dealing with an emergency and the lifting of the 
prohibition from allowing women to work underground is not an 
idle act or a wanton act on the part of the Government, but is 
an act which is amply justified by the facts and circumstances of 
the case. Therefore, Sir, the conduct of the Government must be 
judged in the light of the emergency. I would request Honourable 
Members to judge the conduct of the Government in the light of 
these two circumstances only. Has the Government failed to do 
something which it ought to have done ? Has the Government 
done something which it was needless for it to do ? My submission 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is that judging it in the light of these two considerations which 
I have mentioned, I have no hesitation in saying that the 
Government’s action is perfectly justified. 

My Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi, said that this was a 
convention which could not have been broken. I agree that it is 
one of those conventions which does not contain a clause for its 
own suspension. But I have no hesitation in saying that every 
nation has got a right to break an international convention or 
an international treaty under certain circumstances. That has 
been a well established principle of international law. I am glad 
to say that in the debate that took place at Geneva in 1940, in 
the Governing Body, that was more or less the general opinion. 
Sir, could we have avoided taking steps that we have taken ? I 
should like to detail to the House some of the circumstances which 
have led the Government to take this measure. There is not the 
slightest doubt that shortage of coal was due to shortage of labour. 
That is circumstance, which I think, is beyond dispute. Now, 
Sir, the shortage of labour was due, according to the examination 
which Government made to three causes. First of all, there was 
the grow-more-food campaign started by the Government of India. 
There was the opportunity of increased employment on military 
works. Any one who dispassionately considers employment in coal 
mines as against the results of the grow-more-food campaign and 
the increased opportunities for employment in military works 
can well understand why there should have been shortage of 
labour in coal mines. Sir, it is quite clear that in the present 
circumstances, where prices of foodgrains are rising so rapidly, 
the grow-more-food policy should attract people to agriculture. If 
people who have been working in coal mines and who, as every 
one knows, are purely agriculturists, if they are drawn to grow- 
more food policy, it would be a matter of no surprise. Similarly, 
the military works with their increased earnings attract these 
people. But, Sir, there is one other circumstance which although 
I know that some Honourable Members who have spoken have 
made very light of it, is none-the-less a reality. In the first 
place, it is quite clear to every one that work under coal mines 
is the most uncongenial work, even dangerous. Nobody likes 
it and any workman who finds an opportunity to work on the 
surface is bound to take the earliest opportunity to leave the 
coal mines. The grow-more-food campaign and the military works 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


143 


LIFTING OF BAN ON EMPLOYMENT WORK IN COAL MINES 143 

are those works which provide an opportunity to the coal miner 
to obtain what I call less dangerous and more congenial piece 
of work. The second thing is, I will repeat it again, that both in 
the grow-more-food campaign as well as in the military works, 
the coal miner has the advantage of both earning himself and 
also haying an earning for other members of his family. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member has one minute more. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am sorry, Sir. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : I have 
no discretion in the matter. The Honourable Member should 
conclude. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : That being so, Sir, 
there has been a shortage of labour. 

I should like to refer to two other points which I think it 
would be necessary for the House to take into consideration. The 
first thing is that Government have certainly not gone headlong 
in this matter as though it was a matter of no consequence. I 
should like to tell the House that Government have proceeded 
with great caution. Its first notification applied only to the 
C.P. and did not apply to the whole of the coal area. It was in 
November that Government thought that a case had arisen for 
extending the notification to Bengal and Bihar, and it was only 
in December that Government extended the notification to Orissa. 
We have also taken care to see, and this is an important point, 
that women shall be paid the same wages as men. It is for the 
first time that I think in any industry the principle has 
been established of equal pay for equal work irrespective 
of the sex. We have also taken care that women shall not be 
required to work in a gallery which is less than 5 Vi feet. The 
House will also remember that these notifications are of a 
very temporary character, and I want to emphasise this point. 
We have not said that these notifications will last during the 
period of the war; we have kept the matter absolutely fluid ; 
we are in a position to revoke them at any time that we like 
and that we can. And I should like to tell the House that we 
regard this as a purely emergency and temporary measure. We 
are also doing one other thing in order to shorten the period 
of the notification. For instance, we are instituting a labour 
camp where we are recruiting male labourers to be sent to the 


*Emphasis supplied. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

coal mines. We are taking another measure in order to shorten 
this period, namely, to employ what we call Labour Supply 
Committees in order to furnish the contractors who are working 
on military works for labour so that workers will be released 
for coal mines. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member’s time is up. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, if you will give 
me one minute 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I am afraid 
I cannot. The rule is somewhat peremptory. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The House will 
therefore see that this is a purely emergency measure and 
Government have no intention of continuing it a minute longer 
than the necessities of the case require. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


145 


27 

* The Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) 
Amendment Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Coal Mines Safety 
(Stowing) Act, 1939, be taken into consideration.” 

Sir, this Bill seeks to make certain amendments to the Coal 
Mines Safety (Stowing) Act of 1939. As Honourable Members of 
the House will remember the Coal Mines Act was passed in 1939. 
It created a body called the Stowing Board. The function of the 
Board was principally to administer the fund which is raised by 
the levy on coal and coke and to spend it on the stowing of coal 
mines in order to prevent fires in the mines. In the course of 
the administration of this Act, it has been found that there are 
certain defects which need to be remedied. This Bill proposes to 
deal only with three of such questions because it has been found 
that they are the most urgent and need immediate attention. Of 
these three questions, the first question is the one which relates 
to the amendment of section 8. The House will remember that 
section 8 deals with the functions of the Board and prescribes 
the object on which the money arising out of this fund could be 
spent. Section 8 permits the Board to spend money to meet the 
expenses of the administration. Secondly, it allows the Board 
to grant stowing materials and other assistance to owners or 
agents and managers of coal mines for stowing operation. Section 
3 permits the Board to execute other operations in furtherance 
of the objects of the Act, and fourthly, it permits the Board 
to spend money on research work connected with stowing. It 
has been found that section 8 does not make any provision for 
permitting the Board to spend money on stowing operations 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I, 23rd February 1944, pp. 443-46. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

undertaken by itself. This, it is found, is a great lacuna. It is 
necessary in the opinion of the experts that such a power should 
be given to the Board and consequently the first amendment 
which clause 2 of the Bill proposes to make is to alter the 
wording of sub-clause (iii) of clause (1) of section 8, by permitting 
the Board to undertake stowing directly by itself and to spend 
money on that purpose out of the fund which it controls. The 
second amendment to the Bill relates to section 10. Section 9, 
sub-clause (3) of the Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) Act permits the 
Chief Inspector of Mines to issue an order on the owner or the 
agent of a coal mine, and to require him to take such protective 
measures as may be necessary in the interest of the safety of 
coal. Section 10 of the Act makes such an order an appealable 
order, but it has been found that while the order issued by the 
Coal Mining expert or the Inspector is an appealable order, 
there is no provision made in the Act to permit the owner to 
go to the appellate body and obtain stay or execution of the 
order issued against him by the Inspector of Coal Mines. It has 
been suggested that this is an unfortunate provision, that there 
should be a right of appeal, but there should not be a provision 
for the stay of execution of the original order. This lacuna is 
sought to be removed by the addition of a proviso to section 10 
of the present Act and this is done by clause 3 of the present 
Bill. The third amendment which is sought to be made in the 
Act relates to the question whether the Board should or should 
not have authority to undertake stowing by itself. Stowing is an 
important function. Its purpose is to save coal which otherwise is 
likely to burn away. It has been found that there are some mines 
which are abandoned, over which there is nobody to exercise 
any control, and most persons, it has been found, very easily 
abandon mines whenever they find that the coal underneath has 
taken fire. There are cases where the ownership of a mine is 
in dispute or where the owner is not in a position to undertake 
stowing operations himself. Consequently in such cases there is 
nobody on whom the liability for stowing could be imposed nor 
is there anybody on whom an order could be served. To avoid 
such a situation, it is felt that power must be given to the 
Board in order that the Board might itself undertake the work 
of stowing. Incidentally, if the Board is to perform such a task 
it must also be given the power to enter upon the land which 
is the property of the mine owner. This is sought to be done 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


147 


THE COAL MINES SAFETY (STOWING) AMENDMENT BILL 147 

by a new clause which is 10-A, and it gives power to the Board 
to undertake the stowing and also to have the power to enter 
upon the premises. 

The Bill is a very simple measure and I do not think it needs 
any more explanation than I have given. It is a non-controversial 
measure and I hope the House will accept it. 

Sir, I move. 

k k k 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

I should like to take this opportunity to explain the point 
of view of Government with regard to certain points that have 
been raised by my Honourable friends. With regard to the point 
made by my Honourable friend, Mr. Miller, that Government have 
been getting into the habit of pulling forth these Bills without 
sufficient notice what I should like to say is this. It is of course 
not possible for me, speaking individually, to bind Government as 
to the precise sort of action that Government ought to take with 
regard to these Bills. But with regard to the present measure 
I should like to say that I do not think that Government can 
be accused of being in a position of rushing the Bill through. I 
would remind the Honourable Member that this Bill has been 
under consideration for not less than six months. Secondly, and 
this is an important point, I would like the Honourable Member 
to bear in mind the Bill, as put forth, has been suggested, in 
fact practically drafted, by the Slowing Board itself, and Slowing 
Board, as the honourable Member will remember, is the most 
representative body that can be found to be connected with the 
coal mining industry. And, therefore, I certainly do not think 
that I should be criticised, so far as this particular measure is 
concerned, for having rushed through the Bill. 

With regard to his other point, namely, that this measure will 
be used and put into action only whenever there is an emergency 
arising and not otherwise, I am quite prepared to give him that 
assurance. In fact, it is our intention to confine the powers which 
we are now giving to the Board to emergencies only. 

With regard to the point made by my Honourable friend, Dr. Zia 
Uddin, who is not here at present, I did not quite appreciate what he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


148 


148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was suggesting. So far as I have been aware, I have never known 
that there has been any point of difference or dispute between 
the Coal Mining Stowing Board and the coal owners, and I do 
not think that the provisions which we are now introducing are 
going to create any difference of opinion between the coal owners 
and the Stowing Board. They have been, so far as I know, more 
or less a happy family, and I have not come across a case where 
the Board has decided upon a policy which has been opposed by 
any particular member of the Coal Mining Association. 

My Honourable friend, Mr. Hooseinbhoy Lalljee, raised a 
point which, I think, does require consideration, namely, as 
to the rights of the Government over the mines over which 
Government has spent money in stowing. I am sure that it is a 
valuable suggestion and an important point, and at some later 
stage I shall be able to say what Government’s attitude on that 
point will be. 

Sir, I have nothing more to say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


149 


28 

* Government’s Policy Towards Labour 

Speech in Central Assembly 

“I think I may say that whatever may be said with regard 
to the Government of India in the matter of labour it can be 
legitimately claimed that there has been a new orientation 
with regard to the attitude of Government in respect of labour,” 
observed the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, 
Government of India, replying to the debate in the Central 
Legislative Assembly (on March 16) on Mr. N.M. Joshi’s cut 
motion on the policy of the Labour Department regarding labour 
questions. Dr. Ambedkar said : 

“Mr. Joshi has travelled over such an extensive field and 
raised so many points that I feel that it would be hardly possible 
for me to deal with each one of them specifically and to discuss 
what he has said and what I, as representative of the Labour 
Department, have to say in reply. Having regard to the inadequacy 
of time, 1 am bound to pick and choose such points as I think 
are necessary for me to reply to in the course of this debate. 

Conditions Of Labour 

Sir, Mr. Joshi started by making a general statement that the 
conditions of labour in India were extremely unsatisfactory as 
compared with conditions obtainable in the rest of the world. 
Sir, it is not my business to say from here that I dispute that 
proposition. Undoubtedly it is a fact. All that I want to say is 
this, that it can hardly be said to be the responsibility of the 
Government of India if the conditions are as unsatisfactory as 
Mr. Joshi has depicted them to be. 

Sir, the conditions of labour in India are largely governed by the 
industrial development of this country over which this Government has 


*Indian Information, April 15, 1944, pp. 410-13. [Legislative Assembly Debates 
(Central), Vol. 11, 16th March 1944, pp. 1187-91.] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


150 


150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

hardly any control, and therefore it is of no use accusing the 
Government of India if conditions are really unsatisfactory. 
Mr. Joshi said that as a result of the examination of the conduct 
of the Government of India, he found that the Government was 
guilty of neglect, of inaction. It was timid and whatever it did 
was on an inadequate scale. I should like to say that in passing 
this judgment, Mr. Joshi failed to make a distinction which, I 
think, is a very necessary one to make. 

There are labour problems on which there is no dispute. There 
are labour problems which raise no financial consequences. Now 
what I would like to know from Mr. Joshi is this: Whether on any 
labour problem on which there was no dispute between the parties 
concerned, or which did not raise any financial question, the 
Government of India had not taken action with all the necessary 
promptitude that the urgency of the case required ? Sir, I have 
no hesitation in saying that in all such cases, where there has 
been perfect unanimity or an approximation to unanimity, and 
where there has not been the involving of any financial burdens, 
the Government of India has acted with all the promptitude that 
is due from it. 

Nawabzada Muhammad Liaquat Ali Khan : There was 
no need for action in such cases. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Very much action is necessary. 

Wartime Measures 

Then Mr. Joshi said that the conditions of labour during the 
war had suffered great deterioration on account of the fact 
that Government had granted certain exemptions from the 
Factories Act with regard to the time of working and they had 
introduced a limitation of labour’s right to strike on requiring 
15 days’ notice. He also referred to the fact that Government 
had introduced the National Labour Service Ordinance and the 
Technical Personnel Ordinance by which people were compelled 
to stick to certain jobs notwithstanding their unwillingness 
to do so. I am glad to say that Mr. Joshi had the fairness to 
admit that in the midst of war such limitations were justifiable, 
and I would say on my part that wherever any complaint has 
been brought to my notice with regard to the operation of 
these wartime measures, I have taken the promptest action 
to rectify the grievance. I shall give only one instance. I 
remember Mr. Joshi raised a point that the power given under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


151 


GOVERNMENT’S POLICY TOWARDS LABOUR 151 

the Ordinance to the employer to prosecute the employee was 
harassment of the labourer. I readily accepted the point and I 
remember we issued an amendment to the Ordinance to remove 
the power from the hands of the employer and to hand it to the 
Crown Prosecutors. 

Sir, as I said, I cannot deal exhaustively with these matters 
but I could sum up the whole situation by saying this, that 
when I examine the wartime legislation of the Government of 
India, which undoubtedly has the effect of restricting the liberty 
of labour, I think two new principles have emerged from it. The 
first is this : that the Government of India for the first time has 
taken upon itself the responsibility which it never did before of 
fixing the conditions on which a labourer may be employed. I 
think this is altogether a new principle which had no place in 
our labour legislation so far, and I am sure that this principle 
which has found its place in wartime legislation will be given a 
permanent place in the labour legislation of this country. 

The second important principle which this wartime labour 
legislation contains is the principle of compulsory arbitration. 
Sir, I think my friends, Mr. Joshi and Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, will 
allow me to say that I have some personal experience of labour. 
I have known and seen the wasting efforts that labourers have 
made by going on strike in order to obtain certain advantages 
from their employers, and I think I can say without exaggerating 
the matter that I know hardly of a case where the workers, after 
a long, arduous, painful, wasting struggle, extending over months 
together, had ultimately to surrender to the employers and go 
back on their old conditions or conditions much deteriorated. 

Sir, the provision contained in Rule 81 of the Defence of India 
Rules, which gives the Government the power of compulsory 
arbitration, has been to my mind a matter of the greatest benefit 
to labour. 

There are very few cases, so far as I know, where this power, 
when it has been adopted, has not given labour what it was 
struggling to get. There are very few strikes, so far as I know, 
which have not ended successfully in favour of labour. The 
complaint which Mr. Joshi makes with regard to the provision 
contained in section 81 is that we had not employed Rule 81 in 
each and every case. His contention, so far as I have been able to 
find out, is that Government is not willing always and in every 
case, where labour has raised a dispute, to apply this section. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sir, I have great sympathy with that point; but it is obvious 
that the contention of Mr. Joshi cannot be accepted. With 
qualification we could not accept the position which Mr. Joshi 
has taken up, that is to undertake to apply this rule in every 
case, the moment a trade union notifies its intention to go on 
strike, because its grievances have not been met. 

An Honourable Member : Why is this right being refused 
to India when it is not refused in the case of other countries ? 

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : There is no compulsory arbitration 
there, if I may tell my Honourable friend. 

Dealing with the point, as I said, we cannot accept the 
principle that the moment a trade union sends a notice to the 
employer or threatens a strike we should at once proceed to 
apply Rule 81. We must have the opportunity, we must have 
on our shoulders the responsibility, of examining whether the 
grievances are genuine ; otherwise the question of strike may be 
a matter of day-to-day work, to which I am sure nobody in this 
House will be prepared to lend countenance. 

The other point which Mr. Joshi raised was with regard to 
the inadequacy of the Labour Department in order to deal with 
the problems of labour. His contention was that there should be 
a separate and exclusive Labour Ministry to deal with questions 
of Labour, that there ought to be officers appointed — one for 
reporting on the old age pension, another on sickness insurance 
and the third one on some other urgent labour problems. Now, 
Sir, it is not my business to controvert what Mr. Joshi has said; 
in fact, personally, I have a great deal of sympathy with what 
he said. 

Expansion Of Labour Department 

All I wish to say on the point is this : that if we take 
the circumstances in which we are living and carrying on 
administration, it cannot be said that the Department of Labour, 
as it is constituted, is inadequate to deal with the problems arising. 
Sir, the first thing to be noticed is that the Labour Department 
is no longer an appendix to some other Department. At one time 
it was an appendix either to the Commerce Department or an 
appendix to the Industries Department. It is no longer so. It is 
a separate and an independent Department. It is true it is not 
an exclusive Department. All the same let nobody argue that it 
is an independent and a predominant department in the group of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


153 


GOVERNMENT’S POLICY TOWARDS LABOUR 153 

Departments which are controlled by the Honourable Members 
in charge of them. 

Then, Sir, we have recently considerably expanded the 
Department. Before 1942, we had only one Under-Secretary to 
deal with labour matters in the Labour Department. We have 
now one Deputy Secretary and two Under- Secretaries in the 
Department. In addition to that we have a Labour Adviser, 
we have a Labour welfare Adviser — Mr. Nimbkar — we have 
eight Assistant Labour Welfare Advisers. We have appointed 
a statistician in our Department in order to collect all labour 
statistics, and in addition to that we have a very large staff, in 
fact, a very considerable staff to deal with technical training, 
which, I am sure, is a matter of great benefit to labour in general. 

An Honourable Member : A good case for a scrutiny 
committee. 

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Then, Sir, with regard to the question 
of appointment of special officers, this is not a matter about 
which the Department had no knowledge. As a matter of fact, 
we had made a beginning by appointing a special officer to 
report on sickness insurance. He was Professor Adarkar. It was 
our wish and our proposal to go on appointing similar officers 
to deal with similar problems, to make reports and to suggest 
means and methods for carrying this proposal into legislation. 

But what happened was this. Last August, when the 
Tripartite Conference met, we placed before them the report 
for consideration. The Committee and the Tripartite Conference 
unanimously passed a Resolution that the Government of India 
should also appoint a Committee to consider social welfare 
measures and also to suggest ways and means by which the 
principle of social security could be applied to working classes 
of India. 

To that resolution, I am glad to say, we immediately gave 
effect, and constituted a Committee which has now been 
working on that subject. Obviously, Sir, it would have been very 
wrong for the Department to have gone on appointing other 
officers to report on separate subjects. We had to wait till the 
report of the Committee was placed before us. I can assure my 
Honourable friends that the project which we have of appointing 
special officers to make investigation into special problems is 
not abandoned, but will be taken up when the report of the 
Committee is made available to Government. Sir, I think, that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

having regard to what I have stated on the point, Mr. Joshi will 
admit that, so far as the present machinery of the Government 
of India to deal with Labour problems is concerned, it cannot 
be said to be inadequate machinery. 

Tripartite Labour Conference 

Mr. Jamnadas Mehta made certain comments on the Tripartite 
Labour Conference. He said that the Tripartite Labour Conference 
should be raised to the level of the International Labour Office. 
Mr. Joshi said that it should have a separate secretariat and 
Mr. Mehta also suggested that the member in charge of the 
Labour Department, who generally presides over the proceedings 
of the Conference, should divest himself of that authority. Mr. 
Mehta also said that the reports of the Committee should be 
placed before the Legislature for rectification. 

Sir, I sympathise very greatly with all that has been said 
by my Honourable friends, Mr. Mehta and Mr. Joshi. I would 
like to say this. As both of them are aware, the procedure of 
the Committee is more or less a matter for the Conference 
itself to decide. This question whether the Conference should 
have a separate secretariat was discussed at the time when the 
Conference was inaugurated and I think I am right in saying that 
the Conference was unanimous in their decision for the time for 
having a separate secretariat, but in a subsequent Conference it 
was altered and that gave us a direction of a different character. 
I have no hesitation in saying that the matter will be considered 
again. 

Sir, there is only one more point about which I would like to 
say one thing, if I am right in presuming that both Mr. Mehta 
and Mr. Joshi regarded the Tripartite Labour Conference as a 
matter of small moment and not of much value. Sir, I beg to differ 
from this, because I think that the Labour Conference performs 
so important a function that I think it is really impossible to 
exaggerate its value. 

The point that I would like to make, and I ask the 
Members of the House to take particular note, is this. If 
anyone were to examine the agenda which has been placed 
before the Tripartite Labour Conference or the Standing Labour 
Committee, I think it would be admitted that the topics placed 
before them for consideration and discussion have been of the 
highest moment. I am speaking from recollection, but they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


155 


GOVERNMENT’S POLICY TOWARDS LABOUR 155 

have ranged from almost anything which could be regarded of 
great moment to the labour world. 

I would like to say this. Would it have been possible for 
the representatives of labour outside the Tripartite Conference 
to have approached any employer even to consider or to talk 
about those projects ? I am sure about it that no employer in 
the present disorganised condition of Indian labour would pay 
a tuppenny worth of attention to the problems which might be 
brought before them by representatives of employees. 

I do claim credit for the Tripartite Labour Conference, 
that, if we have done nothing more, we have at least done one 
thing, namely, to induce, if not to compel, the representatives 
of employees to meet the representatives of employers and 
discuss matters of the utmost and gravest importance. 

I think it is a great service that the Tripartite Conference 
is doing to the working classes of this country. 

Women In Coalmines 

My Honourable friend, Mrs. Subbarayan, in her speech referred 
largely to the question of the introduction of women in coalmines. 
I do not doubt the intensity of feeling which she said she has 
on a question of this character. But, Sir, I cannot go over the 
ground once again because the House will remember that this 
matter has already been discussed on an adjournment motion. 
I repeat again that I am indeed unhappy over the decision that 
we have to take and I assure the House that I am taking every 
possible step in order to increase the labour force to be employed 
in the mines and in order to increase coal output so that I may 
be in a position to put the ban on again at the earliest moment 
possible. 

Shrimati K. Radhabai Subbarayan : May I ask a question of 
the Honourable Member ? Did Government consult the Tripartite 
Conference before issuing a notification about employment of 
women for underground work in mines ? 

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am afraid we had no time to do it. 
As I said it was an emergency and we had to meet it by a most 
emergent measure. 

One point which I would like to mention is the point raised by 
her, namely, that the Government of India, instead of trying to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

remedy the grievances of labour, was engaged in imprisoning 
labour leaders. Well, Sir, that is not a matter with which I, in my 
department, specifically deal. We had a great deal of discussion 
yesterday. I have not seen either yesterday or to-day any specific 
illustration or instance given to me of any Labour leader having 
been imprisoned by Government. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : I just referred to a case in the 
Karachi Port Trust. 

Mr. Hooseinboy A. Laljee : Is the Port Trust under you? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. 

Mr. Laljee : Railwaymen ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. 

Mr. Laljee : Seamen ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. 

Mr. Laljee : Then what else have you got ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are very many other categories of labour. 
I was dealing with the question of imprisonment of labour leaders. 

Smt. K. Radhabai Subbarayan : Was not Mr. Dange 
imprisoned ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am just coming to that. Knowing the labour 
leaders, as I do, the trouble I think is that labour leaders play more 
than one part. 

They are sometimes labour leaders, sometimes they are communists, 
sometimes they are national leaders, sometimes they are members 
of the Congress; and sometimes they are members of the Hindu 
Mahasabha or of some other organisation. 

An Honourable Member : All are to be tabooed ! 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is very difficult to say that labour leader 
who plays such a multiple part is imprisoned because he is a labour 
leader and not because he has acted in some other capacity — as a 
communist, as a member of the Congress, or as a member of the 
Hindu Mahasabha. In fact, if I may say so with all humility, in my 
judgment, if labour leaders were to exclusively devote themselves 
to the labour cause and not to be instruments of political parties of 
other complexion or other character, or of other programme, then they 
would be not only excluding themselves from the clutches of Rule 
26, but they would also be doing a great deal of service to labour 
itself. Unfortunately we have not been able to get in this country 
labour leaders who are exclusively devoted to labour. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


157 


GOVERNMENT’S POLICY TOWARDS LABOUR 157 

An Honourable Member : Mr. Joshi is there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not know if there is any other matter 
which has been raised in the course of this debate to which I 
have not given a reply, or which calls for a reply. 

I think I may say that whatever may be said with regard 
to the Government of India in the matter of Labour it can be 
legitimately claimed that there has been a new orientation 
with regard to the attitude of Government in respect of labour. 

Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : What is the policy 
behind it? 

Dr. Ambedkar : For the last half an hour I have been saying 
nothing else. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani: May I seek one piece of 
information from the Honourable Member ? How is it that the 
technicians after being trained at a centre do not get certificates 
after the training ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I will look into it. 

Mr. N.M. Joshi: Sir, in the hope that this discussion will 
lead to increased activity and better activity on the part of the 
Labour Department, I ask leave to withdraw my cut motion. 

The cut motion was, by leave of the Assembly, withdrawn. 

k k k 

international Labour Conference in Philadelphia 

The Government of India have nominated the following 
delegation for the forthcoming International Labour Conference on 
April 20, 1944 at Philadelphia, U.S.A. said a Press communique 
issued on March 24 : 

Government Representatives : Sir Samuel Runganadhan, 
High Commissioner for India, Leader; Mr. H. C. Prior, 
Secretary, Labour Department, Delegate ; A member of the High 
Commissioner’s Office, Adviser to Government delegates and 
Secretary to the Indian Delegation. 

Employers’ Representatives : Mr. J.C. Mahindra, Delegate; 
Mr. D.G. Mulherkar, Adviser. 


Indian Information, April 15, 1944, p. 416. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Workers’ Representatives: Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, Delegate; 
Mr. Aftab Ali, Adviser; Mr. R. R. Bhole, Adviser. 

India, as a member of the International Organisation, has 
undertaken to nominate non-Government delegates and advisers 
chosen in agreement with the industrial organisations, if such 
organisations exist, which are most representatives of employers 
or work people, as the case may be, in their respective countries. 
The employers’ representatives have been chosen in this manner 
as agreed recommendations were received. 

As regards employers, there are two main organisations of 
employees and they have failed to submit agreed proposals. As 
Government have no machinery to examine which of the two 
organisations is the more representative body and as Government 
desire that labour should not lose its opportunity of having its say 
at this conference because of its failure to come to an agreement, 
Government have decided to adopt, for the present, the principle 
of nominating representatives alternately in agreement with each 
of the two organisations. 

In accordance with this decision they have nominated as 
representatives of workers the Delegates and one Adviser 
recommended by the Indian Federation of Labour, and have 
also included, as an Adviser, Mr. R. R. Bhole, recommended by 
the All-India Municipal Employees’ Federation, who has been 
accepted as a Co-Adviser by the workers’ Delegate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


159 


29 


* Miscellaneous Departments 


Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The House 
will not take up Demand No. 64 : Miscellaneous Departments, 
which was left over. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I think my 
Honourable friend, Mr. Avinashilingam Chettiar, wanted to know 
how the sum of Rs. 15,26,000 which finds a place here has not 
been mentioned in the Standing Finance Committee report. I have 
referred to the Report and I find that what he says is correct. I 
have sent for information from the Department to find out exactly 
what items this sum entered here represents. In the meantime 
if the Honourable Member wants some general information as 
to the matter with which this supplementary grant is concerned, 
I am quite prepared to give it to him. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashillingam Chettiar : All this information 
is given in the Memorandum. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The scheme of 
employment exchanges has been fully explained in the report 
of the Standing Finance Committee. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashillingam Chettiar : What we want is 
explanation for the figures. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : With regard to 
the bigger item, briefly the facts are these. As Honourable 
Members know, there has been a great deal of competition 
for unskilled labour by different contractors working for 
Government in the civil departments as well as those working 
for the military department. In order to remove the causes of 
this competition which has the result of enticing away essential 
labour from important fields of work, and which has also the 
consequence of raising the wages of labour beyond reasonable 
limits, Government thought it necessary to establish certain 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th March 1944, p. 1720. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Committees in order to deal with this problem. What the 
Government has done is to bring into operation two different 
schemes, one scheme is called Labour Supply Committee scheme, 
which operates in certain Provinces such as Bengal, Assam 
which are very closely situated with military operations. The 
second thing which the Government has done is to raise what 
are called depots of labour, and one particular depot is the depot 
which has been established at Gorakhpur. Most of the unskilled 
labour is collected and sorted out and supplied either to coal 
mines or to military works. The expenditure which is mentioned 
under ‘M’ — Labour co-ordination of unskilled scheme — is really 
expenditure which is concerned under these two schemes which 
I have mentioned. That is all I have to say. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi (Nominated Non- Official): Sir, the Honourable 
Member has told us about his two schemes, one is the Labour 
Supply Committee and the second is the scheme of arranging 
for depots for supplying labour and sending them for different 
purposes to other places. Now, Sir, as regards this Labour 
Supply Committee, I would like the Honourable Member to tell 
us whether there are any representatives of labour on these 
Committees wherever these Committees are started. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I might just mention 
that I only passed orders yesterday for the representation of 
labour on these Labour Supply Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


161 


30 


* Protection of Mosques in New Delhi 


Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved: 

“That for the original Resolution the following be substituted : 

“That this Assembly recommends to the Governor General 
in Council that in order to protect and keep in proper repairs 
the mosques situated in New Delhi area, he should be pleased 
to take the following steps : 

(a) instruct the Department concerned to allot those bungalows 
in the compounds of which mosques are situated subject 
to the stipulation that no obstruction should be offered to 
their restoration or to the use of such mosques by Muslims 
for offering prayers therein; and 

(b) further instruct the Department concerned and the New 
Delhi Municipal Committee to give all facilities, assistance 
and necessary legal permits to such Mussalmans as come 
forward to repair, restore or rebuild any existing mosque 
in New Delhi area.” 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, this Resolution falls into two parts — part (a) and part (b). 
I am concerned with part (a) only. Part (b) will be dealt with 
by the Honourable the Secretary for Education, Health and 
Lands Department. Part (a) with which I am concerned makes 
two recommendations. One is that the Government should 
undertake to allot bungalows with mosques in their compound 
to Muslim employees of the Government of India. The second 
recommendation is to instruct the occupants not to obstruct the 
restoration or the use of such mosques for offering prayers by 
anyone who cares to come and offer prayers there. 

I would like to say that I am sorry that I cannot accept either of 
the two recommendations. I do so not because I do not appreciate 
the sentiments which have moved by my Honourable friend to 
table the Resolution but because of the inherent difficulties which 
are involved in the acceptance of this Resolution. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 30th March 1944, p. 1798. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Taking the first part of the Resolution, my Honourable 
friend, Sir Yamin Khan, said that the Government had 
already allotted or reserved a particular House for an 
Honourable Member who happens to be a Muslim. I believe 
he referred to this in order to support his plea that the 
principle had already been accepted. Sir, I wordd like to state 
categorically that that is a mistake. No house is reserved 
for any Honourable Member. It happens to be an accident 
that the house to which he referred has been occupied by 
a Muslim Member. But I have not the slightest doubt that 
should there happen to be a vacancy in that house, which 
I hope not, it will be open to any Honourable Member 
next senior to him to claim that house irrespective of the 
question whether the Honourable Member is a Muslim or 
a non-Muslim. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : But a purdah wall has 
also been built. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is another 
matter. I am dealing with principles. 

Therefore, the Government of India has not accepted the 
principle. I am going to point out to my Honourable friend 
that so far as the present times are concerned, it is quite 
impossible for the Government to accept any such rigid 
principle. 

Sir, what does the acceptance of the principle mean ? It 
means two things. It means that the Government should 
undertake to serve a notice on non-Muslims who are occupying 
the sort of bungalows which are the subject-matter of this 
Resolution and to have them vacated. That would be the 
consequence if the Government accepted the Resolution. 

The second consequence of the acceptance of the Resolution 
would be this : supposing there was a vacancy in such a 
bungalow, and that an officer to whom such a bungalow could 
be allotted happened to be a non-Muslim who was called 
by Government from outside to stay in Delhi, and whose 
presence was absolutely necessary ; under the circumstances 
Government should not allot the accommodation to him. Sir, my 
humble submission is that that is an impossible condition; and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


163 


PROTECTION OF MOSQUES IN NEW DELHI 163 

in view of the present circumstances, when there is such 
tremendous paucity of accommodation, and when officials who 
are called here have to live in hutments and in all sorts of 
improvised accommodation, for Government to adopt a rule 
of this kind would be — I do not wish to say, — a dog-in-the- 
manger policy. My Honourable friend can easily realise that 
this is not a thing which can be accepted by Government in 
the present circumstances. 

Coming to the second part of the Resolution which asks 
Government to put certain restraints upon the occupants, 
I am sorry to say that that also is bound to create great 
difficulties. Sir, it is quite well-known that a landlord is 
entitled to put certain restrictions on a tenant. But I have 
no doubt that my Honourable friend, Sir Yamin Khan, will 
agree that the landlord can put such restraints upon a 
tenant which are intended primarily for the preservation 
of the premises. I have not got time to go into this in any 
detail. But the sort of restrictions which my Honourable 
friend desires Government should impose upon the tenant 
are not justifiable on the ground that they will not be for 
the preservation of the premises. 

Now, Sir, I come to the second difficulty. What would be the 
position of the tenant who is subject to this kind of stipulation. 
Sir, I have no doubt and I feel quite certain that I am not 
exaggerating the matter, that if I were to introduce the kind 
of stipulation which is mentioned in the Resolution that every 
man, whether he is Muslim or Non-Muslim, should open his 
compound to anybody who wants to come and say his prayers, 
will be nothing short of destroying the privacy of the premises 
and to convert it, if I may say so, into a musaffir khana. 
I have no doubt about it that it would be very difficult to 
impose such a stipulation on a non-Muslim tenant, and I have 
not the slightest doubt in my mind that it would be difficult 
to impose a similar stipulation on a European occupant. 
But I venture to suggest that even a Muslim occupant 
would not very readily consent to the kind of stipulation 
which my Honourable friend wants me to impose. It is quite 
apparent that my Honourable colleague who is occupying 
premises of the kind mentioned in the Resolution, with all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

his religious proclivities, would not allow a crowd to enter his 
compound to say prayers. 

Sir, I am sorry that for the reasons I have mentioned, and I 
think my Honourable friend will agree that they are not reasons 
of a temporary character, I am unable to accept this Resolution. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


165 


31 


* The Factories (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir I move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, 

be taken into consideration.” 

This Bill is a very simple piece of legislation and it is also 
a non-controversial piece of legislation. The Bill proposes to 
make four amendments and the sections which are sought 
to be amended by this Bill are sections 9, 19, 23, 45 and 54. 

Section 9 is a section which legislates that the occupier 
of a factory, before starting the factory, should send to the 
Inspector of Factories a notice giving certain particulars. 
Now, it has been found out that under this section the 
Inspector of Factories is not entitled to ask for the particulars 
from the occupier of the factory which he thinks he ought to 
have, nor the occupier is bound to give any such particulars. 
Recently it has been found out that the occupier of a factory, 
who wants to start a factory, has refused to give certain 
important information which the Inspector of Factories 
requires. In order to remove this difficulty, section 9 is 
amended and the amendment gives powers to Government 
to ask for certain particulars which the Inspector requires 
for his purposes. 

Section 19 deals with the supply of water and washing 
places in the factory. As the section stands now, the provision 
for a washing places is confined to factories involving contact 
by workers with injurious and obnoxious substances. The 
section docs not require owners of factories of cither kind 
to provide washing places. It has been suggested that this 
limitation ought to be removed because washing places are 
necessary for all sorts of workers and not merely for those 
whose work brings them in contact with injurious and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, p. 1929. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

obnoxious substances. The amendment, therefore, makes provision 
for making washing places obligatory on all factories. 

Section 23 deals with fire-escapes to be installed in a factory. 
Here, again, it has been found that the section is defective. 
The section leaves to the occupier required. It does not give to 
Government the power to prescribe the number of fire-escapes that 
a particular factory may find it necessary to have. Consequently, 
section 23 has been amended by the present Bill in order to 
give power to Government to prescribe the requisite number of 
fire-escapes which the Factory Inspector may find it necessary 
in the circumstances of a particular factory. 

Then, Sir, coming to sections 45 and 54, the position is this. 
These sections deal with two matters. They deal with hours of 
work which a child and a woman is required to work in a factory. 
They also deal with what are called the limits of the spreadover. 
The present amendment docs not in any way alter the provisions 
with regard to the number of hours which a child or a woman is 
required to work in a factory, nor docs it in any way affect the 
13 hours spread which has been prescribed by these provisions. 
All that the present amendment does is to alter the limit of the 
spreadover by changing 7-30 p.m. to 8-30 p.m. This change has 
become necessary on account of two reasons. Firstly, it is due 
to the change in the standard lime and, secondly, it is due to 
the necessity for saving light. 

Sir, I do not think anything more is required from me to 
explain the provisions of this Bill. I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, be 

taken into consideration.” 

I find notice of amendments has been given by Maulvi 
Muhammad Abdul Ghani, but he is not in the House. The House, 
will, therefore, proceed with the consideration of the Bill. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman (Patna and Chhota Nagpur 
cum Orissa : Muhammadan): Sir, I agree with the Bill 
and its principle as explained by the Honourable Member. 
My only objection is that the Honourable Member has not 
taken pains to consult the opinion of the Chambers and the 
merchants who would have been really the proper people to 
say whether such amendments were necessary. What I am 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


167 


THE FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 167 

afraid of is that by placing restrictions in the manner proposed 
in section 19 it may be more difficult for the people who have 
factories or who are establishing factories to have that Schedule 
which they want to prepare. That is my only trouble. If I am 
convinced that the Government has taken pains to consult the 
commercial opinion and the opinion of the industrialists on this 
matter, I will be glad to support the motion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, with regard 
to the point raised by my Honourable friend Mr. Muhammad 
Nauman, I would like to say this, that this Bill is the result of 
the recommendations made by the conference of Inspectors of 
Factories all over India. It is they who have thought that the 
Bill has been defective in the way in which it has been found 
to be. All that the Government has done is to give effect to the 
unanimous recommendation made by the Inspectors of Factories 
all over India. I have no idea, and I have no papers with me 
to enable me to say whether the Chambers of Commerce have 
been consulted. But I should have thought that the Chambers of 
Commerce were hardly the bodies to be consulted with regard to 
factory legislation. But I believe employers’ organisations have 
been consulted. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, be 
taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. C. C. Miller (Bengal: European): Sir, I move: 

“That in clause 2 of the Bill to the proposed part (f) of sub- 
section (1) the following words be added : ‘for the purposes of 
this Act’.” 

Sir, I can explain this amendment very shortly. The original 
section 9, as the Honourable Member has already stated, gives 
under certain specified heads the information which the factory 
owner must supply to the Factory Inspector. Incidentally one 
really doubts whether the amending clause is necessary at 
all in view of section 77 of the Bill which seems to supply 
the gap if further information is needed. But, assuming that 
the Government amendment is in order, we thought that it is 
asking rather a lot to put in an omnibus amendment of this 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


168 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

nature to certain specifically defined subjects. All we ask for is that 
the Factory Inspector should be entitled to seek information only 
which is relevant to the Factory Act. I hope that the Honourable 
Member will accept this very modest amendment 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Amendment moved: 

“That in clause 2 of the Bill to the proposed part (f) of sub- 
section (1) the following words be added: 

‘for the purposes of this Act’.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I accept the 
amendment. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That in clause 2 of the Bill to the proposed part (f) of sub- 
section (1) the following words be added : 

‘for the purposes of this Act’.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 3, 4 and 5 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added, to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I mvoe: 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


169 


32 

* Advisory Committee on Coal Mines 
Welfare Fund 

The Central Government have set up an Advisory Committee 
to advise on matters arising out of the administration of 
the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Ordinance, promulgated in 
January last. 

The Committee, when fully constituted, will consist of the 
Secretary, Labour Department, the Coal Commissioner, the 
Labour Welfare Adviser, the Chief Inspector of Mines ; one 
official each nominated by the Railway Board, the Bengal 
Government, the Bihar Government and the Central Provinces 
and Berar Government; two nominees of the Indian Mining 
Association; one nominee of the Indian Mining Federation, the 
Indian Colliery Owners Association and the Central Provinces 
and Berar Mining Association: two mining engineers and 
representatives of interests other than the colliery owners or 
workmen employed in the coal mining industry. 

In addition, there will be five persons nominated by the 
Central Government to represent the interests of colliery 
labour. Four have already been appointed and the fifth will 
be appointed shortly. Under the ordinance, the Advisory 
Committee should also include a lady member and this 
nomination, too, is expected shortly. 

The Committee, as so far constituted, include the following 
representatives of the Government of India : Mr. S. Lall, 
Secretary, Labour Department; Mr. R. S. Nimbkar, Labour 
Welfare Adviser ; and Mr. W. H. Kirby, Chief Inspector of Mines. 
The representatives of the Railway Board and of the Bengal, 
Bihar, and Central Provinces and Berar Governments are : Mr. 
A. Orr; Mr. A. Hughes, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner, Bengal; 
Mr. A. G. Bunn, I.C.S., Additional Deputy Commissioner, 
Dhanbad; and Sardar Bahadur Ishar Singh, Labour 
Commissioner, Central Provinces and Berar. Messrs. J. Latimer, 


Indian Information, May 15, 1944, pp. 522-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


170 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

S. F. Tarlton, M. N. Mukerjee, R. D. Rathore and A. E. Douglas 
have been nominated to represent the mining industry on the 
Advisory Committee. 

First Meeting 

Of the four spokesmen for colliery labour, Messrs. P. Bhattasali 
and H. Ghosal represent organisations, affiliated to the Indian 
Federation of Labour and Messrs. Nirpada Mukerjee and Chapal 
Bhattacharya represent those affiliated to the Trade Union 
Congress. Messrs. S. N. Mallick and W. N. Burch are mining 
engineers nominated to the Committee. 

The first meeting of the Advisory Committee was held at 
Dhanbad on April 27, the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour 
Member, Government of India, presiding. 

In a short opening speech, Dr. Ambedkar recalled the 
Tripartite meeting held in Dhanbad in December last to consider, 
first, the problem of coal production and, secondly, the securing 
of a continuous flow of labour. He said that the suggestions 
made at that meeting had come to fruition. While the question 
of production was being dealt with separately, this meeting 
was convened to consider measures for the welfare of labour in 
coal-mines. As discussed at the last meeting, the Government 
of India had promulgated an Ordinance constituting a fund for 
the welfare of colliery labour and this Advisory Committee had 
been apppointcd under the terms of the Ordinance. 

The Committee then discussed draft rules, placed before them, 
relating to the composition of the Advisory Committee and to 
expenditure and welfare schemes to be financed from the Fund. 
The rules provide that the Advisory Committee should have a 
secretariat, with headquarters at Dhanbad, under the executive 
authority of its Chairman. There will be a number of sub- 
committees attached to and elected by the Advisory Committee 
for carrying out its functions — a Finance Sub-Committee to 
advise generally on all expenditure debitable to the Fund, a 
Works Sub-Committee to consider all major projects for works 
and constructions the cost of which is to be met from the Fund, 
and a separate Coal-field Sub-Committee for each of the main 
coal-fields in Bengal, Bihar, the Central Provinces and Berar 
and Assam to advise on all matters relating to expenditure from 
the Fund in their respective regions. In constituting the Sub- 
Committees equal representation will be given to colliery owners 
and workers employed in the coal-mining industry. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


171 


ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON COAL MINES WELFARE FUND 171 

Administration Of Fund 

The rules discussed by the Advisory Committee also provide 
that, within the sanctioned budget, the Advisory Committee may 
suggest schemes of expenditure to the Central Government for 
approval. These schemes will be in two parts — administrative 
schemes, to cover secretariat expenses and salary, etc. of the 
staff appointed by the Chairman, and welfare schemes which 
will be either of an obligatory or permissive nature. 

The rules further empower the Central Government to 
impose certain conditions on a Provincial Government, the local 
authority or the owner, agent or manager of a coal-mine to whom 
a grant is made from the Coal-Mines Labour Welfare Fund in 
aid of any schemes approved by the Central Government. These 
conditions may be imposed to ensure that the work for which 
the grant is made is duly and promptly executed, that all the 
necessary facilities are given for any inspection that may be 
made for checking, and that proper accounts are maintained of 
the money granted. 

Before making a grant from the Fund to a local authority 
or the executive agent or manager of a coal-mine, the Central 
Government will require the Party concerned to execute a bond 
for the fulfilment of these conditions. 

The Committee also considered the extent to which the Jharia 
and Asansol Boards of Health and the Jharia Water Board 
should be utilised as the executive authority for expenditure 
of grants from the Fund. It was pointed out that use might be 
made of existing bodies in coal-fields for carrying out welfare 
and other schemes for which the Fund had been created. The 
Committee approved the suggestion put forth by the Chairman 
that the question whether grants should be made to local bodies 
or not should be decided by the Advisory Committee in each case 
individually. The Committee also considered expenditure needs 
which should be taken up at once and for which the cost should 
be met from the Welfare Fund. Among the items which were 
suggested for this purpose were : expenditure on welfare staff, 
expenditure on secretariat staff to be appointed and expenditure 
on the anti-malaria scheme at present in progress in certain coal- 
fields in the Central Provinces and Berar and to be sanctioned 
for Bengal-Bihar. The Committee also discussed the rate of cess 
to be levied under the Ordinance. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


172 


33 


* Mica Industry to be placed on a Sound 
and Stable Footing 


“The Government of India is prepared to do its best to put 
this industry on a sound and stable footing,” observed the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, addressing a Mica 
Conference between representatives of the Government of India, 
the Bihar Government, trade associations and spokesmen of mica 
labour, held at Kodarma (Bihar) on April 29. 

The Bihar Government was represented, among others, 
by Mr. E. C. Ansorge, Adviser ; Mr. J. S. Wilcock, Secretary, 
Revenue Department; and Mr. M. Z. Khan, Deputy Commissioner, 
Hazaribagh district. Mr. D. L. Mazumdar, Joint Secretary, Labour 
Department, Dr. E. L. G. Clegg. Director, Geological Survey of 
India, and Mr. J. T. K. Crosfield, Supervisory Field Officer of 
the Geological Survey, represented the Central Government. 

“The Government of India,” said Dr. Ambedkar, “realised 
that after the war, India might not retain its monopoly in mica 
to the same degree as today.” He indicated that, with a view 
to placing the industry on a stable and permanent footing, the 
Government proposed to set up an Inquiry Committee which 
would deal both with the immediate and ultimate problems of 
the mica industry. 

The Committee’s terms of reference would be ; Working of 
the Mica Control Order, both in regard to war production and 
the effect of the Order on long-term policy, and the review of 
any orders that may have been passed by the Government in 
connection with that order; the present system of marketing — 
both inland and abroad ; standardisation of quality ; the extent 
to which alternative sources of supply may have jeopardised 
or are likely to jeopardise the position of this country as 

* Indian Information, May 15, 1944, pp. 533-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


173 


MICA INDUSTRY TO BE PLACED ON A SOUND AND STABLE FOOTING 173 

a principal supplier of muscovite mica and the extent to which 
other materials that may be used as substitutes for mica may 
have displaced or are likely to displace mica or its uses in 
industry; increased utilisation of mica in this country for the 
manufacture of finished goods; research and development; 
the desirability of setting up suitable machinery, whether by 
appointment of a Central Mica Committee or otherwise, to 
watch the interest of the mica trade and industry. 

Dr. Ambedkar said the inquiry Committee would consist of a 
whole-time Chairman, two part-time members — one experienced 
in inland trade and the other in the export trade — and a 
wholetime Secretary. There would be seven assessors with the 
Committee, two representing the Government of Bihar, two 
representing Bihar dealers, one each representing the Madras 
and Rajputana mica trade, and one representing mica labour. 
In addition, the Committee would be assisted by two technical 
advisers, one of whom would be the Director of the Geological 
Survey of India and the other a representative of the Board of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. 

Labour Welfare 

Referring to the question of labour and industry, the Labour 
Member emphasised that if Government was to help the industry 
it would not allow the industry to exploit labour. It had been 
said that India’s monopoly was based on cheap labour. If this 
was true it was not a matter of compliment cither to the 
industry or to labour. If Government was to intervene or to 
take measures in order to stabilise the industry, Government 
would expect the industry to safeguard the interests of labour. 

The Labour Member observed that Government would require 
that labour must be assured a living wage, fair conditions of 
employment and general welfare, in the interest of maintaining 
Labour Welfare. He referred to the general policy that had been 
evolved to maintain labour by collecting money from industry 
and pointed out the welfare cess on coal as an example. The 
industry, he continued, must bear the cost of welfare by a 
special cess. 

Earlier in his speech, the Labour Member, emphasising the 
importance of Indian’s mica industry, referred to the fact that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

electro-technical industries depended on mica for their existence 
and that mica was strategic material without which defence of 
the country would be impossible. World production of sheet mica 
in metric tons in 1913 was 17,018 of which India’s production 
was 14,598 — practically 81.7 per cent. And yet the mica industry 
had played next to no part in the industrial affairs of India. 

He said : “We hear a great deal about the cotton, textile 
and jute industries but it is seldom that one comes across any 
reference to India’s mica industry”. Giving reasons for this, 
Dr. Ambedkar pointed out that there were two sets of causes — first, 
that mica produced was not consumed in India. Mica was entirely 
exported and the Indian people, therefore, were unconcerned. 
Profits were derived from the outside world and the consuming 
public were not interested in the mica industry. The second set 
of causes included the ineffective and unorganised state of the 
industry. He quoted figures to show that the production of sheet 
mica in India in metric tons had increased from 1,714 in 1905 
to 14598 in 1937. Another indication of the industry’s colossal 
growth was the fact that in the dry season the industry employed 
60,000 workers in mines and factories and about 1,00,000 as 
home splitters. In spite of its enormous growth, he said, there 
was no big organisation in the mica industry comparable with 
the Millowners’ Association or the Northern India Employers’ 
Federation. 

Piracy 

Giving reasons for this state of affairs, he observed that persons 
concerned with the industry were torn by the spirit of mutual 
jealousy and trade rivalries. Each one was trying to build his 
place at the cost of others. It was a case of all competition 
and no co-operation. Referring to the future of the industry, 
the Labour Member said that the Government of India were 
prepared to do their best to put this industry on a sound and 
stable footing. The Government realised that there were two 
problems before the industry, one an immediate problem and 
the other the ultimate problem involving long-term policy. 
The immediate problem was the problem of mica piracy. In 
ordinary circumstances the Government of India would have 
thought that ordinary law dealing with theft and the receiving 
of stolen property was sufficient, but having regard to the 
importance of mica they were anxious to assist the industry 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


175 


MICA INDUSTRY TO BE PLACED ON A SOUND AND STABLE FOOTING 175 

to the best of their ability. The Mica Control Order was in 
existence and, whatever its defects, it certainly provided 
machinery whereby the extent of piracy had been reduced. 
He pleaded for co-operation by those engaged in industry and 
assured them that the Government were ready to take steps 
to stop piracy. 

Proposal Welcomed 

Representatives of the industry at the conference unanimously 
welcomed the proposal to set up an Inquiry Committee. It was 
suggested that the Committee might also go into the question 
of postwar reconstruction as regards the mica industry. 

Earlier, the Conference discussed measures intended to meet 
the immediate needs of the industry. These included proposals 
regarding prohibition of the purchase, sale or transfer of certain 
types of mica, the vesting of District Magistrates and Provincial 
Governments with a certain amount of discretionary authority 
in granting certificates, prevention of multiplicity of licensed 
agents, control of the location of godowns for the storage of mica 
and improvements in the administrative machinery. 

It was indicated that the Central Government intended to 
amend the Mica Control Order, 1940, to provide for these, at 
an early date. 

In regard to the welfare of mica labour, existing arrangements 
for grain concessions and dearness allowance, housing conditions, 
water supply, medical facilities and wages were reviewed. The 
Labour Member inquired if there was a certain basic wage 
for mica labour and emphasissed the need to provide medical 
attention, housing facilities and water supply. It was stated that 
most of the workers lived in their villages. There appeared to 
be general agreement on the proposal to impose a welfare and 
development cess in the interest of mica labour. It was agreed 
that the Geological Survey of India should be responsible for 
the distribution of coal to mica mines. 

Labour Member Visits Mica Mines 

On April 28, Dr. Ambedkar, accompanied by Mr. Mazumdar, 
Dr. Clegg, and Mr. Crossfield, visited a mica mine and 
a mica factory. The party went down about 400 feet 
by means of a ladder installed in the mines. Among 
various other aspects of mining, the Labour Member 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

saw drilling and boring operations conducted through pneumatic 
drills worked by lend-lease compressors which had been placed 
at the disposal of the industry by Government to stimulate 
mica production. Returning to the surface, the Labour Member 
visited the Labourers’ hutted colony. In the middle were two 
saffron-coloured triangular stones placed against a tree. The 
Labour Member was informed that the labourers worshipped 
these stones as “Goddess of Mica” 

In the factory at Kodarma, thousands of workers — men and 
women — squatted in huge dormitories, working on blocks of 
mica. Here the party saw various processes of mica manufacture, 
e.g. slating of mica, kinfe-drcssing, sick-dressing and splitting- 
performed with unerring judgment and skill, by hand. In one 
section of the factory, workers were splitting mica into thin 
sheets of uniform sizes, to be used ultimately as condenser films 
in spark plugs for aeroplanes. In another section, the Labour 
Member saw blocks of mica being cut into small sheets for being 
manufactured into micanite. 

Science Has Increased The Importance Of Mica 

India is the world’s leading producer of sheet mica, which is 
mined mainly in the Hazaribagh and Gaya districts in Bihar, 
and Nellore in Madras, and to a minor extent in other districts 
in Madras and in Tonk State and Ajmer-Merwara in Rajputana, 
about 80 per cent coming from Bihar and most of the remainder 
from Nellore. This pre-eminence in the world’s markets, is due 
largely to the excellent quality of the so-called “ Bengal ruby 
“ mica of Bihar, but also to the great manual dexterity of the 
aboriginals, mainly women, who trim and split the mica with 
crude soft-iron sickles (or shears in Nellore). So much is this the 
case that in pre-war years there was an appreciable import of 
block mica into India, to be re exported in the form of splittings. 
Mica has been used in India for centuries for decorative and 
medicinal purposes. 

The mica occurs as “books”, giant crystals which have been 
found, exceptionally, as large as 10 feet in diameter, in great 
veins of pegmatite traversing mica schists. The mica, which is 
muscovite, occurs with felspar and quartz and other minerals such 
as beryl, which from Ajmer is exported as an ore of beryllium. 

Most of the mica exported from India goes to the United 
Kingdom and the United States. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


177 


MICA INDUSTRY TO BE PLACED ON A SOUND AND STABLE FOOTING 177 

The Advance of science, instead of rendering this natural 
product obsolete, has increased its importance. With the 
employment of higher temperatures of voltages in generators, as 
radio and television are developed, as the number of motor-cars 
and aeroplanes increases, and even as the electron is brought 
under control, mica becomes increasingly important. 

It is considered indispensable for the following appliances : 

(1) commutator segments, for motors and generators ; 

(2) commutator V-rings, for motors and generators ; 

(3) armatures (high temperature and high voltage); 

(4) aeroplane motor spark plugs ; 

(5) radio tubes; 

(6) transformers ; and 

(7) radio condensers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


178 


34 


* Standing Labour Committee Discusses 
Recognition of Trade Unions 


Proposals to secure compulsory recognition of Trade Unions 
and the appointment and constitution of boards of recognition, 
as embodied in the Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 
1943, were discussed at the fifth meeting of the Standing 
Labour Committee held in New Delhi on June 27. The Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour member, Government of India, 
presided. 

The employers’ and the workers’ representatives explained 
their views on the criterion for judging the representativeness 
of a trade union. 

While the employers’ representatives generally favoured 
the idea of bringing together employers and workers, they 
seemed to be of the opinion that this co-operation should 
be on a voluntary and non-legal basis. It was stated that 
with the healthy growth of trade unions, there would be no 
difficulty as regards recognition. The workers’ representatives 
favoured the idea of compulsory recognition and at the same 
time pleaded that the scope of the amending bill should be 
widened to confer more rights and privileges on trade unions. 

Statistics of Trade Disputes 

The Committee then discussed a proposal to improve the 
existing statistics of trade disputes in order to have uniformity 
in the method of compilation and to improve their utility for 
purposes of comparison as between provinces in India and with 
other countries. It was suggested that the machinery provided 
by the Industrial Statistics Act of 1942 empowering the 
Provincial Governments to secure statistics should be utilised. 
This procedure would be, moreover, on the lines of the system 

* Indian Information, July 15, 1944, pp. 53 & 57. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


179 


STANDING LABOUR COMMITTEE DISCUSSES RECOGNITION OF TRADE UNIONS 179 

adopted by the International Labour Organisation. There was 
general approval of the proposal. 

The Committee, however, discussed the alternatives of serving 
notices on all employers irrespective of the number of their 
employees or only on those employing 10 or more workers. Draft 
rules and forms for the collection of statistics under the proposed 
procedure were circulated to the members of the Committee. 

Visit To Cloth Mills 

After the meeting, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and the members of 
the Standing Labour Committee, on the invitation of Sir Shri 
Ram, visited the Delhi Cloth Mills, where they saw various 
manufacturing processes as well as the labour welfare work 
undertaken by the management. Sir Shri Ram accompanied 
the party to the workers’ quarters and explained the sanitary 
arrangements and facilities as regards water for drinking and 
bathing. The Workers’ Colony has a school, a dispensary and a 
library, equipped with a radio set which was tuned in to a film 
song radiating from A.I.R., Delhi. 

The party also saw a swimming pool varying in depth to suit 
the novice as well as the expert swimmer. At the workers’ sports 
club a kabbadi match was in progress. Nearby was a workers’ 
theatre where, it was stated, historical and other plays, all acted 
by the workers were staged occasionally. 

The following delegates and advisers representing the Central 
and Provincial Governments, Indian States, All-India Organisation 
of Industrial Employers, Employers Federation of India, All-India 
Trade Union Congress, Indian Federation of Labour, and other 
employers and workers attended the meeting : 

The Hon’ble Mr. H. C. Prior, Secretary, Department of 
Labour, and Mr. S. Lall, Joint Secretary (Central Government); 
Sardar Bahadur Isher Singh, Labour Commissioner, Nagpur 
and Mr. C. K. Vijayaraghavan, I.C.S., Labour Commissioner, 
Madras (Madras and Central Provinces and Berar); Mr. 
S. V. Joshi, Labour Commissioner, and Mr. V. P. Keni, 
Assistant Labour Commissioner (Bombay); Mr. A. Hughes, 
I.C.S., Labour Commissioner Bengal; Mr. J. E. Pedley, I.C.S., 
Labour commissioner (United Provinces); Mr. M. H. Mahmood, 
Director of Industries, Punjab, and Mr. P. K. Kaul, I.C.S., 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


180 


180 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Secretary to Government, Electricity and Industries Department, 
Punjab (Punjab, Sind and N.W.F.P.); Mr. A. S. Ramchandran 
Pillai, Labour Commissioner, Assam, and the Director of 
Development and Chief Inspector of factories, Orissa (Assam 
and Orissa); Mr. K. S. Srikantan, Director of Industries, Indore, 
Mr. B. S. Desai, Assistant Director of Labour, Baroda and Mr. N. 
D. Gupta, Labour Officer, Gwalior (Baroda, Indore and Gwalior 
States); Mr. E. I. Chacko, Director of Industries and Labour 
Commissioner, Travancore, and Mr. M. A. Mirza, State Labour 
Officer, Hyderabad, Deccan (Mysore and Travancore States); 
Mir Maqbool Mahmood (Chamber of Princes); Sir Shri Ram, 
Mr. Kasturbhai Lalbhai and Mr. D. G. Mulherkar, Secretary, 
All-India Organisation of Industrial Employers (All-India 
Organisation of Industrial Employers); Mr. H. S. Town, Mr. C. 
C. Miller, M.L.A., Mr. J. Latimer and Mr. T. S. Swaminathan, 
Secretary, Employers’ Federation of India (Employers’ Federation 
of India); Mr. S. S. Mirajkar, Mr. V. Chakkarai Chettiar, Mr. 
Kazi Mujtaba and Mr. V. G. Balwaik (All-India Trade Union 
Congress); Prof. B. N. Banerji, Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta, Mr. 
Abdul Sattar and Mr. V. G. Karnick (Indian Federation of Labour); 
Rai Bahadur Shyam Nandan Sahaya (other Employers); Mr. S. 
C. Joshi, M.L.C., and Mr. P. T. Dewara (other workers). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


181 


35 


* Post-War Employment of 
Skilled Workers 


“No plan for the future development of the country can be 
deemed to be complete which does not provide for technical 
and scientific training. This is the age of Machine and it is 
only those countries in which technical and scientific training 
has risen to the highest pitch that will survive in the struggle 
that will commence when the war is over, for maintaining 
decent standards of living for their people. The Government of 
India is not oblivious to these considerations and would like 
to see the Technical Training Scheme not only maintained but 
extended all over the country and become a permanent part of 
the country’s educational system.” Thus observed the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, Government of India, 
addressing the Technical Training Scheme Advisory Committee 
in Calcutta on August 24. 

The committee, which was appointed by the Central 
Government to consider the adjustment of the Technical Training 
Scheme to the needs of civil industry, consists of representatives 
of engineering associations, the All-India Organisation of 
Industrial Employers, the Employers’ Federation of India, the 
Bengal Chamber of Commerce, the Supply Department, the 
Railway Board and the Institute of Engineering. The meeting 
lasted three days. 

Labour Member’s Speech 

Here is the full text of the Labour member’s speech : 

Gentlemen : In welcoming you here, today, I should like 
to express to each one of you my appreciation and thanks 
for the trouble you have taken to attend this meeting. 
In these days, we are all so fully preoccupied with our 
normal duties, that any additon to them must involve 

* Indian Information, September 15, 1944, pp. 274-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a heavy strain. I am all the more grateful to you for undertaking 
this task of helping Government to re-mould their Technical 
Training Scheme to meet the changing needs of the country. 

I need hardly say how great is the importance I attach to 
the work of this Committee. The fact that, notwithstanding a 
last moment hitch, I decided to come down to Calcutta to meet 
you and to wish you good luck and full success in your labours, 
is evidence — if there is need for any — of the sincerity of what I 
am saying. 

You have assembled here today to consider the future of 
our Technical Training Scheme, which was introduced as an 
emergency measure to cater to the technical needs of the Army 
and has resulted in providing India with semi-skilled man-power 
to an extent unheard of before. 

Just to give you an idea of the magnitude of the work done 
in the field of technical training, I might refer briefly to the 
history of the Technical Training Scheme from its early stages. It 
was started 314 Years ago to overcome one serious obstacle — the 
lack of technical personnel for the requirements of the Army. 
We started with a target for training about 3,000 men at a lime, 
but within two years we had to raise this figure to 48,000 which 
required setting up 394 training centres. By the end of 1942, we 
had already supplied 54,000 trained personnel to the Army. By 
June, 1944, we had turned out 75,000 trainees of whom 63,000 
joined the technical branches of the Defence Services and 3,000 
went to the ordnance factories. I am sure you will agree that 
this is no mean achievement having regard to the period within 
which it has been accomplished. 

As I said this Technical Training Scheme was started to meet 
the needs of the Army which had arisen out of the war. The war, 
as everybody can see, is coming to a close, and the demand for 
technical training which came for the Army will abate. 

In view of the situation that will arise at the end of the 
war there are two questions that arise for consideration. The 
first is : What are we to do for those who have already been 
trained, and who have been serving the Army, but who will 
soon be discharged from the Army and would be waiting for 
employment ? The second question is : What are we going to do 
with this Technical Training Scheme ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


183 


POST-WAR EMPLOYMENT OF SKILLED WORKERS 183 

Some people have formed the conclusion that Government 
have decided to liquidate the Technical Training Scheme. This 
is altogether untrue. It is true that Government has closed some 
of the training centres. We have now 170 training centres with a 
capacity to train about 32,000 trainees, in place of 400 training 
centres with a capacity to train 45,000 trainees which we had 
in 1942. This is due to various causes, foremost among which 
are two. One is the decreased intake of the Army. The other is 
the heavy cost of maintaining small centres. 

Government’s Intention 

These steps only show that what Government has done is to 
make necessary adjustments called for by the exigencies of the 
situation. They do not indicate any intention on the part of the 
Government to liquidate the Technical Training Scheme. If such 
was the intention of the Government, the Government need 
not have constituted this Committee. No plan for the future 
development of the country can be deemed to be complete which 
docs not provide for technical and scientific training. This is the 
age of Machine and it is only those countries in which technical 
and scientific training has risen to the highest pitch that will 
survive in the struggle that will commence when the war is 
over, for maintaining decent standards of living for their people. 
The Government of India is not oblivious to these considerations 
and would like to sec the Technical Training Scheme not only 
maintained but extended all over the country and become a 
permanent part of the country’s educational system. 

Industry Should Absorb Trainees 

While this is the objective of the Government, the success of the 
Scheme must depend upon the possibilities of the trainees getting 
employment. If the trainees, after they are trained, fail to get 
employment, then the Technical Training Scheme is doomed to 
failure. The answer to this question must entirely depend upon 
the attitude of the Industry to the trainees coming out from the 
training centres. The whole fate of the Scheme depends upon 
it. If the Industry refuses to employ the trainees it is obvious 
that nobody is going to bother about technical training, and the 
training centres will have to be closed down. This unfortunate 
consequence can be averted only if civil industries were to show 
eagerness to absorb our trainees. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


184 


184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Out of the 6,000 surplus trainees, civil industry has only 
taken 3,000. Indeed, they prefer to employ untrained workmen 
in the expectation that they will acquire the necessary skill and 
training in the course of employment or as apprentices. This 
reluctance to employ the trainees from our technical training 
centres may be due to various causes. I have heard of complaints 
that our training is inadequate. Civil industry insists on their 
technical personnel possessing a higher degree of skill than can 
be provided by our Scheme, in which we attempted — no doubt 
under the pressure of war — to give technical training in 8 months 
which before the war took 5 years. 

I am, however, satisfied that it is not at all necessary that a 
training scheme should run the full length of a five-year course 
in order to satisfy the requirements of civil industry. Experience 
gained by wartime technical training schemes in other countries 
shows that with intensive training semi-skilled men can be 
quickly trained for most industries. 

Industry’s Responsibility 

If, therefore, the training imparted under the Technical Training 
Scheme is supplemented by further ‘biased’ training, the final 
product should be acceptable to civil industry. I am, however, 
prepared to admit that there are faults in our Training Scheme. 
I am also prepared to accept any reasonable changes that may be 
suggested to make our trainees passable to Industry. But unless 
Industry agrees to absorb our trainees, there is no hope of a 
technical training scheme being made a success in this country. 
Industry therefore should note that a very heavy responsibility 
lies on its shoulders. 

You, gentlemen, know the needs of industry better than I 
do. All I can say is, that if the Scheme is to succeed it must 
have the cooperation of employers and workers in determining 
its future. We have no time to lose or else we may find that we 
have only won the war, but done nothing for the peace. 

As I have already said we have two questions to deal with : 
(1) To find employment for trainees who will be discharged 
from the Army after the war is over and for trainees who are 
completing the prescribed courses of training, (2) To revise 
the scheme for technical training as a part of the Post-War 
Plan of Industrial Reconstruction. These are two distinct 
questions and we propose to tackle them separately. That is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


185 


POST-WAR EMPLOYMENT OF SKILLED WORKERS 185 

why we have thought it desirable to proceed by two stages. 
Relevant to the second stage is the question : What changes can 
be made in our Technical Training Scheme to make it serve fully 
and completely the present-day needs of civil industry. It involves 
the consideration of the long-term policy, of providing trained 
technical personnel for the postwar industrial development of 
the country. 

Employment of Skilled Workers 

On the other hand the problem we have to consider as relevant 
to the first stage is to find ways and means for the rehabilitation 
of the thousands of our skilled workers, turned out by our 
training centres, now serving in the Army but who will be 
soon thrown out of employment at the close of the war. Our 
expectation is that Industry should not find it difficult to take 
over these men, especially, as we hope that there will be a 
post-war expansion of civil industry and a consequent increase 
in the demand for men technically trained. 

The immediate problem before us is : How to fit them to 
our peacetime industrial structure, we want to examine the 
difficulties connected with it and to plan to meet them well in 
advance. To accomplish success in this we have to see what 
further training and what additions and modifications in our 
training syllabuses, or introduction of subsidiary courses are 
necessary in order to make our trainees more acceptable to 
existing industries. The results of your deliberations will 
determine what future progress we can make in the next stage. 
The two stages are closely connected and the second is no less 
important than the first. 

I do not wish to take more of your time as I know you have 
a heavy agenda. But before I close I should like to say how 
important it is that we should have an adequate supply of skilled 
personnel if we are to plan a brighter future for our country. It 
is only by tripartite cooperation between Government, employers 
and workers that we can hope to develop a technical training 
scheme on sound lines. I would here make a special appeal to 
employers and industrialists. Their specialised knowledge and 
experience is invaluable but no less is their future co-operation 
in maintaining any technical training scheme that may be set 
up by Government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


186 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

One word more and I will close. Is unemployment to be the 
fate of the trainees who have gone to the Army and who will 
before long be returning to civil life ? Is that to be reward of 
the services they have rendered and the risks they have taken ? 
I am sure we shall not fail them. If we neglect them, they will 
constitute a powerful centre of discontent in industry. Suitably 
accommodated in civil life after the war, they will help to give 
stability to industry. They will bring to civil industry the sense 
of discipline which they have acquired in the Army. It is for you 
to say what measures Government must take to re-condition 
them for civil employment. I can assure you Government will 
not only be grateful to you for your advice but will do its best 
to give effect to such measures as may be found reasonable and 
practicable. 

Committee’s Discussions 

Later the Committee discussed various problems relating to 
technical training and emphasised the importance of improving 
educational standards of technical trainees. Mr. S. Lall, Joint 
Secretary, Labour Department, presided. 

k k k 

*Visit To Employment Exchange 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, who arrived in Calcutta on August 23, 
inspected the Calcutta Employment Exchange, accompanied 
by Mr. S. Lall, Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
Department of Labour, and formerly Deputy High Commissioner 
for india in London. 

The Labour Member discussed various matters relating to 
the operation of the Employment Exchange Scheme in Calcutta 
and the working of the National Service (Technical Personnel) 
Ordinance with Mr. A. Hughes, Labour Commissioner with 
the Government of Bengal. There was also a discussion on 
Government of India’s policy to close down technical training 
centres as far as it affected Bengal. 

Dr. Ambedkar saw a large number of workmen who had come 
to the Exchange for registration. Mr. Hughes and Mr. Bennett 
(Manager of the Exchange) explained the process of registration 
and the card index system. 

*Indian Information, September 15, 1944, p. 278. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


187 


POST-WAR EMPLOYMENT OF SKILLED WORKERS 187 

Rise In Employment Figures 

The Labour member noted that there was a progressive rise 
in the figures of men registered for and placed in employment 
through the Exchange. He was informed that according to the 
latest available figures 1,029 ex-trainees of the Technical Training 
Scheme had been registered at the Employment Exchange and 
out of this number 388 were placed in employment. The total 
number of technical personnel registered at the Exchange from 
January, 1944, to July 31, 1944, was 2,264 and the number of 
those placed in employment in the same period was 537. 

Dr. Ambedkar and party were also shown a chart giving 
up-to-date information about the progress of Technical Training 
Scheme in Bengal. He was informed that there were 24 centres 
with a training capacity of 4,164 in addition to 15 civil centres 
with a training capacity of 2,270. Seventeen of these centres were 
technical institutes and two belonged to industrial undertakings. 
Up to July 31, 1944, 2,540 trainees who had passed out of 
these training centres were posted to civil industry. The Labour 
Member also visited the Government of India press and the 
central stationery office. 

Later in the day he addressed members of the trade Union 
Advisory Committee set up by the Government of Bengal and 
discussed the working of orders recently issued by the National 
Service Labour Tribunal. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


188 


36 

* Plenary Session of Tripartite Labour 
Conference 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar’s Address 

Presiding over the sixth plenary session of the Tripartite 
Labour Conference which began in New Delhi on October 27, 
the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour member, Government 
of India, suggested changes in the constitution of the Conference 
to remove organisational weaknesses discovered during its two 
years’ existence. 

He suggested that the subjects coming within the purview 
of the Conference should be divided into two lists : List 1 to 
contain all general subjects, such as terms and conditions of 
employment, labour legislation and questions relating to social 
security, and List 2 to include all concrete questions relating to 
labour welfare and administration of labour laws. 

Here is the full text of Dr. Ambedkar’s speech : 

“It would be a very easy and very pleasant task indeed for a 
Chairman if his opening address was to be nothing more than 
a word of welcome and a word of gratitude to the delegates 
assembled. Convention requires that a Chairman must say 
something more than that. For a Chairman of a Labour Conference 
such as ours, it is not an easy matter to select his theme. This 
is not a Conference of philosophers. He cannot therefore play the 
part of the pedant and get over without committing himself to 
anything by indulging in intellectual acrobatics which have no 
social import. This is not a Conference for the reconstruction of 
society, and the Chairman cannot fill his opening address with 
a disquisition on capitalism, socialism, communism and other 
ideologies. 

“This Conference is not a meeting of an ethical society, and the 
Chairman cannot choke it up with appeals to righteousness to stir up 


Indian Information, November 15, 1944, pp. 590-97. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


189 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 189 

emotions. I do not know what is the best pattern for an opening 
address by a Chairman to the Labour Conference. For the purposes 
of this session I propose to get over the difficulty by using this 
opportunity of addressing you on matters of practical importance. 
I feel sure that you will not regard it as inappropriate. 

“There were two matters in particular which I wanted to cover 
which must be of interest to members of the Conference. Firstly, 
to give you a survey of the action taken by the Government on 
various questions which have been discussed by the Conference 
and the Standing Labour Committee and secondly, to refer to 
the defects in the constitution and procedure of the Tripartite 
Organisation. 

“The first subject proved too large for this address. It would 
have taken a good lot of your time which having regard to 
your Agenda, you could ill-afford to give. I therefore thought 
of presenting you a separate Memorandum (Printed with this 
speech) on the subject. You are already in possession of that 
memorandum. It may be taken as part of my address. 

Tripartite Organisation 

“There remains the other subject for me to deal with, namely, 
the question regarding the organisation and procedure of this 
Conference. We have had two years’ experience of the working 
of the Plenary Conference and the Standing Labour Committee. 
That experience cannot be called long. But short as it is, it has 
revealed some weaknesses in the organisation we have set up. 
The following appear to me rather serious : — 

(1) There is no clear cut division of functions between the 
Conference and the Standing Labour Committee. It is 
not that one is a deliberative body and the other is an 
executive body. Both are deliberative. 

(2) There is overlaping in the work they do. The subjects 
discussed by both are of the same nature. 

(3) There being no clear cut distinction between general 
questions and concrete problems, the discussions in the 
Conference as well as in the Committee become too general 
to be of much use, even concrete problems are treated as 
though they were general. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(4) There is no machinery to undertake the task of examining 
special problems and reporting upon them. It is an 
important function and there must be some machinery 
charged with such a function. 

(5) There is no machinery to study and advise on problems 
of labour welfare, industry by industry. 

Separate Secretariat 

“A second weakness in the organisation has also been pointed 
out by some members of the Conference. It relates to the non- 
existence of a separate Secretariat for the Labour Conference. 
It is suggested that there should be a separate Secretariat to 
take over the following functions namely: — 

(a) Preparation for meetings (i.e., circulation of papers, 
informing members of the dates fixed, agenda, etc.); 

(b) Preparation of records of the proceedings ; 

(c) Propaganda by issue of leaflets and tours ; 

(d) Financial administration such as payment to staff and 
T.A. bills of non-Government members attending the 
Conference ; 

(e) Research and collection of information to serve as a basis 
of discussion and recommendation ; and 

(f) Check-up of the action taken by Government. 

“There are two other matters which have given ground for 
complaint. One of these relates to the preparation of the Agenda 
of the Labour Conference and the Standing Labour Committee. 
The existing procedure in the matter of the Agenda is said to be 
defective in two respects. First, members of the Conference and 
the Committee are not entitled to have matters in which they 
are interested placed on the Agenda at their will. The second 
defect is that the memoranda which accompany the Agenda reach 
members so late that they have no time to study and be prepared 
to make their contribution to the discussion of the subject. 

“Another matter which has given rise to complaint 
relates to the representation of the different parties on 
the Conference and on the Standing Labour Committee. 
The employers have stated that it is objectionable on the 
part of Government to reserve three seats for employers to 
be nominated by Government. It is their contention that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


191 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 191 

the Employers’ Federation of India and the All-India Organisation 
of Industrial Employers are fully representative of the employer 
class in India and that therefore the provision for appointing 
more employers’ representatives by nomination is unnecessary. 
The method of representation of labour is also said to suffer from 
one defect, namely, that among those who represent labour there 
is none who belongs actually to the labouring classes. 

“You would naturally want me to tell you what action 
Government is prepared to take in this connection. I am 
anxious on my part to do whatever is possible to see that the 
Labour Conference functions properly and does not suffer in 
its working by reason of any serious fault in its mechanism. 
You will, however, realise that these are matters which require 
exploration and examination before any definite conclusion can 
be arrived at. Of these weaknesses some have been examined 
by Government and decisions have been arrived at. There are 
some which have not been examined as yet. I will first refer to 
those about which Government have after consideration come 
to a decision. They include the question of separate Secretariat, 
Agenda and Representation. 

Only An Advisory Body 

“The demand for a separate Secretariat for the Labour Conference 
is, I think, based on the analogy of the I.L.O. Government think 
that there is a fundamental difference between the I.L.O. and our 
Tripartite Organisation. It lies in the fact that the I.L.O. is an 
idependent organisation created by the Peace Treaty of Versailles. 
Its conventions and recommendations place definite obligations on 
all State-Members and failure to fulfill those obligations involves 
certain definite international liabilities. It is regulated by its 
own constitution and if is not subject to any outside authority. 
In addition to this the I.L.O. has its own finances and is not 
dependent upon any other state or Department for meeting its 
liabilities when it chooses to undertake any new function. 

“Our Tripartite Organisation is not independent in the 
same sense as the I.L.O. is. It has no independent finances 
and it cannot have any. It is only an advisory body which 
is constituted to advise the Government of India on such 
matters as are referred to it for advice. It cannot take 
decision. To allow it to do so would be to permit it to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

usurp the functions of the Legislature. Having regard to these 
differences, it is obvious that an independent Secretariat for the 
Labour Conference will create friction between Government and 
the Conference. 

“It is true that the efficiency of the I.L.O. is derived largely 
from its Secretariat and its capacity to turn out good material. 
Nonetheless the Government of India feel that all the functions of 
that Secretariat with the exception of “Research and Information” 
are such as can be discharged efficiently by the Labour 
Secretariat of the Government of India. As regards ‘Research 
and Information” the Labour Department have certain proposals 
under consideration for reorganizing its activities which inter 
alia will set up necessary machinery for research and collection 
of information on labour and allied questions. For those reasons 
the Government of India do not at present favour the idea of a 
separate Secretariat for the Tripartite Organisation. 

Right To Fix Agenda 

“On the question of the Agenda, Government have considered 
the matter. The decision of the Government is that they cannot 
surrender the right to fix the Agenda of the Conference. The 
Conference is not a Legislature. It is an advisory body and 
Government must determine what are the matters on which 
they need advice. 

“There is another reason why Government cannot surrender 
the right to frame the Agenda for the Conference. It is not 
possible for Government to accept an obligation to place a subject 
on the Agenda unless Government are in a position to furnish 
the Conference factual statements which would help and guide 
members in their deliberations and have had time to examine 
the matter sufficiently enough to be able to express their own 
view. It is not possible for Government to be ready with such 
statements without sufficient notice. But, subject to their right 
to frame the Agenda, Government are prepared to revise the 
procedure. 

“According to present procedure the Labour Department 
invites suggestions from Governments, and Employers and 
Workers Associations after the conclusion of a meeting 
from which items are selected for an Agenda for the next 
meeting. There is no consultation between Government 
and the Conference or Committee before a decision is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


193 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 193 

taken by Government in selecting items for the Agenda. Under 
the revised procedure Government will be ready to receive 
suggestions for the Agenda whenever Government, and Employers 
and Workers Associations may desire to send them in. In case 
they fail, Government will invite suggestions from delegates at 
each meeting. 

“The other change which Government are prepared to make 
is that while the final decision will be that of the Government, 
all suggestions received for the framing of the Agenda will be 
placed for discussion at each meeting. This will give Government 
the opportunity to consult the wishes of the members and the 
members will have the opportunity to express their preference. 
I am sure you will agree that this is a great improvement on 
the present position. 

“On the question of the composition of the Conference I admit 
that there is much force in the suggestions which have been 
made. If the two employers’ organisations are fully representative, 
as they claim to be, obviously there is no justification for 
nominating employers. In the same way, it is necessary to see 
that the working classes should have not only their problems 
of employment and welfare considered but that they should be 
trained to do their things for themselves. This can be done by 
allowing working men and working women to participate in all 
Labour Conferences. You must have been aware of the fact that 
recently when the Coalmines Welfare Committee was organised 
Government took the step of appointing one working man and 
one working woman in the coalmines to represent the working 
classes on the Committee. 

Constitution : Some Suggestions 

“Government are therefore not averse to making appropriate 
changes in the composition of the Conference. At the same 
time, Government feel that matters relating to changes in the 
composition of the Conference are not very urgent and we could 
well afford to postpone their consideration for a while. As I said 
in the course of the first Tripartite Conference, we must not keep 
on pulling out the plant every now and then to see whether it 
has taken any roots. This is a way to kill the plant. 

“I will now turn to the weaknesses in the constitution of the 
Conference. This is a weakness which Government admit is a serious 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

one and must be remedied. But Government had not arrived at 
any conclusion. Government would welcome any suggestions that 
you may like to make. May I place before you my views on the 
matter ? I would suggest the following changes in the constitution: 

(1) To divide the subjects which come within the scope of the 
conference into two lists. List I will contain all general 
subjects such as (a) terms and conditions of employment; 
(b) Labour Legislation; and (c) questions relating to 
social security. List II will include all concrete questions 
(a) relating to labour welfare and (b) relating to the 
administration of labour laws. Subjects in List I will be 
assigned to the Plenary Conference, which I would propose 
should be called by the simple name Labour Conference 
dropping the words ‘Plenary and Tripartite’ which has 
made the name too mouthful. 

(2) To create a new body to be called Labour Welfare 
Committee and assign to it subjects following in List II. 

(3) The composition of the Labour Welfare committee will be 
as follows : (a) members elected by the Standing Labour 
Committees ; (b) one representative of the Employer and 
one representative of the employees drawn from organised 
industries and municipal and other bodies employing 
labour; (c) persons nominated by Government from non- 
officials; (d) persons representing Indian States; and (e) 
representatives of Provincial Governments. 

(4) There will be no change in the Standing Labour Committee 
so far as its composition is concerned. Only there will be 
a change in its function. It will not be a deliberative body. 
It will be the agent of the Conference and will perform 
such of the duties assigned to it by the Conference from 
time to time. 

“Under this arrangement there will be three organs : the 
Conference, the Standing Committee and the Welfare Committee. 

“The functions and powers of the Conference will be as follows : 

(1) To make recommendations to Government on matters 
relating to terms and conditions of employment and all 
questions of social security which might be placed on the 
Agenda. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


195 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 195 

(2) To refer any such matter or any part of such matter to 
the Standing Labour Committee with a direction : (a) 
to make a report back to the Conference, or (b) make a 
recommendation to the Government. 

(3) To appoint an ad hoc committee to consider any matter on 
the Agenda with a director to report: (a) to the Conference : 
(b) to the Standing Labour Committee with a view to 
making recommendation to Government and making a 
further report to the Conference. 

The functions and powers of the Standing Labour Committee 
will be such as may be Conferred upon it by the Conference. It 
will be an agency of the conference and will derive its authority 
from the Conference and will, with the exception mentioned 
below, conduct no business other than that which has been 
delegated to it by the Conference. It will, however, be open to 
Government to refer a matter on which they want an early 
opinion direct to the Standing Labour Committee for report either 
to the Conference or the Government. But ordinarily any report 
or recommendation of the Standing Labour Committee should 
be made to the Conference. 

“The powers of the Standing Labour Committee will be : 

(i) to make recommendations or reports to the Conference 
on matters referred to it by the Conference ; 

(ii) to make recommendations to Government in a case in 
which the Conference has directed the Standing Labour 
Committee to report to Government; and 

(iii) to appoint ad hoc Committee to consider any matter on 
the Agenda with directions to report to the Standing 
Labour Committee. 

Labour Welfare Committee 

“The functions of the Labour Welfare Committee will be confined 
to matters relating to Labour Welfare and administration of 
Labour Legislation. Its powers will be to consider all such matters 
placed before it and to make recommendations to Government. 

“These are my proposals for removing the organisational 
weaknesses that have been discovered. They are put before you in my 
personal capacity as a Member of this Conference. No greater weight 
attaches to them though the approach, I may say so, seems to me to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be sound, I propose to have these proposals examined 
departmentally in the Government of India. If they are found 
to be workable the conclusions of Government will be placed 
before you for your deliberation. This organisational grievance 
I regard as a very serious matter and I promise to treat it as 
a matter of urgency. 

“I have said all that need be said on matters relating to 
the Conference, reconstituting the various bodies which form 
parts of it, recasting its procedure and reforming its personnel. 
I hope you will agree that Government are keen on improving 
its efficiency and enhancing its utility. 

Labour Legislation 

“There are two other matters to which I would like to make a 
reference. The Legislative Programme of the Labour Department 
for the coming session of the Assembly comprises three Bills : 
Factories Amendment Bill, otherwise known as Bill for Holidays 
with Pay : Trade Unions Amendment Act which seeks to provide 
for the recognition of Trade Unions ; and Payment of Wages 
Amendment Bill. The first two have been considered by the 
Conference. The third Bill is a new bill and is, according to 
our procedure, laid before you for discussion. 

“As you are aware the 26th Session of the International 
Labour Conference was held at Philadelphia in U.S.A. in April 
last. There was an Indian Delegation which attended the session. 
It was led by Sir Samuel Runganadhan, High Commissioner for 
India in London. The Government of India were represented 
by the Hon’ble Mr. H. C. Prior, C.S.I., CLE., I.C.S., Secretary 
to the Labour Department, Mr. D. G. Mulherkar represented 
the Employers and Messrs. Jamnadas Mehta, M.L.A., 
Mr. Aftab Ali and Mr. R. R. Bhole represented the Employees. 
You will, I am sure, join with me in recognizing publicly the 
splendid part that they played and the great work they did 
at the Conference. The delegation has made a report which is 
placed before you. I am sure you will find it both interesting 
and instructive. 

“There is nothing that I can usefully add. I will therefore 
conclude with thanks for your having given me a patient 
hearing. Let us begin the work which is awaiting us.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


197 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 197 

Dr. Ambedkar’s Memorandum 

An indication of the action taken by the Central Government 
subsequent to the discussions at the Tripartite Labour Conference 
and its Standing Labour Committee is given by Dr. Ambedkar, 
in the Memorandum placed before the Labour conference. Among 
the subjects covered by the Memorandum are : Settlement of 
trade disputes, Labour welfare, Food supplies to industrial labour, 
Fair wage clause in Government contracts, Labour Officers in 
industrial undertakings, Employment exchanges, Industrial 
statistics, Involuntary unemployment, Labour representation, 
Social Security, dearness Allowance and Industrial canteens. 

The consensus of opinion at the third meeting of the Standing 
Labour committee in May, 1943, was that the Government of 
India should proceed with the establishment of employment 
exchanges. A proposal to prohibit advertising for technical 
personnel was also put forward by the Central Government and 
was generally approved. Both these proposals have been given 
effect to. Exchanges have been opened at a number of centres 
to provide employment to technical personnel. 

General opinion at this meeting was also in favour of (1) a 
certain degree of continuity being maintained in the adjudication 
machinery, and (2) the whole policy regarding trade disputes 
being laid down de novo and a new Act being enacted in place 
of the existing Trade Disputes Act, 1929, encouraging internal 
conciliation. While proposals for fresh legislation are under 
consideration the Central Government have brought item 
(1) to the notice of the Provincial Governments who have, as 
far as possible, maintained continuity. Government have under 
consideration proposals for fresh legislation on the question of 
trade disputes. 

Bevin Training Scheme 

Another question which arose out of this meeting was 
that organised labour should be associated with National 
Service Labour Tribunals for selecting Bevin trainees and 
that Tribunals should consult prominent trade Unions 
in their area at the time of selection of candidates. This 
method of selection is under consideration for selecting 
trainees. On the labour welfare side the committee’s 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

suggestion that the Welfare Fund should be built up for housing, 
education, etc., is under Government’s consideration, but, the 
Memorandum says, there are great difficulties in divising any 
practical scheme. 

At the second meeting of the Standing Labour Committee 
in January, 1943, a resolution was adopted recommending 
distribution of food supplies to industrial labour through 
employers’ grain shops, associations of approved and recognised 
trade unions or other representatives of employees in the working 
of such shops, encouragement of cooperative grain shops to 
industrial labour, etc., etc. These recommendations are brought 
to the notice of the appropriate authorities. With the introduction 
of rationing in large cities and towns and its gradual extension to 
smaller towns, the measures recommended are now out of date. 
But the rationing authorities use the agency of the employers’ 
grain shops as much as possible. 

Fair Wage Clause 

The Memoradum further refers to a fair measure of agreement 
reached at the third Standing Labour Committee meeting in 
May, 1943, on the provisions of fair wage clause in Government 
contracts. It is stated that the Central Government have already 
“a fair wage” clause in the Central P.W.D. contracts. 

In their own undertakings, the Central Government are 
giving effect to the recommendation that labour officers should be 
appointed as far as possible for all large industrial undertakings. 
Provincial and State Governments and private employers have 
also been requested to do so and, according to a report received 
from the Indian Mining Association, they have appointed 
personnel officers. 

The Committee’s suggestion that matters under dispute should 
be specified in the order referring dispute to adjudication, and 
the defence of India Rule 81 (a) has been amended accordingly. 
The attention of the Provincial Governments has been drawn 
to the desirability of making a provision in the adjudication 
order that workers whose conduct is under investigation or 
who are immediately connected with the dispute shall not be 
discharged by the employer except for misconduct unconnected 
with the dispute or with the approval of the adjudicator 
or other prescribed authority. The question of collecting 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


199 


PLENARY SESSION OF TRIPARTITE LABOUR CONFERENCE 199 

statistics of wages and earnings and hours of work for selected 
industries on an all-India basis is under active consideration. 

Involuntary Unemployment 

The fifth Labour Conference at its session in September, 1943, 
unanimously agreed that some kind of relief was necessary for 
cases of involuntary unemployment of workers due to shortage 
of coal, raw materials, etc. The Central Government have 
issued a circular letter to Provincial Governments advocating 
the adoption of principles set out therein, for grant of relief, 
and this letter has also been brought to the notice of the States 
concerned. At this session Labour had put in a strong plea 
for adequate representation in legislatures, local bodies and 
statutory committees, etc. The matter is under consideration 
and the Memorandum points out that labour is represented 
on “Central” official committees such as the Reconstruction 
Policy Committees, Central Health Survey and Development 
Committee and Central Food Advisory Committee. 

Wages And Earnings 

This session adopted a resolution for the setting up of a 
machinery to investigate the question of wages and earnings, 
employment and housing and social conditions generally 
with a view to providing adequate materials on which to 
plan a policy of social security for labour. In pursuance of 
this resolution a Labour Investigation Committee has been 
constituted and its report is expected to be received by the 
middle of 1945. 

The Memorandum points out that Provincial Governments 
and States, and employers and workers associations were 
consulted about introduction of standing orders in industrial 
concerns employing 250 or more persons, and that there was 
general opposition to take statutory powers under the Defence 
of India Rules. It is proposed to enact permanent legislation 
on the subject at an early date. In the meantime the two 
all-India bodies of employers have been requested to frame 
standing orders forthwith without waiting for legislation to 
be completed. A memorandum designed to be of assistance 
to the employer in framing the Standing Orders has also 
been circulated. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


200 


200 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The discussions of Statutory Wage Control at the fourth 
Standing Labour Committee meeting resulted in a fair measure 
of agreement regarding the form of machinery for the regulation 
of wages. The question as to what industries may be covered by 
legislation was on the Agenda of the present session of labour 
conference. 

Industrial Canteens 

Committees have been set up in four Provinces, i.e., Bombay, the 
United Provinces, Bengal and Bihar, to investigate the question of 
standardisation of definitions of trades and the recommendations 
of these committees are awaited. As suggested at this meeting 
representatives of labour are associated with the Central Exchange 
through the Employment Committees constituted for advising 
National Service Labour Tribunals in regard to the administration 
of Employment Exchanges. 

The Memorandum further refers to the steps taken by the 
central Government to encourage workers’ canteens in industrial 
concerns. They have sanctioned rent-free accommodation and free 
furniture and cooking utensils in canteens run by Government or 
by the workers or by both jointly and, under certain conditions, 
even in the canteens run by contractors. Supply of rationed 
foodstuffs to canteens outside the rations has also been sanctioned. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


201 


37 


* The Factories (Second Amendment) Bill 
@ Holidays with Pay for Factory Workers 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move: 

“That the bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, 
(Second Amendment) be referred to a select Committee consisting 
of Nawab siddique Ali Khan, Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq 
Piracha, Mr. R. R. Gupta, Mr. A. C. Inskip, Sir Vithal N. 
Chandavarkar, Rao Bahadur, N. Siva Raj, Mr. N. M. Joshi, 

Mr. D. S. Joshi and the Mover and that the number of members 
whose presence shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the 
Committee shall be five.” 

The provisions of the Bill fall into two parts and I think 
it will be desirable from the point of view of simplicity in 
the matter of presentation if I explained to the House the 
provisions of the Bill in two separate forms. 

Part I of the Bill deals with compensatory holidays for 
the loss of compulsory holidays. Members will realise that in 
section 35 of the Factories Act it is obligatory upon the owner or 
manager of the factory to give one compulsory holiday to every 
adult worker in the factory. This provision which is contained 
in section 35 is subject to the provisions contained in sections 
43 and 44. Section 43 and 44 provide that the Inspector of 
factories may permit exemptions being granted to the manager 
of the factory or factory owner from the obligations imposed 
by section 35. The view that is taken is this that when such 
exemptions should be granted, they ought to be compensated 
by other holidays, equivalent in number. Health and efficiency 
of the worker requires that he should have the requisite 
number of holidays which are prescribed by law. The Act, as 
it stands, makes no such provisions for compensatory holidays. 
Consequently, clause 2 of the Bill has been introduced for 
the purpose of removing this lacuna. It will now be open for 
the Provincial Governments to make rules subject to certain 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV, 1st Nov. 1944, pp. 89-91. 

@ Titles for paragraphs are taken from the Indian Information, 15th November 
1944, pp. 600-01. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

adjustments that wherever exemptions have been granted under 
section 35, compensatory holidays of the equivalent amount 
shall be granted to the workmen. This is the first part of the 
provisions of the Bill. 

Labour Convention 

Coming to the second part of the Bill, the provisions contained 
therein deal with the question of holidays with pay. It might be 
desirable at the outset to state to the House the origin of this 
part of the Bill. Many members of the House will recall that in 
1936 the International Labour Conference passed a convention 
relating to the holidays with pay. The Government of India, which 
was represented at that International Labour Conference, was not 
prepared to accept the convention and to ratify it. A Government 
Resolution was moved in the Assembly on the 26th July, 1937, 
proposing the non-acceptance of the convention. The Resolution 
was carried. But while the Government did not find itself in a 
position to ratify the convention, the Member in charge of the 
Resolution said that the government would explore and examine 
the possibilities of giving effect to the convention, if not wholly, 
at any rate, in part and undertook to have consultation with the 
Provincial Governments and all the Associations representing 
the employers and employees to find out to what extent there 
was a general agreement in the matter of this convention. Part 
II of the provisions which relate to holidays with pay are the 
result of this examination and exchange of views which have 
been going on over a considerable number of years. 

Perennial Factories 

Turning to the Bill itself, it will be seen that the Bill applies to 
factories and it applies not to all the factories, but to perennial 
factories only. The Bill undoubtedly is limited in its scope as 
compared to the provisions contained in the convention which 
was adopted in 1936. With regard to the other provisions, I think 
it will be better if I divide my observations in four parts so as 
to cover separately the four points which legislation concerning 
holidays with pay must necessarily deal with. 

1. Length of holiday. 2. Qualifying conditions for a right to a holiday. 
3. Limiting conditions. 4. Pay during holiday. With regard to the first 
point, namely length of a holiday, this is a matter which is dealt with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


203 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 203 

in the new section 49-B which the Bill proposes to add to the 
Factories Act. According to this section, the total holiday is to 
be on seven consecutive days for a worker who has put in a 
continuous service for one year. It might be asked as to why 
we have taken seven days and not more. The reply to that is 
that in fixing this period of seven days, we have followed the 
provisions contained in the Geneva convention of 1936 which 
laid down six days as the limit of the holiday. To that we have 
added a seventh day which is a compulsory weekly rest granted 
to a worker under section 35 of the Factories Act. 

With regard to the question of qualifying conditions laying 
down as to when a worker will be entitled to claim a seven days 
holiday, the provisions contained in the Bill are as follows. As 
a matter of fact, there is really only one condition and that is 
that the worker must have put in a period of twelve months 
continuous service. There is no other condition. With regard to the 
question as to what is continuous service of twelve months, the 
bill provides for what are called interruptions and declares mat 
certain interruptions shall not invalidate the claim for holidays 
with pay. The interruptions which are mentioned in the Bill are 
interruptions arising out of sickness, accident, authorised leave, 
lock-out period and a strike period provided the strike is legal. 

Involuntary Unemployment 

There is also another provision in the bill which relates to 
the same subject and that is the question of involuntary 
unemployment caused by the desire of the factory owner to 
close the factory. We have limited that to a period of 30 days. 
If the involuntary unemployment caused by the factory manager 
does not extend beyond 30 days, then that would not invalidate 
the claim of the worker for his right to holidays with pay. It 
might be necessary perhaps to mention why we have prescribed 
only 30 days. The explanation is this. Holidays with pay must 
necessarily take into account the ability of the manager or the 
factory owner to pay and the view that is taken in the Bill is 
that if the manager or the factory owner is obliged to close his 
factory for more than 30 days, then I think it is legitimate to 
presume that he has really not been prospering as well as he 
ought to and that he is, therefore, not in a position to pay the 
cost for holidays with pay. But if the involuntary period does 
not exceed 30 days, then the presumption is that he is still 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


204 


204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

able to bear the cost and should bear. The Bill also provides for 
limited condition with regard to holidays with pay and that limited 
condition relates to the question of accumulation of holidays. The 
Bill provides that a worker who has been qualified to earn his 
holidays may be entitled to accumulate holidays for two years 
and that is for a total period of 14 days. 

Pay during Holidays 

Coming to the question of pay during holidays, there are several 
points to which I should like to draw the attention of the House. 
The first is that although the total period of the holiday is seven, 
only six are declared to be paid holidays. The seventh, as I said, 
is really a day of weekly rest provided under section 35. With 
regard to the seventh day, the Bill does not make it obligatory 
upon the employer to pay for it. But at the same time the bill 
does not take away the right of the employee to demand payment, 
if as a result of his contract of service that holiday was due to 
him as a paid holiday. It is really left to be governed by the 
contract of service. 

The third point is with regard to the payment to be made for 
these six holidays. The rule that we have adopted in the Bill is 
a rough, and I believe, an equitable rule and it is this : that a 
worker is to be paid at a rate equivalent to the average of his 
earnings during the three preceding months barring overtime. 
I believe that is an equitable principle. The Bill also provides 
that in order to enable a workman to take his holiday, some 
facilities should be given him in order to have some cash with 
him on the day on which he proposes to start on his holiday. 
Consequently provision is made in the Bill that half the dues 
which are to be paid to the workman going on holiday shall be 
paid to him at the start. 

Another matter which is relevant to this, and is also 
importants, is this. The Bill proposes to exempt certain factories 
from its operation if it is found that a factory has a system 
of holidays with pay which is substantially similar to the one 
provided in the Bill and about whose satisfactory character the 
Provincial Government is able to certify. The object underlying 
this clause is that if there is a voluntary arrangement between the 
employer and the worker whereby the worker is given the same 
privileges which we are providing in the law, the view taken by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


205 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 205 

the Bill is that in so amicable an arrangement it is unnecessary 
for the law to enter. 

Sir, these are the main provisions of the Bill. There are two 
other matters to which I should like to make a reference before 
I sit down. The first is the question of a discharge of a workman 
by the employer to prevent him from earning his holiday. The 
second question is the employer inducing a workman not to take 
his holiday although he has earned it. These are questions which 
I frankly admit are not being provided for in the Bill. Not that 
Government are not aware that such questions may arise, but 
the view of Government is that at the present stage, at any 
rate, there is no reason to suppose that such contingencies will 
arise. If experience shows that such cases do become usual it 
would be time then to amend the Act to stop their recurrence. 
For the moment the view I hold is that the provisions of the Bill 
are sufficient for the purposes which it has in view, namely, to 
grant holidays with pay to factory workers. 

Sir, I move. 

•k "k "k 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My task has been 
considerably lightened by the fact that there has been general 
support given to the motion which I have made in regard to this 
Bill and therefore in the course of the reply which I propose to 
make to the debate, I shall be very brief. 

I had better say something straightaway with regard to the 
speech of my Honourable friend Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad. What 
I propose to say is this — that I really do not propose to say 
anything about what he has said and I hope we would not take 
it as an act of discourtesy to him, because what he has said, if 
I may say so, has really very little to do with the Bill which is 
under discussion. He has propounded a novel theory of solving 
the labour problem — namely, partnership. I am sure that we are 
greatly benefited by the elucidation which he has given of this 
new ideology, and I can assure him that when the problem of 
our constitutional structure comes before us for discussion what 
he has said undoubtedly would be a matter of great use and 
benefit not only to myself but to all those who will be engaged 
on that problem. 


Legislative Assembly Debates, Vol. IV, 7th November 1944, pp. 372-75. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Coming to the other speakers. I first propose to deal with the 
observation which fell from my friend Sir Vithal Chandavarkar. 
He referred to the Resolution which was moved by Sir Frank 
Noyce in this House with regard to the International Convention 
dealing with holidays with pay. I did not, if I may say so, succeed 
in catching exactly the point that he wanted to make by reference 
to that speech but I understood him to convey the fact that the 
Government of India had changed front. 

Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar : No, no. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That in 1936 
they were opposed to it, while now they are prepared to give 
recognition to the principle contained in that Convention. I do 
not think that there has been any change in the position of the 
Government of India. I have read the debate with some care and 
attention and I am quite satisfied that the reason which led the 
Government of the day to oppose the Convention was because 
of the understanding that if a convention has to be recognised 
it must be recognised as a whole. It could not be recognised in 
part and the Government of India, as it was then advised, felt 
that it was impossible, having regard to the circumstances of 
this country, to accept the convention as a whole and although 
therefore they were prepared to accept the principle and also 
prepared to investigate the possibilities of applying it in some 
limited manner they could take no other course than the one 
which was open to them under the circumstances which then 
prevailed. 

Now, my friend Mr. Joshi has made some points in the course 
of his speech. Two of his points, I must admit, are points of 
substance. The first point that he made was that although we were 
limiting the scope of the Bill we have limited it to a factory and 
we have not agreed to extent the principle at least to an industry. 
As I said, I admit that this is a point of substance but I must at 
the same time point out that to have applied it to an industry 
means that it would be necessary for us to devise some method by 
which we could pool the resources of those concerns which come 
under one particular industry. Now, although as I said, I have 
the fullest sympathy with the point which he has made, it is not 
possible for us at the present moment, without any experience 
behind us, to work out a pool system by which all factories 
within a particular industry could be made to share the cost 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


207 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 207 

of broken holidays earned by different employees in different 
factories arising out of broken periods of service in different 
factories. And this is the reason why it has not been possible to 
make the thing applicable to industry as a whole. 

The second point which Mr. Joshi made was the complaint 
that the holiday period provided in the Act is too short. I also 
admit that there is considerable force in that 7 days is in fact 
too short a holiday but there again I am confronted with another 
difficulty, which difficulty is a difficulty which I am sure both 
Mr. Joshi as well as Sir Vithal Chandavarkar have to admit. 
The difficulty arises on account of the desultory character of 
our labour. Labour, as Mr. Joshi and Sir Vithal Chandavarkar 
both know, take long holidays for a variety of reasons and 
consequently the absenteeism which is prevalent on account of 
this habit does really complicate the matter very much. If our 
labour was induced or was trained to give continuous service 
in a factory for a large number of days than they have been 
doing now, I should be quite prepared to admit that the case for 
extension of the holiday beyond the period that we have fixed 
would undoubtedly be very strong but I hope that the fact that 
we have given seven days holiday would have its indirect effect 
on the labouring and working classes of this country who will 
realise that if they did render more continuous service than they 
have been doing, they would be making strong the case for the 
extension of the holiday beyond the period of seven days but as 
the situation stands, I think it would not be justifiable to go 
beyond the prescribed period of seven days which, if I may say 
so, is also the period which was recommended by the Convention. 

Then, Sir, another point that was made with regard to the 
same question was with relation to the application of the Act to 
non-perennial factories, a point that was made by my Honourable 
friend Prof. Ranga on the other side. To that point also my reply 
is the same, namely, that the provision for 7 days paid holiday 
is made to those workmen who are not getting a sufficiently long 
rest, if I may use that phrase. Now, a non-perennial factory is a 
factory where people do get long period of rest. It may be that 
it is a case of involuntary employment, but I am not looking 
at it from the point of view of employment or unemployment. 
So far as the Bill is concerned, we are looking at it from the 
point of view of rest and so far as the non-perennial factories 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


208 


208 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are concerned, the workmen certainly get a sufficiently long 
period of rest so that it cannot be said that in their case there 
is as much necessity for a paid holiday of 7 days as it is in the 
case of the perennial factories. 

Then, Sir Vithal Chandavarkar raised a point with regard to 
the words ‘at least’ in one of the amending clauses. He expressed 
the fear that having regard to the use of the words ‘at least’ in 
one of the amending clauses it would be possible for Provincial 
Governments to direct that the factory-owners may be compelled 
to give more than 7 days. Now, I would like to convey the 
assurance that has been given to me by my legal advisers that 
under the amended section, as it stands, it would not be possible 
for the Provincial Governments to compel an employer to give 
more than 7 days’ holiday. Another point which was made by Sir 
Vithal Chandavarkar was that this was a premature measure and 
that, in his opinion, this measure should come last ; certainly it 
should come, according to his judgment, not before the Sickness 
Insurance Act which Government is contemplating and thinking 
about. I personally beg to differ from and if I had time I would 
have given some arguments in support of my contention. I would 
invite him to read the observations of Professor Adarkar in his 
report on health insurance for industrial workers which occur 
on page 112 where he will find some very strong arguments 
which he has produced in order to show that the holidays with 
pay is a measure which is so integrally connected with sickness 
insurance if an order of precedence was to be framed it would 
be necessary to give priority to the measure relating to holidays 
with pay before social insurance. As I said, the report is now 
available to the Members of the Legislature and I will not 
take the time of the House in repeating what has been said by 
Professor Adarkar on this point. 

Then, Sir, another point which has been raised on both 
sides is the question whether a measure like this should be 
compulsory or voluntary. So far as the Bill is concerned, I think 
it strikes a very happy mean inasmuch as the Bill, while making 
obligatory by law to provide holidays with pay for workmen who 
render a certain length of service, has left it open for voluntary 
agreement between the employers and the employees. As 
Honourable Members must have seen, there is a clause in the 
Bill which says that if Government is satisfied that a measure 
of holidays with pay substantially similar to the one which 
has been contained in the provisions of this Bill is introduced 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


209 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 209 

voluntarily by an employer and the Government is satisfied of its 
efficacy, Government has been giving power to exempt a factory 
from the obligations in this Act. I find that the position in Great 
Britain is also similar in this matter. Under the British system, 
there is a Holidays with Pay Act of 1938 and 2,300,000 people 
are covered by it. The rest of them, namely, 5 millions, get it 
under voluntary agreement, not under the Act and 4,000,700 get 
under what is called a long-standing custom. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : Where is the provision whereby 
an employer can postpone giving that leave ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am coming to 
that. Now, Sir, one other point I wanted to deal with, as I said, 
was this compulsory versus voluntary. 

The other point that was raised by my friend Prof. Ranga 
and also by Mr. Chettiar was that we have made no specific 
provision against an employer entering into an unfair practice 
whereby he would discharge an employee in order to prevent 
him from earning his holiday. To that point I had referred in 
my opening speech when I made the motion and I said that 
while Government is aware that certain practices may develop, 
Government does not think that they ought to take any action 
straightway. Government would prefer to wait and watch and 
see which side resorts to what sort of stratagem in order to 
over-reach the other side. But, as I said if there is a strong 
feeling on the point and those who represent labour are able to 
convince the Select Committee that it is necessary straightway to 
have a provision entered into the Act itself to prevent any such 
practices, it will be open to them to move and get it through. 
Government does not regard that as a matter of principle and 
will not stand in the way of the thing being done in the Select 
Committee. 

The other point which has been raised is whether this 
question of leave should be entirely made dependent upon 
the wishes of the employee, namely, that the employee should 
have a right to determine from what date and at what time he 
should exercise his holiday. Now, we have deliberately made 
no provision in the Bill for that and we have left it to the 
Provincial Governments to make rules to regulate what should 
be done with regard to that particular point. I think it would be 
desirable in an experiment of this kind not to tie down everything 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


210 


210 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by statute. It would be better if the matter was left to be 
regulated by rules for which the Bill authorises the Provincial 
Governments to make, because, as the House knows, it is much 
easier to change a rule than to change a statute. But as I said, if 
the parties to this Bill who are concerned and affected do desire 
that this should be made the subject matter of a statute, it will 
again be open to the Select Committee to do so. 

I do not think there is any point raised by any Honourable 
Member which I have not covered and I therefore do not propose 
to say anything more in support of the motion I have made. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): The 
question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934 
(Second Amendment) be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of Nawab Siddique Ali Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha, 

Mr. R. R. Gupta, Mr. A. C. Inskip, Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar, 

Rao Bahadur N. Siva Raj, Mr. N. M. Joshi, Mr. D. S. Joshi, and 
the Mover and that the number of members whose presence 
shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee 
shall be five.” 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


211 


38 


* The Payment of Wages (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. Deputy President, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936, be referred to a Select Committee consisting of Seth 
Yusuf Abdoola Haroon, Mr. Muhammad Hussain Chaudhurv, 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai. Mr. A. C. Inskip, Sir Vithal N. 
Chandavarkar, Mr. N. M. Joshi, Dr. Sir Ratanji Dinshaw 
Dalai, Mr. D. S. Joshi, and the mover, and that the number 
of members whose presence shall be necessary to constitute a 
meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

Sir, the Payment of Wages Act, to which the present Bill 
proposes to make certain amendments, was passed in the year 
1936. This Bill, at the time when it was passed, was recognised 
as an experimental measure for the simple reason that when 
the Bill was drafted we had not before us any model piece 
of legislation on which we could have modelled the measure 
which is embodied in this Act. We have had now an experience 
of practically six years of this measure and in the course of 
the working it has been discovered that the Bill suffers from 
many defects. If I may tell the House, it has been pointed 
out that there are practically 30 or 40 amendments which it 
is necessary to make to improve the Payment of Wages Act. 
The government of India realise that at present they have not 
got the time to devote to all the amendments to the measure 
which different parties have suggested and consequently they 
do not propose to engage themselves upon improving the Act 
and to remove all the defects that have been suggested. What 
the Government of India proposes to do through the present 
amending Bill is to take certain defects which are of such 
administrative importance that unless and until those defects 
are removed, it will be difficult to administer the measure with 
the intention which lay behind the act when it was passed. 


legislative Assembly, Debates, Vol. V, 16th November 1944, pp. 889-92. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sir, taking the Bill clause by clause : Clause 2 of the Bill 
seeks to make certain amendments in the definition of the word 
“wages”. I do not wish to weary the House by repeating seriatim 
the defects which different parties to the Bill have suggested that 
they have found in the present definition of the word ‘wages’ as 
it stands. But I might mention some important ones. It has been 
said in a judicial decision given by the High Court of Bombay that 
the present definition of “wages” is so drafted that it is possible 
for a workman not only to claim wages which he has earned but 
also wages which might be called potential wages-wages which he 
might cam. That certainly was not the intention of the original 
measure. Another defect which has been suggested with regard 
to this definition is that it allows a workman employed on the 
outturn basis to claim wages irrespective of his outturn. It has 
been suggested that there is a confusion in the definition which 
does not quite distinguish the case of a workman employed on 
a time basis and a workman employed on outturn basis. It has 
also been suggested in certain quarters that some of the words 
which now occur in the definition are superfluous, that they 
need not be there and that their presence only causes confusion. 
I might refer to the words “includes any bonus or additional 
remuneration of the nature aforesaid which would be so payable”. 
It has been suggested to us that these words may not have 
any meaning other than the one which is already included in 
the previous part of this definition. It has also been suggested 
that while the definition of “wages” was adequate before the 
system of dearness allowance brought about by the war came 
into existence, the definition today is inadequate because it is 
open for an employer to argue that the dearness allowance is 
not part of wages. 

Now, the definition that we have suggested in the amending 
Bill seeks to remove all these difficulties. It seems to make the 
definition simple. I ought to tell the House that I am myself 
not very confident that the draft, as it stands in the amending 
Bill, carries out the intention which lies behind this original 
Act. I do not regard the definition which we have proposed as 
sacrosanct and if the members of the Select Committee are able 
to suggest a better one I should certainly raise no objection to 
the further amendment of the definition as it now stands in the 
amending Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


213 


THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL 213 

Coming to clause 3, it is a clause which makes two amendments 
to the present section 5. As the Honourable Members will 
remember, section 5 is a section which prescribes the period during 
which wages must be paid ; and for the purpose of prescribing 
the period for the payment of wages, the section divides factories 
into two categories. In one category are placed factories which 
employ workmen whose number is less than 1,000. In the second 
category are placed factories which employ more than 1,000 
employees. After making this division, the section provides that 
in the factories which come into category No. 1, payment must 
be made within 7 days, while in the case of the latter the limit 
of the period is prescribed to be 10 days. In actual practice it 
has been found difficult to observe the terms of this section, and 
the reason for that is very simple. The division of the factories is 
based upon the number of employees. As the House will realise, 
the number of workmen is never a constant figure ; it always 
changes. For instance, if the number of employees goes down 
by one, the category automatically shifts from category No. 1 to 
category No. 2. Similarly, if the number of employees is increased 
by one, category No. 2 goes into category No. 1. It is believed — and 
I think very rightly — that this discriminating principle is neither 
very just nor administratively feasible. Consequently what the 
amendment seeks to do is to abolish this distinction whereby the 
factories have been divided into two categories and adopt the 
general principle that in all factories, irrespective of the number 
of employees that are working there, there shall be a uniform 
rule, namely, that the payment must be made within ten days. 
The second amendment which clause 3 seeks to make is also, 
as the House will see, very necessary. In section 5, provision is 
made for the payment of an employee who is discharged from 
service. The section as it stands today provides that the payment 
to a discharged employee should be on the second working day. 
Now, Sir, if the Payment of Wages Act was only applicable to 
perennial factories which are working throughout the day, there 
can be no difficulty arising from the section as it stands now. But 
in the case of seasonal factories, the difficulty that would arise is 
absolutely genuine because, supposing an employee was discharged 
on the last working day of the factory and the factory being a 
seasonal factory was closed down thereafter, then the second 
working day would come after a long interval which it would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be difficult for anybody to imagine or to stipulate. Consequently 
the payment of wages to a discharged employee working in a 
seasonal factory would be indefinitely postponed if the provision 
as it now stands was not amended in the way suggested in the 
Bill. What we have therefore done by the amending Bill is to 
take away the word ‘working’ and substitute for the word ‘second’ 
the word ‘third’, so that where the factory is a seasonal factory 
or where the factory is a perennial factory every discharged 
workman will be paid on the seventh day and would not have 
to wait as he would have to in case the factory was seasonal 
factory and the Act stood as it is now. 

Now, I come to clause 4 of the Bill. As Honourable Members 
will see clause 4 proposes to make certain amendments in 
section 7 of this Act. Section 7 is a section which lays down 
what deductions can be made from the wages of a workman. 
Honourable Members will see presently that the section as it 
stands now does not cover all legitimate cases of deductions. 
I will draw the attention of Honourable Members to what are 
the omissions in the present Act. For instance, the act as it 
stands now, or the section of the Act, does not cover the case of 
an employee who has left his employment, taken his provident 
fund and his gratuity and has lost the privileges which he would 
otherwise get if he had continued to be in service. It may be 
that for certain reasons, he had to resort to the expedience of 
obtaining a discharge from service in order to get his provident 
fund and his gratuity to meet certain economic demands that 
may be very pressing upon him. After that, he is re-employed 
and obviously he is anxious to get back all the privileges which 
he enjoyed before his discharge and his privileges depend upon 
whether or not he is prepared to return the provident fund which 
he had obtained and the gratuity which he got. The workman is 
willing and prepared for such deductions being made, but the law 
does not permit this. I think it will be agreed that such deduction 
should be allowed because it is in the interest of the employee 
himself. But as I said such a provision does not find a place in 
the act, as it now stands. Then, Sir, there are certain deductions 
which may be beneficial to the employee and the employee 
may be willing that the deductions may be made in order to 
cover such beneficial purposes. Again, there is no provision for 
allowing the workman voluntarily to agree to make deductions 
which he thinks are beneficial to himself. The law is made 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


215 


THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL 215 

by the amendment in order to the conclusion that the purposes 
are beneficial really. There are other omissions in section 7 as it 
stands and those omissions relate to cases of workmen who are 
employed in what are called incremental scales. This is a new 
thing in the bill and I wish to explain to the House not only 
what the provisions are but the circumstances which have led us 
to bring forward this amendment. The sub- section (3) of section 
4 deals with three cases. It deals with the case of withholding 
of increment of an employee who is employed on an incremental 
scale. It deals with the case of demotion from a higher grade to 
a lower grade with consequent deduction in salary. Thirdly, it 
deals with the case of retention of an employee in a grade, the 
deduction of salary being due to loss of efficiency. The reason 
why it has become necessary to bring forward these amendments 
embodied in sub- section (3) of section 4 is that it has its origin 
in a decision given by the Judicial Commissioner of Sind. It 
was a case in which an employee who is, I believe an Engine 
driver, was concerned. His grade was maintained, but his salary 
was reduced. He went to a court of law for redress and pleaded 
that the reduction of his salary, while he was continued in the 
grade, was a deduction unauthorised by law. The Judge upheld 
the contention and said that was an unauthorised deduction. But 
the Judge observed that if there was a new contract entered into 
with an employee telling him that as his efficiency was not of 
the required level and standard to discharge his duties that are 
incumbent upon an officer holding that particular grade, and if 
the new contract was accepted by him, then the deduction would 
be justifiable. Now, what I have done in the Bill is to accept 
the suggestion made by the Judge, namely, that whenever there 
is a case of an officer whose grade is not reduced, but whose 
salary is reduced on account of the fact that he is not found 
to be as efficient as the responsibilities of the post require, 
the deduction shall not come into existence unless the period 
of notice that his service requires shall be fulfilled. Now, Sir, 
the object of that provision is really to give him one month’s 
notice. The completed or simplified procedure would be to give 
him a legal notice and to say. “We are not prepared to pay you 
the same salary that we paid before ; if you like, continue on 
the new basis ; if you do not like it, discontinue and go out of 
service”. Instead of having that elongated process of two equations, 
notice and reply, offer and rejection, we have combined the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

process by delaying the operation of the reduction decision by 
the period of notice, so that before the period of notice expires 
if he tells his employer that he is not prepared to accept, he 
would be at liberty to go out. I should like to make this point 
clear because it might be argued that in bringing forward these 
amendments we have really tried to counteract or set at naught 
or nullify the decision of the Additional Judicial Commissioner 
and I want to tell the House that I am doing nothing of the kind 
but am merely following the decision of the Judicial Commissioner 
in the amendments which we have proposed. 

With regard to the other two amendments, viz., the withholding 
of increments and demotion from a higher grade to a lower grade, 
there can be no matter of controversy, for the simple reason that 
a period is promoted from a lower to a higher grade only when 
the employer is satisfied that by the experience that he has had 
in the grade in which he has been serving he will be able to 
acquire such greater experience and greater efficiency that he 
can be legitimately expected to discharge the responsibilities of 
the higher grade. When, for instance, he has not been promoted 
there is no grievance, for the simple reason that he has not 
earned something which is sought to be taken away. 

Similarly with regard to the other provision, viz., demotion 
from a higher to a lower grade, I do not think there can be any 
legitimate grievance in this kind of deduction, for the simple 
reason that when a man has lost so much efficiency that an 
employer does not think that he can be retained in the same 
grade, I think it is justifiable to reduce him because the reduction 
in salary is also accompanied by reduction of responsibility. 

Now coming to clause 5 of the Bill it is a very simple clause. 
It seems to amend sub-section (7) of section 8. Sub-section (6) of 
section 8 deals with the question of the time within which the 
fine imposed by an employer may be recovered. The question that 
arises is, when does the time run ? Does it run from the date 
when the offence was committed or does it run from the date 
when the employer came to know that a certain act or omission 
was done ? Obviously it is not always possible for an employer to 
know at the very time when an act was committed that it had 
been committed ; it often happens that an act is committed and 
knowledge of it comes to the employer after a very long time. 
Consequently, it is felt necessary that the point of time from which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


217 


THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL 217 

limitation should run should not be the date of the offence but 
the date of the knowledge ; and I should like to tell the House 
that in amending this provision we are not introducing anything 
that is novel. As lawyer Members of the House would know, 
there are many provisions in the law of limitation where the 
time in some cases runs from the date of the act and in some 
cases from the knowledge of the act. 

Coming to clause 6, this seeks to amend section 9 of the Act. 
Section 7 (2) (b) permits deductions being made on account of 
absence from duty. Unfotunately there is no definition given in 
the Act itself as to what is meant by ‘absence from duty’. This 
clause removes this lacuna and adds a second explanation to 
section 9 where the expression ‘absence from duty’ is not sought 
to be defined. Clause 7 amends section 13, and that again is 
purely consequential; it is not a substantial provision. If makes 
section 13 applicable to the two of the new deductions contained 
in clause 4 of the Bill. As Honourable Members know, section 
13 makes deductions permissible subject to such conditions as 
the Provincial Government may impose. We also want that the 
new deductions which the new amendment permits shall also 
be subject to the same proviso. 

The last clause amends section 17 of the Act which regulates 
the right of appeal. As it stands the section gives a right of appeal 
to an employed person but does not give it to the Inspector who 
is the administrative authority for administering this particular 
Act. It is felt that it would be advisable in the interest of all, and 
particularly in the interest of the employees, for the Inspector 
also to have the right to make an appeal. 

These, Sir, are the provisions of the Bill. I submit they are 
non-controversial and I believe and hope that the House will be 
able to accept my motion. 

Sir, I move. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): Motion 
moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936, be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of Seth Yusuf Abdoola, Haroon, Mr. Muhammad Hussain 
Chaudhury, Mr. Lalchand Navalrai, Mr. A. C. Inskip, 

Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar, Mr. N. M. Joshi, Dr. Sir 
Ratnji Dinshaw Dalai, Mr. D. S. Joshi, and the mover, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and that the number of members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 


k k k 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Sir, the Hon’ble Member has also 


introduced certain other amendments, one of them regarding 
permitting certain deductions for absence. 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have only given 
the definition of absence. I have not permitted deductions : they 
are already there. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : I know. The Honourable Member is a very 
simple man. He has changed the definition of absence with the 
result that certain deductions may be permitted. The original 
Act permits deductions for absence up to a certain point. The 
deductions may be made for the actual time lost or work not 
done. But if this Amendment is made, and if I understand it 
rightly, it is quite possible for an employer to impose double 
fine on the employee. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That is not correct. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: All right. We shall discuss it at the proper 
time. What may happen is this : an employee is absent for an 
hour. He cannot turn out work for that hour and therefore if 
he is paid on piece rate his wages are automatically reduced. 
Besides receiving less wages, it is quite possible that if this 
Amendment is made, the man’s wages may be deducted still 
further. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No, no. 

k k k 

@ The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mr. Deputy 
President, if it can help to curtail the debate, I should like to 
state at this stage that I am prepared to accept the amendment. 

k k k 

fThe Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, 

as I have said, I am prepared to accept the motion 
made by my friend Mr. Joshi. In that event, it is 
unnecessary for me to make any speech. All that I would 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V, 16th November, 1944, pp. 896. 

@ Ibid., p. 901. 
t Ibid., p. 902. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


219 


THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL 219 

like to say is this that I cannot agree that any strong case has 
been made out for circulation. As I said just now, I made myself 
very clear that the amendments which I have put forth were 
administrative in the sense that they will remove the difficulties 
that exist in the administration of the law. I have not seen that 
any of the amendments which are contained in this Bill were, if 
I may say so, beyond the capacity and the intelligence and the 
knowledge and the information of Honourable Members of the 
Select Committee. I, Sir, was surprised to see that my Honourable 
friend Mr. Joshi did not do enough credit to himself. If I circulate 
the Bill, and I am asked to circulate the Bill in order to canvass 
the opinion of the working classes, I wonder whether who would 
be the advocate that would be employed by the working classes 
except Mr. Joshi himself or my Honourable friend Mr. Lalchand 
Navalrai. It was in order to get the benefit of their representative 
character, their knowledge and information that I have taken 
care to include them in the Select Committee. However, Sir if 
they feel that they cannot repose confidence in their ability to 
deal with what I regard as non-controversial points. I am quite 
prepared to fall in line with them and accept the amendment. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta) : The 
question is : 

“That the Bill be circulated for the purpose of eliciting public 
opinion thereon by the 28th February, 1945.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


220 


39 


* Damodar Valley Scheme 
Calcutta Conference 


Address 

“The Government of India is very much alive to the 
disadvantages arising from the present state of affairs and 
wishes to take steps to evolve a policy which will utilise the 
water resources of the country to the best advantage of everybody 
and to put our water resources to the purpose which they are 
made to serve in other countries,” observed the Honourable Dr. 
B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, Government of India, in his 
address to representatives of the Central, Bengal and Bihar 
Governments at a conference held in the Bengal Secretariat 
in Calcutta on January 3 to consider means and methods for 
developing Damodar Valley. 

Here is the full text of Dr. Ambedkar’s speech : 

On behalf of the Government of India I thank you for having 
agreed to hold this meeting at such short notice and at considerable 
personal inconvenience to yourselves. The purpose of this meeting 
is to consider means and methods for giving effect to the proposals 
of the Damodar River Flood Enquiry Committee appointed by 
the Government of Bengal in 1944. Before I proceed further, 
it is only proper that I should congratulate the Government of 
Bengal on the appointment of this Committee. I must also pay 
my tribute to the Committee for the very sound views they have 
expressed both on the particular problem of dealing with floods 
in the Damodar River and on the general problem of the best 
utilization of the water resources of the country. 

Committee’s Recommendations 

I would like to make particular reference to two of its recommendations, 


'Indian Information, February 1, 1945, pp. 97-101 & 109. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


221 


DAMODAR VALLEY SCHEME CALCUTTA CONFERENCE 221 

namely VIII and XIII. In their recommendation No. XIII the 
Committee have stated : 

“During the course of discussions it was felt by the 
Committee that it will be an advantage in the solution of flood 
control and soil conservation problems if forests and rivers of 
India are made the concern of the Central Government.” 

By their recommendation VIII, the Committee have 
suggested that the project of damming the Damodar should 
have as its purpose not merely stopping the flood but also 
include the generating of electricity and the supply of water 
for irrigation. Those who are aware of the present policy, or 
lack of policy, in the matter of the utilization of India’s water 
resources will admit that these are recommendations, the 
importance of which cannot be exaggerated. It is not far from 
truth to say that so far there has been an absence of positive 
all-India policy for the development of waterways. Secondly, 
there has not been enough realization that our policy for 
waterways must be multi-purpose policy so as to include the 
provision for irrigation, electrification and navigation. 

Railways And Waterways 

Irrigation has been the only purpose of our waterways policy. 
Further, we have not taken sufficient account of the fact that 
there is no difference between railways and waterways, and if 
railways cannot be subjected to provincial boundaries, neither 
can waterways, at any rate those that flow from province to 
province. On the contrary we have allowed our constitution to 
make a distinction between railways and waterways, with the 
result that railways are treated as Central, but waterways are 
treated as Provincial. 

The disadvantages of this error are many and obvious. To 
give one illustration, a province needs electricity and wishes 
to utilise its water resources for the purpose but it cannot 
do so because the point at which water can be dammed lies 
in another province which being agricultural does not need 
electricity and has no interest in it, or money to finance the 
project, and would not allow the needy province to use the 
site. Complain as much as we like, a Province can take such 
an unfriendly attitude and justify it in the name of Provincial 
Autonomy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Utilisation Of Water Resources 

I have made these observations with a two-fold purpose. Against 
this background you are in a better position to evaluate the 
recommendations of the Damodar River Flood Enquiry Committee 
appointed by the Bengal Government, to which I have made 
particular reference. My second purpose is to tell you that the 
Government of India is very much alive to the disadvantages 
arising from the present state of affairs and wishes to take 
steps to evolve a policy which will utilize the water resources of 
the country to the best advantage of everybody and to put our 
water resources to the purpose which they are made to serve 
in other countries. 

A revision of the constitution treating waterways on the 
same footing as the railways will no doubt be a very welcome 
change. But the Government of India does not think it necessary 
to wait till such constitutional changes come into being. Nor 
does the Government think that, if the Provinces show the will 
to co-operate in a joint project for the utilization of the water 
resource, the difficulties created by the constitution will stand 
in their way. 

The Government of India has very much in its mind the 
Tennessee Valley Scheme operating in the United States. They 
are studying the Scheme and feel that something along that line 
can be done in India if the Provinces offer their co-operation and 
agree to override provincial barrier which has held up so much 
of their progress and their prosperity. As a preliminary step for 
securing the best use of the water resources of the country, the 
Government of India have created a central organisation — called 
the Central Technical Power Board, and are contemplating to 
create another to be called the Central Waterways, Irrigation 
and Navigation Commission. 

The objects which have led to the setting up of these two 
organizations is to advise the Provinces on how their water 
resources can be best utilized and how a project can be made to 
serve purposes other than their irrigation. It may be necessary 
to constitute other bodies, such as the Central Utilization Board 
or ad hoc Commissions of Enquiry. The appointment of the 
Central Power Board and the Central Waterways, Irrigation 
and Navigation Commission does not exclude the setting up of 
such organizations. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


223 


DAMODAR VALLEY SCHEME CALCUTTA CONFERENCE 223 

The Damodar river is the first project along this line. It 
will be a multi-purpose project. It will have the object of not 
only preventing floods in the Damodar river but also have the 
object of irrigation, navigation and the production of electricity. 

The authority which will be in charge of this project after 
it is completed will be more or less modelled, as far as it may 
be possible, on the Tennessee Valley Authority. It will be a co- 
operative undertaking in which the Centre and the Provinces 
of Bihar and Bengal will be partners. The Government of India 
are anxious to give shape, form and life to the project, and are 
anxious that no time should be lost in doing so. 

New Policy For Waterways 

The Government of India feel that they cannot proceed further 
in the matter unless certain preliminaries are explored. The first 
such preliminary is the site of the dam. Obviously, it cannot 
be decided in accordance with the wishes of Bengal. Equally, 
it cannot be decided in accordance with the wishes of Bihar 
alone. And even if the two Provinces agree upon a site, it could 
not be finalized without the advice of the experts. There are 
aspects which have also to be gone into. As I have said, the 
Damodar project must be a multi-purpose project. We intend 
that it should not only deal with the problem caused by floods, 
it should also provide for irrigation, electricity and navigation. 
Along with the question of a site, these matters have also to 
be examined. 

The business of this conference is to come to a decision as 
to the best machinery for doing this job. I hope we shall be 
guided by the right spirit, leaving aside all sectional points of 
view, and proceed to our business with a determination to agree 
upon the best solution and open a way to the inauguration of a 
new policy in regard to our waterways and lay the foundation 
for a regime of prosperity for the poverty stricken millions of 
this country. 

CONFERENCE DISCUSSIONS 

The Damodar Valley Project, a multi-purpose project, intended to 
exploit the Damodar river for irrigation, electrification and nagivation, 
was discussed at the conference presided over by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The basis of the discussion was a note circulated by the 
Central Government regarding the procedure for collecting 
necessary information. 

Suggestions made in this note required that the three 
Governments should prepare an inventory of the facts and 
figures available to each other. This inventory was to be 
prepared in consultation with the Central Government’s 
technical experts, and, if it did not disclose all the facts 
required further information should be collected. The Central 
Government’s technical experts could than prepare a preliminary 
memorandum setting out the prospects for a co-ordinated 
scheme for the multi-purpose development of the Damodar 
Valley. The three Governments should then get together and 
give the necessary instructions for framing a project to the 
technical experts of the Central Government and the Provinces. 

General Agreement 

While there was general agreement on the question of making 
the Damodar Scheme a multi-purpose project, representatives 
of Bengal emphasised that the problem of controlling floods in 
Damodar should be a primary concern. After some discussion, 
it was agreed that investigations on the lines suggested by 
the Central Government should start under Mr. Man Singh, 
Special Engineer (Irrigation) with the Bengal Government. 
The Central and Bihar Government would try to lend officers 
to assist Mr. Man Singh in this investigation. Mr. A. Karim, 
Deputy Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, Bihar, would 
remain in touch with Mr. Man Singh. 

Earlier during the meeting Mr. H. C. Prior, Secretary, 
Labour Department, Government of India, spoke about the 
administrative side of the waterways problems and indicated 
days and means by which the Centre could lay its part. 

k k k 

Among those who attended the Conference were the Hon’ble Mr. 
B. P. Paine, Minister for Communications and Public Works, Bengal 
Government, Mr. B. Sarkar, I.C.S., Secretary, Communications 
and Public Works Department. Mr. B. L. Subarrwal, Mr. J. 
F. Russel, Chief Engineer, Bengal, Mr. Man Singh, Special 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


225 


DAMODAR VALLEY SCHEME CALCUTTA CONFERENCE 225 

Engineer (Irrigation), Mr. N. K. Bose, Director, River Research 
Institute. Mr. N. Dar, Secretary, Post-War Reconstruction 
Committee, Mr. H. M. Ishaque, Development Commissioner and 
Mr. A. Karim, Deputy Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, 
represented the Government of Bihar. Mr. H. M. Mathews, 
Chairman, Central Technical Power Board, Mr. W. L. Voorduin, 
Hydro-Electric Member of the Board and Mr. D. L. Mazumdar 
were also present to represent the Central Government. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


226 


40 


* Post-war Electric Power Development 


A schedule of heavy power equipment required by India 
as soon as possible after the cessation of hostilities has been 
prepared and steps have been taken to reserve for India 
the necessary manufacturing capacity, said the Honourable 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, Government of India, 
in his address to the second meeting of the Policy Committee 
on “Public Works and Electric Power” held in New Delhi on 
February 2. 

Here is the full text of Dr. Ambedkar’s speech : 

I should like to begin by extending to all the representatives, 
old and new, present at this meeting a most hearty welcome. 
I say old and new because we have on our Committee new 
members who were not on the Committee when we met 
last. They are the nominees of the Federation of Electrical 
Undertakings in India and of the Indian Trade Union Congress. 
Electrical undertakings and organised labour are both vitally 
concerned in the future of electrical development in India and 
whatever they may have to say about the subject must receive 
due consideration in any decision that may be arrived at. I 
am sorry that an omission to have them with us should have 
occurred last time. I apologise for it, for it was indeed a very 
serious omission. I am sure we are all very glad to have them 
with us today and will be looking forward to their contribution 
to the discussion of the subject we have before us. 

Power Engineers’ Conference 

I believe it would be of some advantage if I were to begin the few 
observations I have to make as Chairman by referring to what has been 


Indian Information, February 15, 1945, pp. 235-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


227 


POST-WAR ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT 227 

done by the Government of India in furtherance of the post- 
war planning for electrical development since the Committee 
last met on October 25, 1943, as most of you may have no 
knowledge about it. Soon after the last meeting of this Policy 
Committee, Mr. Mathews, the Electrical Commissioner with 
the Government of India, with the approval of Government, 
called together a Conference of leading power engineers in 
the country, both official and non-official, to consider postwar 
electric power development. The first thing the Conference 
did was to prepare a schedule of the heavy power equipment 
required by India for electric development immediately 
after the war. In addition to this the Conference passed 
certain resolutions all of which, to use the language 
of the report, “represented the unanimous conclusion 
of their studies, investigations and discussion.” These 
resolutions fell under four heads : — 

(1) Under the first come recommendations which set out 
some general and specific suggestions to the Provinces 
and States to be observed by them in regard to electrical 
development within their jurisdiction. 

(2) Under the second were grouped those which concerned 
the appointment of the Technical Power Board. 

(3) Under third come those related to certain prospective 
power developments considered by the Conference to the 
prima facie worth investigation without dalay. 

(4) Under the fourth head were placed those which relate to 
railway electrification, manufacture of synthetic fertilisers 
and rural electrification. 

As the members of the Conference said in the letter 
accomanying their findings, “this is the first occasion on which 
the power development programme has been reviewed as a 
coordinated whole and that the presence of engineers whose 
experience covers in the aggregate the varied conditions of the 
whole of India, has introduced an extremely valuable element 
in co-ordinating regional needs.” 

Heavy Power Equipment 

I am sure you will agree that we owe the Conference a great debt for 
unfolding to us the prospective electric power development for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


228 


228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

whole of India in the period immediately succeeding the cessation 
of hostilities in such clear cut manner. The Conference asked the 
Government of India to take appropriate action on the several 
recommendation made by them. The two recommendations in 
regard to which action lay with the Government have been 
already put into effect. They relate to the securing of equipment 
and the establishment of the Technical Power Board. 

A schedule of heavy power equipment required by India 
as soon as possible after the cessation of hostilities has been 
prepared and steps have been taken to reserve for India the 
necessary manufacturing capacity. The total capacity reserved 
come to over 850 megawatts, at an estimated cost of Rs. 50 crores 
approximately. The aggregate of new capacity represented by 
these schedules comes to nearly 65 per cent of India’s existing 
installed capacity. A more detailed inquiry might show that 
our requirements for equipment are larger than what has been 
booked for. But as it was impossible to delay the matter without 
putting India’s interest in grave jeopardy, we had to take action 
immediately on such data as could be collected within the limited 
time that was available to us. 

Technical Power Board 

As you must have noticed from the Press Note issued on 
November 8, 1944, the Government of India has constituted 
a Technical Power Board. Besides the Chairman, the Board 
will initially have two full-time members and three part-time 
members. The Government of India has appointed Mr. Mathews, 
Electrical Commissioner with the Government of India, as the 
Chairman and has obtained the services of Mr. W. L. Voorduin 
from the United Stales of America as another member of the 
Board. Before he came to India, Mr. Voorduin was employed 
as a Project Officer of the Tennessee Valley Authority. It is 
proposed to have a third member to be called the Utilisation 
Member. Effort is being made to recruit a suitable Engineer 
who is conversant with Utilisation. These appointments of 
high level experts will assure you how very anxious the 
Government of India is to make the Board a strong technical 
organisation designed to collect ideas, conduct surveys and 
prepare schemes for the electrical development in consultation 
with Provincial and State Governments. I have referred 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


229 


POST-WAR ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT 229 

to this because it is necessary you should know what has happened 
in the interval and also to show that the Government of India has 
been pursuing the matter in all earnestness and with all speed. 

The Triple Programme 

There is another important development in electrical policy to 
which I would like to draw the attention of all of you here. You 
will recall that at the last meeting of the Policy Committee, 
Mr. Collins, on behalf of the Bombay Government, made certain 
references to the contemplated introduction of the “Grid” system 
in the Bombay Presidency. During the last year, we in the 
Government of India have given a great deal of thought to the 
regional as distinguished from the local development of electricity 
in different parts of this country. We have felt more and more 
that if the services offered by electricity are to be brought to 
the door of producers as well as the consumers at the cheapest 
possible rates compatible with efficiency, we may have to follow 
albeit cautiously and gradually, the triple programme on which 
the Central Electricity Board in the U.K. have worked from the 
very beginning, viz. : — 

(a) The creation of large-scale power stations located in the 
main industrial areas under the control of public supply 
undertakings ; 

(b) the construction of main transmission system (with smaller 
secondary lines attached to it for tapping agricultural 
and other outlying areas) so that the entire region to be 
developed by the main system can be held in a power ring 
or a series of power rings radiating out from the large 
scale power stations ; and 

(c) standardisation of frequency as far as possible within the 
region to be developed by the power system. 

This triple programme constitutes the foundation of the “Grid” 
system, as we know it, to be operating in the U. K. since 1926 
and it is my hope that if such a scheme of regional development 
is adopted in this country, we may before long bring the great 
boon of cheap electricity service to the door of everyone, high 
or low. 

You may be interested to know that when the “Grid” system on 
a large scale was first contemplated in the U. K. it was estimated 
that by 1940-41 the national production of electricity would reach the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


230 


230 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

colossal figure of 25,000 million units and the working cost of 
electricity would by that date fall from 9.4d, as recorded in 
1925-26, to less than 4d. per unit, while the large industrial 
consumer would be able to obtain his power requirements at 

y 2 d. 

Items On Agenda 

I will now turn to the Agenda for our meeting to-day. As 
you will see, there are altogether four items on the Agenda. 
Item 4 places before you for your consideration two schemes, 
one for the Technical Power Board and the other for sending 
Indians to foreign countries for training in electricity. Neither 
is a controversial subject. I will not therefore take your lime 
in dwelling upon them. 

Item 2 on the Agenda is unfortunately not quite so 
uncontroversial as item 4. Item 2 relates to the question 
of applying to electrical undertakings certain accounting 
principles for ascertaining their income, expenditure and 
profits. This item is not as controversial as it appears. The 
issue raised by this item covers two questions and not one, 
and the controversy would be very much narrowed if they 
were considered separately. 

The first question is whether the dividend of an electricity 
supply undertaking should or should not be related to the 
charges for consumption of electricity. The second question is 
how to determine reasonable dividend. On the first question, 
I venture to say, there can be very little dispute. Electricity 
is to be a prime necessity of the people both for production 
and consumption. The price of such a prime necessity cannot 
therefore be at the will of the suplier. The whole industrial 
future of India will be put in great jeopardy if India could not 
ensure cheap and abundant supply of electricity. The necessity 
of correlating dividends to charges is therefore paramount. If 
this is granted, the necessity of enforcing rules of accounting 
which will give the undertaking a reasonable return but no more 
and choke all holes for concealed profits cannot be disputed. 

Principles Of Accountancy 

The issue then becomes a secondary one. In pressing for enunciating 
principles of accountancy we are not introducing any revolutionary 
idea. We are following the lines laid down in British Legislation on 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


231 


POST-WAR ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT 231 

Electricity contained in the London Electricity Act of 1925 and 
the Electricity Supply Act of 1926. The Electrical Commissioner 
with the Government of India has drawn up a Memorandum 
in which he has proposed a set of such accountancy principles 
for being applied to electricity undertakings. His Memorandum 
was circulated to the Provincial Governments and to Electrical 
Undertakings for their opinions. There has been unfortunately 
some divergence of opinion. As a means of bridging the gulf, 
the Government of India proposes to appoint an Advisory 
Board to advise on principles which may be just and proper. 
I hope you will regard this solution as a satisfactory one. 

There remain items 1 and 3 of the Agenda. They are 
indeed the most, important items of our Agenda and you will 
bear with me if I take some of your time to deal with them. 

With regard to item 1, it might be well to refresh your 
memory by telling you how the position stood at the last 
meeting of the Policy Committee. At the close of the discussion 
of the items on the Agenda the Policy Committee desired that 
the Labour Department should draft a Resolution embodying 
the measure of agreement reached and that it should be 
placed for discussion at a subsequent meeting of the Policy 
Committee. A draft Resolution was accordingly drawn up 
which is in the following terms : — 

“That this meeting recomends that the further development 
of electricity supply in India be actively pursued as a State or 
quasi-State enterprise and that steps be taken to eradicate any 
factors that retard the healthy growth of electrical development 
in the Provincial, State or Local authority — owned undertaking 
as well as the commercially owned undertakings.” 

It was felt that the draft Resolution was not very clear. 
The Resolution spoke of further development. It said nothing 
about the undertakings that have already come into existence. 
The Resolution spoke of the necessity of controlling factors 
likely to hamper or retard the healthy growth of electrical 
development but did not specify what the factors were. It 
was therefore felt desirable that the Resolution should be 
again carefully considered in the Policy Committee to clear 
up elements of doubts. This is how item 1 comes to be what 
it is. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

State Control And Ownership 

The discussion at the last Policy Committee meeting seemed to 
indicate clearly the intention that electrical supply enterprise in 
areas where there is none at present should be pursued as a State 
or a quasi-State enterprise ; but there remained an element of 
doubt as to the extent to which the State should come in those 
areas in which electrical undertakings were already functioning. 
For instance, is it advisable that the State or other authority 
should as a general rule exercise an option to take over an 
undertaking whenever under the terms of an individual licence 
such option arose ? And is it advisable that the State should 
exercise control over existing privately — owned undertakings for 
the purpose of securing bulk supply for regional development or 
control of generation ? There may be cases in which in order to 
secure suitable regional development bulk supply from some other 
undertaking should be given to some existing undertaking and 
that it may be that the manner in which an existing undertaking 
operates and expands may have to be brought into line with 
general schemes for regional development. We wish, therefore, 
in this discussion to get clarification not only as to the extent to 
which State ownership should come in but also as to the extent 
to which the State should control where State ownership cannot 
immediately become operative. 

Jevon’s Economic Criteria 

The issue between State enterprise and private enterprise has 
ever been a matter of controversy. This controversy is now 
resounding in India in full blast since we have started the 
project of planned economy. Old Jevons in his tract on State in 
relation to Industry, attempted to formulate certain economic 
criteria by which the line between State enterprise and private 
enterprise can be drawn and which have been the gospel of the 
opponents of State enterprise. According to Jevons, there were 
four criteria which ear-marked an industry for State ownership. 
They were (1) small capital account: (2) routine operations : (3) 
the co-ordination of several services such as Posts, Telegraphs 
and Telephone and (4) the sufficiency of a single all-embracing 
plant as in the case of water and gas supply. 

The followers of Jevons in this country propose to add some more 
criteria, the object of which is to restrict the field of State enterprise 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


233 


POST-WAR ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT 233 

except in one case, viz., they are prepared to enlarge the field 
by allowing the State free field in such cases which could not be 
profitable for private enterprise to undertake. The controversy 
may have had some solid basis when private enterprise was 
a fact. But to-day private enterprise is only a phase. There is 
nothing private in an economic order when industry is carried 
on by huge Public Joint Stock Companies. There is nothing of 
individual enterprise in an economic order where the slogan of 
a business firm is caution and not adventure and where the 
prime consideration is to stabilise profits by seeking to maintain 
in an orderly permanence existing economic conditions. It is 
unnecessary for me to enter into this controversy. For there are 
very few opponents of State ownership and State control who 
do not make an exception in the case of electricity. 

Item 3 raises the question as to who should exercise the 
option when it falls due by reason of the termination of the 
licence issued to an electrical undertaking for the supply of 
electricity. The matter of purchasing an electrical undertaking. 
This question is now regulated by the provisions of Section 7 of 
the Indian Electricity Act. According to this section, the authority 
to exercise the option to purchase vests in the first place with 
a Local Authority and where the Local Authority does not elect 
to exercise the option it passes to the Provincial Government. 
The question raised by item 3 on the Agenda is whether it is 
not desirable that option should also be given to the Central 
Government and, if so, at what stage and under what conditions. 
It is proposed that the Central Government should also have 
an option to purchase. Having regard to the fact that electricity 
is a public utility, there ought to be no difficulty in vesting the 
Central Government with such an authority. 

Provincial Or Central Control ? 

Unfortunately, there seems to be some reluctance to accept 
this principle. Planning in India has been confronted with 
two issues, the issue of State versus Private enterprise and 
the issue of Provincial or Central control. With both issues 
we are all quite familiar and item 3 deals mainly with the 
second issue. To those who believe in State enterprise it should 
be a matter of small consideration whether the enterprise 
should be Provincial or Central and little or no objection 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

should be raised to Central control in cases where a Province 
does not desire to take on such control, or where in the interests 
of regional development extending beyond the boundaries of 
a Province, Central control may be considered necessary. In 
the case of electricity, as in the case of waterways, suitable 
schemes cannot be limited by provincial boundaries, and though 
there must clearly be the closest co-operation and co-ordination 
between the Centre and the Province, it does seem advisable 
that the Centre should be able to step in cases where State 
control is found necessary for regional development and where 
a Province does not itself wish to bring an undertaking under 
State control. 

I don’t think I can usefully add anything to what I have 
already said about questions arising out of the Agenda. However 
before I close, I would like to say how very necessary it is for 
you to bear in mind that whatever decision you take it must 
accord with the public opinion in the country regarding the 
future of Indian Economy. It would be a mistake to suppose 
that there is no Indian public opinion on the future of Indian 
Economy because one does that opinion is I do not wish to 
dogmatise although I am sure that it is far more Leftist than 
many are inclined to allow. 

The point I am anxious to emphasise is that the need for 
an accord between the plan and public opinion can hardly be 
exaggerated in a country like India which has as its ideal a 
Parliamentary system of Government. People talk about the 
success of planning in Russia. But they forget that the success 
is due largely to the fact that Russia has no Parliamentary 
Government. Planning in a Parliamentary Government where 
those who plan live under the constant threat of no confidence 
motions and cannot be sure whether they can remain long 
enough to put their plans through is a very doubtful proposition. 
Whether planned Economy is inconsistent with Parliamentary 
democracy and, if it is so, how the two can be reconciled is a 
very large theme and this is not the place to deal with it. All, 
therefore, I wish to do is to caution you that if our plans are 
not to be scrapped by our successors, we must lake care that 
they are in accord with what the large majority of people believe 
to be for the greatest good of the greatest number. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


235 


POST-WAR ELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT 235 

Committee’s Recommendations 

The Policy Committee on “Public Works and Electric Power,” 
recommended that the development of electricity supply for 
areas outside existing licenced areas should be actively pursued, 
as far as possible, as a state or quasi-State enterprise. If for 
any reasons the State was not prepared to undertake such 
development in any area within a reasonable time, private 
enterprise should not be excluded. They further recommended 
that, provided efficient and economic operation could be assured 
to the public, options existing under any licence to acquire 
an undertaking should, as a general rule, be exercised when 
they arose. Steps should be taken to eradicate any factors 
that retarded the healthy and economical growth of electrical 
development on regional lines whether in Provincial, State or 
local authority — owned or in commercially — owned electrical 
undertakings . 

In another recommendation the Committee accepted the 
necessity of laying down financial principles for the control of 
electric public utilities both in the interests of public utilities as 
well as of the general public. An Advisory Board should be set up 
under Section 35 of the Electricity Act to advise Government on 
the nature, extent and method of application of such principles. 
On this Advisory Board there should be two representatives 
of the Central Government, two representatives appointed by 
agreement with the Provinces, and one representative of the 
Federation of Electricity Undertakings. The Board may appoint 
such assessors as may be necessary. 

The discussion on the proposal to amend Section 7 of the 
Indian Electricity Act of 1910, with a view to evolve a systematic 
and coherent policy for planning electrical development, raised 
a number of points for examination by the Central Government. 
The Committee agreed that the Act should be so amended as 
to give the Provincial Government the first option to lake over 
an undertaking. The question of amending the Act so as to 
give power to the Centre to take over electric undertakings, if 
Central control was considered necessary for inter- Provincial 
development, was discussed. There was difference of opinion 
on some aspects of the question, and it was decided that the 
matter should be further examined in consultation with the 
Provinces. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


236 


236 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government’s Training Schemes 

The Policy Committee welcomed the appointment of the Central 
Technical Power Board, and the Central Government’s scheme 
for sending ten Indian Engineers to receive training abroad on 
the commercial and administrative side of electricity supply 
industry. Four of these officers will receive training in the U.K., 
four in the U.S.A. with the Tennessey Valley Authority, and two 
in Canada. Two officers belong to the Central Government, four 
to Provincial Governments, two to State Governments and two 
to Public Electricity Supply Undertakings. The Government of 
India will bear the entire cost of the training of the two Central 
Government Officers. It was stated that while under this scheme 
Indian Engineers would be trained in the commercial and 
administrative aspects of electrical industry, Government intended 
to send two more batches for training in the technical aspects. 

The meeting which was presided over by the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was attended by the Hon’ble Sir Ardeshir 
Dalai, Planning and Development Member, Government of 
India, the Hon’ble Mr. K. Shahbuddin, Minister of Commerce, 
Labour and Industries Department (Bengal), the Hon’ble Rai 
Bahadur Gokuldas, Minister for P.W.D. (Sind), Sir Mirza Ismail 
and Raja Dharam Karam Bahadur. Official representatives 
of the Central and Provincial Governments and non-officials 
representing the All-India Trade Union Congress, Federation of 
Electrical Undertakings and Indian Engineering Association also 
participated in the discussions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


237 


41 


* Government Policy re Mineral 
Resources of India 


Mr. K. C. Neogy : Sir, I beg to move : 

“That the demand under the head ‘Geological Survey’ be 
reduced by Rs. 100.” 

As indicated in the notice, my desire is to discuss 
Government’s policy with regard to the mineral resources 
of India. But, having regard to the hour I should like my 
Honourable friend to have as much time as possible for making 
a statement, which we all desire. I have already indicated to 
him the various points which I would have liked to deal with 
had I the time to make a speech on this occasion. As it is more 
important that we should have a statement from him than that 
I should make a speech, I should very much appreciate it if 
my Honourable friend could make an informative statement. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta) : Cut 
motion moved. 

“That the demand under the head ‘Geological Survey’ be 
reduced by Rs. 100.” 

The H onourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour 
Member) : Mr. Deputy President, I am indeed very glad that 
Mr. Neogy should have thought of such a cut motion as the 
one he has moved, because the cut motion gives Government 
the opportunity to explain its mineral policy which it had 
not got so far. There is so much ignorance and so much 
misunderstanding about the matter that I think it is in 
the interest of everybody that so important a matter as the 
mineral policy of the Government of India should be explained 
fully to the House. Sir, I regret, and I have no doubt that 
there are other Members of the House who will share 
that feeling that owing to the exigencies of the timetable, 
Mr. Neogy did not have the opportunity of making a verbal 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. H of 1945, 12th March 1945, pp. 1383-85. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

statement explaining the points he wanted to make. I quite 
appreciate, and indeed I am very grateful to him for having 
cut short his speech and gave his time to enable me to make 
a statement. 

Sir, this is a matter in which I think it is better to be very 
candid and say that the Government of India so far had really 
no mineral policy. It may be a ground for complaint. But it need 
not be a ground for surprise. The responsibility for the absence 
of a mineral policy has been sought to be placed in certain 
quarters at the door of the Geological Survey of India. I am sure 
that that is a wrong charge ; and I propose to devote the first 
few minutes that I have in order to dispel such an impression. 

I think it will be admitted that the mineral policy of any 
government is necessarily dependent upon the industrial policy 
of that government. Minerals necessarily play a great in the 
industrial development of the country and if the country has 
no industrial policy, obviously there cannot be a mineral policy 
at all. This House is aware that until the Government of India 
decided to have as its aim and object the reconstruction of the 
economic and industrial life of this country in the post-war 
period Government in this country played very small part in 
the industrialisation of the country. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea : What a pity ! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Whether it is a 
matter for pity or whether it is a matter of anger is not for the 
moment my concern. All that I am trying to show is that if there 
has been no mineral policy, the fault is not of the Geological 
Survey of India. The fault lay with the Government of the day ; 
the fault perhaps lay with the Legislature and, it may be, with 
other organisations which were interested in the economic and 
industrial life of the country. 

The second reason why the Geological Survey did not 
play the part that geological surveys in other parts of the 
world do play is largely due to the fact that this is one of 
the departments which has always been under-staffed. I 
would like to tell the House a little history with regard to the 
staffing and the provision of the technical personnel of the 
Geological Survey of India. In 1920 sanction was obtained for an 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


239 


GOVERNMENT POLICY RE MINERAL RESOURCES OF INDIA 239 

increase in the superior gazetted staff of the Geological Survey. 
Unfortunately there was much difficulty in getting a trained 
personnel that it took practically nine years to fill the required 
number. The pity of the matter was that as soon as this number 
was filled, the Legislature in 1931 carried a motion for economy 
and almost all these men who were recruited had to be axed. 
I point that out in order to show that if the Geological Survey 
Department did not play its part in the mineral policy of the 
Government of India, the legislature to some extent is responsible 
for that result. 

In the limited time that I have, I do not wish to dwell more 
on the past. I wish to speak about the future. I am glad to say 
that the Government of India has now accepted the need for a 
definite mineral policy. That is largely due to the fact that the 
Government of India has taken a decision to have a drive in 
favour of bringing about the industrialisation of the country. The 
mineral policy of the Government of India has been set out in 
section 14 of the second report on Reconstruction and Planning. 
I have no time to read section 14 or even to give the gist of that 
paragraph. I have no doubt that the Members of the Legislature 
who are interested in the matter will look up section 14 and see 
for themselves what exactly that policy is. 

To summarise the matter briefly, the mineral policy of the 
Government of India and the action which the Government of 
India propose to take in furtherance of that policy falls into two 
parts : in the first place, we propose to reconstitute the Geological 
Survey of India in order to make it a more potent instrument for 
the furtherance of our policy. Accordingly, a detailed scheme of 
expansion of the survey has been drawn up and administratively 
approved. The new branches of the Geological Survey which we 
propose to set up will deal with engineering geology, industrial 
utilisation of minerals, central mineral development, geophysical 
work, oil development. It will include the establishment of a 
natural history museum, and a publicity section in order to keep 
the public informed of what is being done. 

The second part of our mineral policy consists of legislation, 
which the Government of India propose to initiate for the purpose of 
establishing control over minerals. In defining the limits of legislative 
control over the minerals, we propose to take into consideration the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


240 


240 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

following circumstances. One, the importance of the mineral 
from the defence point of view on all India mineral development; 
two, the technical nature of the mineral; three, the purposes for 
which the mineral is used ; four, the value of the mineral or of 
the products into the making of which the mineral enters. Our 
legislative provisions will fall into two classes, or rather divide 
the minerals into two classes : those which will be subjected to 
general control: and under general control we propose to confine 
ourselves to the granting of prospecting and mining leases, the 
terms and conditions of such licenses and termination thereof. 
Then there will be other minerals, which will be selected for 
more detailed control. The number of such minerals which 
are suggested for more detailed control are about 28. I do not 
propose to detail them here. The detailed control will include 
besides the power to grant licenses, the power to control the 
method of mining, of processing, of grading, of standardising, to 
direct improvement of mining and procuring methods, and also 
the power to initiate research for increased utilisation and for 
other necessary purposes. 

I have stated as briefly as I can within the time available to 
me the general policy which the Government of India propose 
to adopt in regard to minerals. 

I propose now to turn to some of the specific points of which 
Mr. Neogy had given notice to me. The first point to which he has 
referred was the export of minerals. I would like to assure the 
House that in the contemplated legislation there will undoubtedly 
be provisions for dealing with the export of minerals outside India. 
The question really is whether we can completely stop the export 
of our minerals. The answer to that question must necessarily 
depend upon another question, namely, shall we be able to import 
those minerals in which India is deficient if we completely stop the 
export of our own minerals ? As Honourable Members are aware, 
India is in fact deficient in such important minerals as oil, copper, 
lead, zinc, tin and sulphur. Consequently the question of export 
has to be considered in the light of the effect it may produce on 
our ability to import things of which we have a deficiency. The 
course which appears safest to the Government of India is to 
regulate the export of those minerals of which we are in short 
supply and which are necessary for the industrial development 
of the country, and secondly to see that our minerals are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


241 


GOVERNMENT POLICY RE MINERAL RESOURCES OF INDIA 241 

not exported in a raw condition but that we establish in our 
own country such industries as will enable us to process the 
raw material before it is exported to other countries. Another 
point to which Mr. Neogy has drawn my attention is with regard 
to the oil concessions. As Mr. Neogy knows, and as I believe 
other Members of the House know, there exists at present a 
moratorium on oil concession — moratorium on the granting of 
mining and prospecting licenses. That moratorium was introduced 
mainly because the Government of India did not deisre that 
various oil companies should dissipate or engage for their own 
prospecting purpose technical personnel which is so deficient in 
its supply in this country. That moratorium will last till the war 
and some time thereafter. Now, Sir, so far as the question of 
granting licenses is concerned, the matter, since the passing of 
the Government of India Act, is in the hands of the Provincial 
Governments ; but the Provincial Governments have been so far 
following the rules, that the Government of India have made under 
the 1919 Act under which this was a matter for the operation, 
the policy of what is called ‘closed door’ against non-British 
subjects. The rules framed by the Government of India lay down 
that a company before it can obtain such a license must show 
that it is a company which is Indian in its personnel or that 
the majority of the members of the Board are British subjects. 
I do not know whether Mr. Neogy had in mind the further 
question, namely, the distinction between Indian subjects and 
British subjects. I have no time to enter into that. All I can say 
is that this is a matter which is closely connected with another 
important matter, namely, the Provisions contained in sections III 
to 118 of the Government of India Act and which is being 
debated in the House on a separate Resolution. With regard to 
the question of coal, that again, as I said, will have its place in 
our new legislation. As my friend will understand, it is rather 
a difficult question. It covers matters such as mining, grading, 
marketing and utilisation of inferior coal. It will require a good 
deal of co-operation of the owners of mines and all those who 
are in the trade in order that our legislation may be fruitful. I 
may assure the House that we propose to take the matter up 
as part of our post-war policy. 

I have said in a general way in the short time that is available to me 
what the policy of the Government of India is. I would say only this 
in conclusion — that an all — pervasive and dynamic mineral policy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

would depend upon three circumstances. It would depend upon 
the industrial drive in the country. If there is industrialization, 
this country will undoubtedly have to undertake a more vigorous 
mineral policy than it has done in the past. Whether our mineral 
policy will be successful and will be used for the benefit of the 
many will also depend upon two other considerations, namely, 
the constitutional position, the distribution of authority between 
the Provinces and the Centre and the role the State is allowed 
to play in this matter. I believe I have said enough to enable 
the House to appreciate what the Government of India proposes 
to do in regard to a mineral policy for this country. 

An Honourable Member : I move that the question be 
now put. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): The 
question is that the question be now put : 

(Several Honourable Members : ‘No, no.’) 

I take it that the opinion of the House generally is that this 
motion should not be put. 

An Honourable Member : You can adjourn the discussion. 

Mr. H. A. Satar H. Essak Sait (West Coast and Nilgiris : 
Muhammadan) : Under the arrangement that has been arrived 
at and that has been circulated. (Mr. H. A. Sattar H. Essak 
Sait.) The time allotted to the Nationalist Party is over. It is a 
sort of guillotine. Now, the other Party must come in. It is not 
for the House now to express an opinion on it. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akh il Chandra Datta): The 
position now is this that this cut motion cannot be put to the 
House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


243 


42 


* Labour Policy of Government of India 


Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): 
Discussion will now be resumed on the cut motion moved by 
Mr. Joshi yesterday. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Sir, myself and my Party wholeheartedly 
associate ourselves with the cut motion moved by Mr. Joshi. 

Some Honourable Members : The question be now put. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): The 
question is... 

Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait (West Coast and Nilgiris: 
Muhammadan): What about the Government’s reply ? 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): I waited 
but did not find anybody getting up. 

(At this stage, the Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was seen 
to rise in his seat). 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): Does 
the Honourable Member want to speak ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Yes. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): The 
House is impatient. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will try to keep 
my patience. I will promise that. 

In the course of the observation which Mr. Joshi made 
yesterday in support of his cut motion, he levelled certain 
charges against the Labour Department. At the conclusion he 
not only stated that the Labour Department had failed in dealing 
adequately with the duties which are cast upon it to conserve 
and protect the interests of the workers but he also ended by 
saying, which I thought was a somewhat extravagant observation, 
that the Labour Department had not even sympathy for 


*Discussion on Demand No. 23 of the Labour Department. Legislative Assembly 
Debates (Central), Vol. II, 13th March 1945, pp. 1456-62. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the worker. Sir, the speech delivered by my Honourable friend 
was delivered by him in a more or less telegraphic fashion, 
omitting prepositions, participles, conjuctions and disjunctions 
and certainly did not advance any detailed arguments in support 
of his conclusions and I therefore feel at a certain disadvantage 
in dealing with his cut motion. I however propose to do my best 
to meet his charges. 

Sir, the first charge that he levelled against the Labour 
Department was with respect to dearness allowance. His first 
accusation was that the dearness allowance granted by the 
Government of India was not adequate and the second ground 
was, if I understood him correctly, that in the scheme of dearness 
allowance sanctioned by the Government of India there was 
no kind of uniformity. With regard to the first part, I think 
Mr. Joshi will agree that the notions of adequacy must necessarily 
differ. It will be difficult to find two people who could agree on 
the exact quantitative measurement of what adequate dearness 
allowance would mean and therefore I do not wish to enter upon 
that aspect of the case. What however I would like to draw the 
attention of the Honourable House to is that the Government of 
India has always been taking considerable interest in the matter 
of the dearness allowance and has been watching the situation ; 
that it has from time to time taken steps in order to increase 
dearness allowance is beyond question. To give only a few facts 
to the House, I think it will be recalled that the first dearness 
allowance was given in August 1942. It was thereafter increased 
in January 1943. It was further increased in June 1943. (An 
Honourable Member: What was the amount of dearness allowance 
in 1942 ?”) I really have no time to go into details and I hope the 
Honourable Member will let me proceed. It was further increased 
in March 1944. We have not only increased dearness allowance 
but we have also from time to time increased the higher limits 
of the workers who should be entitled to get dearness allowance. 
On the first occasion, when dearness allowance was given the 
highest limit fixed was 100 to 120. On the third occasion, it 
was raised to 150 and on the fourth occasion it was raised to 
250. I may tell the House that the Government of India is most 
actively considering the question of further increased in dearness 
allowance and I hope and trust that before long the decision of 
the Government of India in this matter will be announced. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


245 


LABOUR POLICY OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 245 

With regard to the question of want of uniformity, I will very 
readily admit that there is no uniformity, that different classes 
of employees of the Government of India are paid at different 
rates. But, Sir, the question I would like to ask is — who is 
responsible for this want of uniformity. I have no hesitation in 
saying that if anybody is responsible — for the want of uniformity 
in dearness allowance it is Mr. Joshi himself. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Why? I am not the Government. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : When I say My 
Joshi’ I mean the whole of the Labour organisation. It is they 
who are responsible for this want of uniformity. What has 
happened in the matter of the grant of dearness allowance is 
this. You have got different sections in the labour world. You 
have got a body like the Railwaymen’s Federation, a body like 
the Posts and Telegraph Union, like the Textile Union and so 
on, and there are lot of other people among the working classes 
who have practically next to no organisation. I think Mr. Joshi 
will agree that the policy followed by most of these labour 
organisations is really nothing else but a policy of organised 
loot, the first man trying to take whatever he can from the 
Government of India, leaving the rest of the people uncared for. 
Here is the Railwaymen’s Federation which meets the Railway 
Board, uses its power-politics and compels the Railway Board 
to grant the highest degree of dearness allowance. Then comes 
the Posts and Telegraph Union. They wait upon my Honourable 
friend in charge of that department. They threaten him with 
strike. They tell him that they are the most essential part of 
the service to the country and they eke out from him something 
which they think is best for themselves. The rest of the people 
have nobody to look after their cause and I have certainly not 
seen any move on the part of what are called the All- India 
Trade Union Congress or the All-India Labour Federation to 
come together and work out a policy which could be applied 
uniformly to all the working classes and to the men in the 
service of the Government. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Is it not the duty of the Government of 
India to formulate a uniform policy ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, certainly, if we are 
left free to do so. But every time a section of the labour world comes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

up and uses its dagger and says “We shall not work and we shall 
go on strike unless you give us this or that, the Government are 
certainly very helpless in the matter. (An Honourable Member 
“Why don’t you meet together?”) Then Mr. Joshi referred to want of 
attention lo unemployment caused by involuntary circumstances. 
If I followed him correctly, he referred in somewhat contemptuous 
terms to the circular issued by the Central Government to the 
Provinces and to the employers telling them that it was the 
view of the Government of India that whenever there was any 
involuntary unemployment due to shortage of coal or shortage of 
raw material, the employers should pay certain compensation to 
their employees. In our letter to the Provincial Governments, we 
had informed them that the Government of India was prepared 
for a certain scale of payment to be made to the workers during 
this period of unemployment. We had told them that they should 
pay 75 per cent, of the ordinary rate of pay for the first fortnight 
and for the second fortnight, they should pay 50 per cent, of the 
wages, that the period for which this benefit was to be payable 
was one month and that the waiting period should be seven 
months. Mr. Joshi ended by saying that all that the Government 
of India had taken no further step in order to see that these 
benefits were actually made payable. Now, Sir, I should like to 
point out that if Mr. Joshi had read the letter that we circulated 
to the Provincial Governments and to employers, he would 
have seen that we had also made some definite proposals with 
regard to meeting the cost of this involuntary unemployment. 
In the circular letter sent out, we had stated that the cost of 
these benefits paid to workmen for involuntary unemployment 
would be admissible as a revenue expenditure for income-tax 
and for E.P.T. purposes. Obviously, then, if I may say so, this 
was a special clause in the letter and we did not think anything 
more was necessary. There is in addition to that Rule 81 -A of 
the Defence of India Rules, under which it is perfectly open to 
workers who have been thrown out of employment by reason of 
these circumstances to apply to the Provincial Governments for 
the purpose of submitting the issue to arbitration. I am glad to 
say that the matter is now being pursued in that direction. As 
Honourable Members are aware, there is a case of arbitration 
going on between the employers in Ahmedabad and the workers 
there on this issue. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


247 


LABOUR POLICY OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 247 

The third point which Mr. Joshi mentioned was connected 
with workmen’s compensation. I was not able to get at exactly 
the gravamen of his charge as to what was the deficiency in 
the position as it existed in this country and what exactly he 
wanted me to do. What I got from him was that he thought 
that compensation was not adequate. Now, the House will recall 
that our definition of wages in the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act is a very wide one. It not only includes money wages, but 
it also includes everything that is capable of being estimated in 
terms of money. From this it will be clear that wherever there 
is a case of compensation to workman, he is not only entitled 
to get compensation on the basis of his money wages, but he 
is also entitled to get compensation on his money wages plus 
dearness allowance. Mr. Joshi mentioned the further fact that 
while in Great Britain the law has been altered, we have done 
nothing of the kind in this country. He said that during the 
war the benefits payable to workmen under the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act in England have been enhanced. I have looked 
up the matter and the position is really this. I am sorry to say 
that Mr. Joshi has not really understood what the difference 
is. As Honourable Members of the House will be aware, the 
English law makes payment under Workmen’s Compensation 
periodical, while in India our payments are mostly lump sum 
payments. This has a very important effect. In the case of lump 
sum compensation a workman receives his payment and he is 
out of the picture, nobody has any continuing liability about him, 
either his employers or the Government. But in cases where the 
liability to pay is a continuous liability by reason of the fact 
that the benefit extends for a period, obviously the liability is 
continued on the employer, and just as an employer is liable to 
pay for instance dearness allowance to a workman, who is in 
employment, in the same way, an employer is also required in 
English law to pay enhanced compensation by reason of the fact 
that payment being periodical the liability to pay continues. If 
it was the desire of the House that our system of Workmen’s 
compensation should also be so altered that instead of lump 
sum to a worker, we should pay him periodical payment either 
for life or to his children until the time that they come of age, 
no doubt the case that has been in England will also become 
operative in this country. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): It is the desire 
of the House — not a ruling from the Chair-that you should be brief. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is the desire of the House that the next motion should be reached. 
It is for you to consider. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : No, Sir, it is not the desire of the 
House, at any rate I wish to hear him. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): Order, order. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : It is not the desire of the House, 
Sir, You speak in the name of the House, Sir. I say so far as this 
part of the House is concerned, we desire to hear him. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea : There are other Honourable Members 
who desire that he should conclude his speech. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : But we want to hear him. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): You do 
not constitute the whole House. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : That is right. 

The Honourable Sir Sultan Ahmed : After all, Sir, this side 
of the House wants to hear him. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): Where 
is the trouble ? I am telling over and over again that it is not a 
ruling from the Chair. It is only a request from the Chair to the 
Honourable Member, and it is for him to decide whether he wishes 
to comply with it or not. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, the next point 
which Mr. Joshi made was with regard to Technical Personnel 
Ordinance. He said that this Technical Personnel Ordinance has 
in it the principle of inequality of treatment between employer 
and the employees. The point that is sought to be made out there 
was that under the Technical Personnel Ordinance, an employee 
is not free to resign from his employment, while under the same 
Ordinance an employer is free to discharge an employee. Sir, I 
should like to state the true position as may be found from a reading 
of this Ordinance. The true position is this : that an employee is 
not required to obtain permission of his employer if he wants to 
resign. What is required by the Ordinance is that he should ask 
permission of the Tribunal if he wants to resign. On that point, I 
think Mr. Joshi is somewhat misinformed. Then, Sir, with regard 
to the power of the employer to discharge, the position again is 
this. That, as a rule, he is not allowed to discharge or dismiss an 
employee unless he has obtained permission of the Tribunal. To that 
there is undoubtedly one exception and that exception is that in case 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


249 


LABOUR POLICY OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 249 

of insubordination of misconduct which calls for disciplinary action 
the employer may dismiss his employee without obtaining the 
permission of the tribunal. To that there is undoubtedly one exception 
and that exception is that in case of insubordination or misconduct 
which calls for disciplinary action the employer may dismiss his 
employee without obtaining the permission of the tribunal. Now, 
Sir, I do not think that this particular provision which permits an 
employer to get rid of an employee who has misconducted himself 
or who is insubordinate can be a ground for complaint. 

N. M. Joshi: Who is to judge ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I should like to ask 
Mr. Joshi, who judges in ordinary cases where the Tribunal does not 
become operative ? In the way in which our industry is organised it 
is the employer who has rightly or wrongly the right to dismiss a 
worker whom he thinks is of no service to him. Therefore I think 
there is no point in that. But what I wanted to inform the House, 
and Mr. Joshi particularly, is that in order that there may be no 
abuse of this provision we have amended the Ordinance in two 
important particulars. The first thing that we did and that was 
done expressly at the desire of Mr. Joshi was to constitute advisory 
committees to be associated with the tribunal. On these advisory 
committees there are representatives of labour, and I have not the 
slightest doubt that with the help of these advisory committees, 
constituted as they are, they will be able to bring to the attention 
of the Tribunal such cases which they have reason to believe are 
due to victimisation. 

The second and the most important step which has now 
been taken is this. We have now issued an order calling upon 
the Chairman of the Tribunal to place on record his reasons for 
not allowing an employee to resign or to quit his job. This is a 
provision which we have borrowed from the Criminal Procedure 
Code, so that at the centre of the Government it would be possible 
for us to know whether there were legitimate and proper grounds, 
for the Chairman of the Tribunal not permitting an employee to 
resign his job. 

Sir, Mr. Joshi then proceeded to point out that the 
conditions in coal mines were not very satisfactory. I do 
not claim that the conditions are ideal but I do like to say 
that the Labour Department has taken definite and quite 
large steps to bring about better conditions in coal mines. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


250 


250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

We have now been working our coal mines with two types of labour — 
local labour and the labour which we have imported from outside, 
principally from the Gorakhpur district of the U.P. I should like to 
give the house certain figures with regard to wages. The Gorakhpur 
labourer gets 12 annas per day as basic wage ; in addition to that 
he gets four annas of production bonus and he gets four annas of 
extra allowance for working underground. Then we give him food 
free, the cost of which comes to 14 annas per day per man. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray (Nominated Non-Official): Sir, on a point 
of order, I think the Honourable Member has taken 25 minutes 
already. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): The 
Honourable Member in charge can be given more than 20 minutes. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : The rule is 20 minutes. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta) : No ; 20 
minutes or more if necessary. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, Sir, apart 
from these wages the Gorakhpur labourer is given 14 annas per 
day for his food. He has free housing and free medical aid. 

Coming to the other colliery labour, their wages stand as follows. 
There is an increase in cash wages of 50 per cent, over the pre-war 
rates which were 8 annas on the surface and 14 annas underground. 
Then he or she gets certain rations. The local colliery labourer gets 
4 seers of foodgrains per worker at controlled rates for himself or 
herself and 4 seers for each adult dependent and 2 seers for each 
child between two and twelve years. In addition he or she gets 
one-fourth of the basic ration in cereals and dal at the concession 
rate of six seers to the rupee. Each worker also gets one seer of 
rice free of cost for each day of attendance. In addtion to that he 
gets cash benefits which are two annas per day of attendance to 
a worker who has no dependent, three annas to a worker with 
one dependent, five annas to one with an adult dependent and a 
child or children. 

Mr. Sri Prakasa : Sir, on a point of order. So far as I know, 
the option to allow a Government member to speak for more than 
20 minutes, to which you referred, was for the Member in charge 
and not for any Member of Government who might jump up and 
speak. In this case the Member in charge is the Finance Member 
whose motion is before the House. It is not the Labour Member’s 
motion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


251 


LABOUR POLICY OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 251 

Mr. Sami Vancatachelam Chetty (Madras : Indian 
Commerce): Sir, I move that the question be now put. 

Several Honourable Members : The question may now be put. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I cannot be 
disturbed in this fashion. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): Order, 
order. Closure motion can be moved only after the speech is 
finished. I have done all that I possibly could to help the Opposition 
with regard to the next motion, but I have no option now. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Sir, on a point of order, the Government 
Member can speak for 20 minutes or more. But the point is, is it 
to be left to the sweet will of the Government Member himself to 
spin out his speech to inordinate lengths ? Or is it for the Chair 
to decide whether the Honourable Member has had sufficient time 
or not ? I contend that this power lies solely with the Chair and 
the Government Member cannot be allowed to spin out his speech 
to any length he likes. I contend he has had sufficient time. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta) : It is a 
very delicate thing for me to say that he has had enough time 
to speak or that he is taking time deliberately. 

Several Honourable Members : The question may now be 
put. 

Mr. Sami Vencatachelam Chetty : I rise to a point of order. 
Evidently the Chair is under the impression that I cannot move 
the motion for closure, but I think this time as the Honourable 
Member has resumed his seat I can move the closure motion. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): It is a 
convention that closure motion cannot be moved when a member 
is speaking. But the point is that the Honourable Member did 
not take his seat because he had finished his speech but because 
he was interrupted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Then, Sir, 
Mr. Joshi said that the Labour Department was short-staffed. 
I am rather surprised how Mr. Joshi came to make that 
statement. I would like to inform the house about the staff 
which has been employed by the Labour Department quite 
recently. So far as the coal Mines are concerned, we have got the 
Chief Executive Officer for the Coal Mines Welfare Committee. 
He has got a Chief Welfare Officer under him and under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

him are two inspectors — one of them is a lady welfare inspector. 
Then, Sir, we have a Director of Unskilled Labour Supply. He has 
under him three Deputy Directors and four Assistant Directors. 

(At this stage, there was a loud uproar and thumping of the 
table on the Opposition Benches.) 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Your demand will be thrown out 
completely. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There are 20 officers 
under the Chief Inspector of Mines. Then, in addition to that we 
have now appointed a Chief Labour Commissioner at the Centre. 
Under him there are three Deputy Labour Commissioners who 
will be in charge of all the welfare activities. 

Then, Sir, Mr. Joshi said that the Labour Department was 
always behind time in taking action, that delay was the rule. 
On this point what I would like to submit is this that in the 
circumstances in which we are carrying on the activities of the 
Labour Department delay is inevitable. We have got to consult 
the Provincial Governments, we have got to consult the organisers 
of labour, we have got to consult the employees. All this must 
necessarily take time, and therefore I do not think that there is 
any point in Mr. Joshi saying that we delay matters. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: Mr. Deputy President, I rise to a point of 
order. Is it your ruling that a Member of Government can speak 
at any length ? I want a ruling from the Chair definitely 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Dalta): I 
understand the Honourable Member has finished his speech. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: Sir, I want to save the time of the House, 
and therefore I ask leave of the House to withdraw my cut motion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would like to 
say one thing that if my Honourable friend, Mr. Joshi had told 
me that he was going to withdraw his cut motion, I would not 
have spoken as long as I have done. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta): 
Mr. Joshi was not bound to give any previous intimation to the 
Honourable Member to the effect that he was going to withdraw 
his cut motion. 

The motion was, by leave of the assembly, withdrawn. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


253 


43 


* Need for immediate re-imposition of ban 
on Employment of women 
underground in Mines 


Mrs. Renuka Ray : Sir I move : 

“That the demand under the head ‘Department of Labour’ 
be reduced by Rs. 100.” 

Sir, since August 1943 and December of the same year, 
when the ban on women working in underground mines was 
first withdrawn, there has been a consistent and insistent 
protest throughout the country against this undersirable 
action. The Government of India are fully aware that they 
have not only violated an international pledge but that they 
have considerably shocked and offended world opinion. 

A year ago, at the request of all-India Women’s 
Conference, I moved an adjournment motion asking that the 
ban be re-imposed immediately, and my Honourable friend, 
Mrs. Subbarayan, also spoke on a cut motion on labour during 
the Budget Session on the same subject, but the plea of the 
Honourable the Labour Member at that time was that this 
was a very temporary measure only to be carried on till the 
next harvesting season and not for the period of the war that 
arrangements were being made to remedy the labour shortage, 
and that once these arrangements went through the ban 
would be lifted. Sir, the attitude was that we were creating 
all this song and dance about nothing since the period was to 
be very short. A year has come and gone and today I think 
the attitude has become far more adamant. The Honourable 
the Labour Member has made it only to clear that he does 
not intend to reimpose that ban. The Honourable Members of 
this House are only too well aware of all the circumstances 
and realise fully, I am sure, that the arguments that have 
been put forward if they had come from a merciless type of 
capitalist employer, could have been understood. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II, 13th March 1945, pp. 1463-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

[At this stage, Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur 
Rahim) resumed the chair.] 

But how they could have been ratified and even advanced by 
those who are primarily responsible for the protection and the 
well being of the common people it passes our comprehension. 

Sir I should like to have the support of the House, of all 
Members — either on this side of the House or on the other, — of 
all Parties, including the Government, because this is a legitimate 
demand the infringing of which leads to the infringing of one of 
the most elementary canons of human decency. 

Sir, I move. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Cut 
motion moved: 

“That the demand under the head “Department of Labour” 

be reduced by Rs. 100.” 

Some Honourable Members : The question be now put. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : With regard to this 
cut motion, it is difficult within the short time that is at my 
disposal to deal with it adequately. I would begin by saying that 
the last time when this question was debated on an adjournment 
motion, I made the statement that in taking the decision which 
the Government of India took I felt very unhappy about it. And 
I am still very unhappy about it. But the circumstances are such 
that it is impossible to take any other action than what we took. 
If the House will bear with me for a few minutes 

Some Honourable Members : No, no. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would tell 

the House the relevant circumstances which forced our hands 
in this matter. 

I should like to begin by stating to the House what the 
position with regard to coal was ? In the year 1941 the total 
raising were 29,381,000 tons. In 1942 they fell to 29,270,000 
and in 1943, the critical year in which we were forced to lift 
this ban, the total production of coal had fallen to 23,753,000. 
The House will at once realise that within a year there was a 
fall of something like 6,628,000 tons. It is unnecessary for me 
to dilate on the fact that coal is one of the most important raw 
materials both for industry as well as for the war effort. It was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


255 


NEED FOR IMMEDIATE RE-IMPOSITION IN MINES 255 

impossible for any Government to sit with folded hands and to 
watch with indifference what might be called a tremendous fall 
in the production of so important a material as coal. 

The next thing to which I should like to draw the attention 
of the House is the number of collieries that were opened during 
these years. In 1941 the total number of collieries in operation 
was 440. In 1942 they had risen to 670 and in 1943 the number 
had gone up to 706. In the ordinary course of circumstances, this 
enormous increase in the number of collieries in 1943 should 
have given us a larger quantity of coal than we actually had, 
but we were faced with this most curious phenomenon, namely, 
that on the one hand we had an increase of 366 collieries while 
on the other we had a fall of 6,628,000 tons of coal. 

Let us look now to the labour position. In the year 1941 the 
total number of workers employed in coal mines was 2,11,601. In 
1942 the total employed was 2,08,742. In 1943 it was 2,05,822. 
Comparing them with the number of mines opened, it will be 
seen that here again we had a very strange phenomenon, namely, 
that although the mines had increased, the labour force had 
decreased considerably. In fact the total decrease was 4,879. 
But this does not complete the story. In fact many have not 
realised what exactly was the crucial fact. That will be realized 
if the House were to know the number of coal cutters that are 
employed was 55,691. In 1942 they fell to 51,438, and in 1943 
they fell to 45,306, a drop of 10,385. It is unnecessary for me 
to tell the House that the coal cutter is a prime mover in the 
process of producing coal. It is no use having a very large labour 
force round about the coal mines if you have not got a sufficient 
number of coal cutters. Coal cutting is the basic primary activity. 
This is the crux of whole problem, namely, that this important 
class of workmen had dwindled by no less a figure than, 10,385. 

The reasons why these coal cutters had dropped are, of 
course, well known to the House. There was in the area 
where the coal mines are situated tremendous possibilities 
opened up by the various industrial establishments, by various 
military works, alternative employments, where wages were 
considerably higher than they were in the coal industry. The 
alternative employment had also this advantage, namely, that 
it was work on surface, which, other things being equal is 
undoubtedly for more attractive than work underground. The third 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


256 


256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

reason why the coal cutters preferred to quit the mines in 
favour of the other employment on the surface was because 
the coal cutter could take his wife along with him and get 
her earnings added to his own and thus increase the family 
earnings. If he worked in the mines he could not benefit of her 
earnings because of the ban. This was probably the greatest 
inducement which the coal cutter had in order to quit the mine 
and seek alternative employments that were within his reach. 

Now, I have no doubt that nothing else would have 
helped to bring back the coal cutter except to allow his wife 
the opportunity to work with him and earn a wage. In my 
judgment nothing else could have enabled us to retrieve the 
position and get back the coal cutter into the coal mine, we 
have been told that we could have got back labour to the coal 
mines by increasing wages. On this point what I would like 
to say is this, that this is an argument which within limits 
has its force but that when carried to extremes turns out to 
be worse than useless. My friend Mr. Joshi yesterday referred 
to the fact that they paid enormous wages to coal miners in 
England and that it was the best paid industry. Undoubtedly 
so. But Mr. Joshi forgot the fact that even in England where 
they pay such enormous wages to the coal miners, there has 
been an enormous shortage of labour available for coal mines. 
Therefore, Sir, the point is this, that wages could not be that 
sovereign remedy which it has been suggested to be. In our 
judgment, and I think it was a correct judgment, the only 
method of retrieving a very bad and a very serious situation 
was to take the decision that we have taken. 

There is another point which is urged against the decision 
the Government has taken. I should like to meet this point quite 
squarely because it is an important point the force of which I 
confess I have always felt-namely, that there is shortage of coal 
in England and in other countries but there women are not 
allowed to work underground, why should then we allow women 
to work underground in India ? Now, Sir, the answer to that is 
two-fold. In the first place in other countries like England, where 
women are not allowed to work underground, they have the 
alternative remedy of conscription. They can compel people and 
they do compel people to go and work in coal mines. I have very 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


257 


NEED FOR IMMEDIATE RE-IMPOSITION IN MINES 257 

recently read a report that in Belgium, the 1941 class recruits 
required to serve in the army instead of being sent to the front 
were sent by the Belgium Government to go into the coal mines. 
That power, as the House will realise is not available to us and 
therefore we could not follow that remedy. 

Now, Sir, the other reply that I would like to give is this. In 
all those countries like Great Britain, South Africa and other 
countries, there has been no tradition of women being employed 
underground. Their women worked at one time but that was 
probably for 60 or 70 years before. I appeal to the House to take 
a realistic view of this matter. In our own country is it not a fact 
that up to 1937 women did work in coal mines ? Is it not a fact 
that women in this country were working in coal mines till eight 
years ago ? Can anybody in India say as people in England say 
that our women have ceased to work underground for a century 
and that therefore this is a new departure ? 

The Honourable lady who moved the cut motion, I think, has 
forgotten what was the view of the All-India Women’s Conference 
in 1934. I should like to explain it to the House. The Government 
of India had taken certain steps practically from 1929 with a 
view to close the employment of women underground and, as 
the House will remember, they had laid down a proportion, 
a dwindling proportion, so that according to that programme 
women would have ceased to work in coal mines in 1937. This 
was long before there was any talk about a convention. What 
was the attitude of the All-India Women’s Conference ? I find 
that this matter was taken up for consideration by the All- 
India Women’s Conference in their session held on the 26th 
December, 1934. According to the report which I have in my 
hand, (Interruption by Mrs. Renuka Ray.) Please do not disturb 
me. The All-India Women’s Conference set up a Committee to 
consider this question and I would like to read only two short 
sentences, which contain the view that the All-India Women’s 
Conference took of the action of the Government of India. Sir, 
I will read from page 53, The report first gives the advantages 
and then gives the disadvantages. The report (I should like to 
tell the House that the lady who has moved the motion was a 
member of this committee appointed by the All-India Women’s 
Conference) — begins by saying : 

“ Our impression about the effect of the elimination of women 

from underground work is that it is on the whole not suited to 

the conditions in which the miners live. ” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Then, Sir, they conclude by saying : 

“ If these women are removed from underground work in the 

present condition, the distress will be so great in the miners’ 

homes that it will far outweigh the evils of allowing them 

underground. ” 

(Interruption by Mrs. Renuka Ray.) 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is not giving way. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, it is true 
that when this matter was considered by the All-India Women’s 
Conference at their session held in 1935 they came to the 
conclusion that they would support the International Convention 
which was passed, in spite of the fact that they saw grave 
objections to the course pursued by the Government of India. 
Now, Sir, I claim that this view that the All-India Women’s 
Conference took up in 1935 which was so different from its view 
expressed in 1934 was due to the passing of the Convention and 
I am sure that if in 1935 the Convention had not been passed, 
the All-India Women’s Conference would have continued to agitate 
against the decision of the Government of India to eliminate 
women from coal mines. I do not want to say that there are 
any sinister motives for the change of front on the part of the 
All- India Women’s Conference in this matter but I would like to 
say that I am not prepared to believe that within the ten years 
that have elapsed there has been such a revolution in the moral 
and political conscience of the people of this country that they 
are not prepared to tolerate the action which will be annulled 
as soon as the emergency vanishes. 

Sir, I have been told that after all, the number of women 
employed in coal mines is only 15,000 and that they have not been 
able to produce more coal. Why, then, is it that the Government 
of India persist in keeping these 15,000 women underground ? 
The answer to that question is a very simple one. In the first 
place 

Mr. Sami Vencatachelam Chetty : May I ask if the 

Honourable the Labour Member would give an assurance, a 
firm assurance, that he will continue to employ them whatever 
might be the public opinion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable friend 
has such a wicked opinion about me, I cannot help him. He is quite 
entitled to have whatever opinion he has about me and I am free to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


259 


NEED FOR IMMEDIATE RE-IMPOSITION IN MINES 259 

have my own opinion about him. I do not think we ought to 
exchange them on the floor of the House. 

The question has been asked as to why we are keeping these 
women underground ? There arc three reasons for it. First of all, 
it has got to be realised that in the situation in which we are 
placed the woman underground cannot be treated as a single 
unit by herself. She is a potential. If she goes 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
Honouable Member’s time is up. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not spoken 
for more than 20 minutes. 

The first consequence will be that if she leaves the coal mine, 
the coal cutter will also leave the coal mine and there would be 
a further deterioration in the situation. The second consequence 
will be that if she does not work, there will be more absenteeism 
in the coal mines. And thirdly that there would be a further 
reduction in the number of coal cutters because some cutters will 
have to do the work of loaders, a work which women now do. As 
a matter of fact, the argument that has been sometimes urged 
that the women have not been able to produce more coal is not 
correct and I would like to draw the attention of the House 

Several Honourable Members : The Honourable Member’s 
time is up. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, we have 
no intention to keep women underground for a minute longer 
than is absolutely necessary. As the House is aware, we have 
taken several measures in order to meet the situation. We have 
imported Gorakhpur labour, we have imported machinery, and 
we have done several other things. 

(It being Five of the Clock). 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abudr Rahim): The 
question is: 

“ That the demand under the head ‘Department of Labour’ 

be reduced by Rs. 100.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


260 


44 


* Department of Labour 

(Demand for Supplementary Grant in respect of) 


The Honourable Sir Jeremy Raisman : Sir, I move : 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 2,40,000 be 
granted to the Governor General in Council to defray the charges 
which will come in course of payment during the year ending 
on the 31st day of March, 1945 in respect of ‘Department of 
Labour’.” 

Mr. Chairman (Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang): Motion Moved : 

k k k 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): As 
my friend Prof. Ranga probably knows, last year the Government 
of India imposed a cess on coal, called the Coal Mines Welfare 
Cess which is levied at the rate of 4 annas per ton on coal 
produced. It was with regard to the administration of this coal 
fund that the Coal Mines Welfare Officer was appointed. The 
Coal Mines Welfare Fund is administered by a committee. The 
committee is constituted of equal representatives of employers, 
equal representatives of workers in coal mines, representatives 
of the Provincial governments, namely, of Bihar and Bengal and 
is presided over by the Secretary of the Labour Department, as 
the Chairman. The Committee is more or less an autonomous 
body. It has its own budget which is prepared by the Coal 
Commissioner. It is submitted to the Committee and the Coal 
Mines Welfare Commissioner is the executive authority over 
this expenditure. All questions of welfare, for instance, such as 
malaria, water supply, medicine and other matters relating to 
coal welfare are considered by this Committee. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Do you exercise any 
control over it in any way ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 27th March 1945, pp. 2138-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


261 


DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR 261 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Oh, yes. I exercise 
control, because the secretary of the Labour Department is the 
Chairman. The budget comes to us for purposes of consideration. 
When it is passed, it is sent back and referred to the committee 
for further amendment. 

With regard to the question of the Labour Commissioner, I 
think my friend Professor Ranga will know that all Provincial 
Governments have got Labour Commissioners. Under them, they 
have their own conciliation officers and other officers looking 
after labour. It was felt in the Government of India that as 
the Government of India has also got certain undertakings for 
which it is responsible, it was desirable that the Government of 
India should also have a similar organisation under its control 
to look after the welfare of workers engaged in these Central 
undertakings and consequently quite recently we have established 
this organisation. At the head of the organisation is an officer 
called the Chief Labour Commissioner with the Government of 
India. The rest of India is divided into three different areas and 
for each area there will be one Deputy Labour Commissioner. 
Prof. Ranga, I think, would like to know that we have taken 
advantage of this new organisation in order to amalgamate the 
work of Central undertakings along with the work which was 
originally done separately by the Conciliation Officer (Railways) 
and the Supervisor of Railway labour. All this has now beeen 
amalgamated and centralised. The Labour Welfare Officers who 
were working individually in different areas and were reporting 
directly to the Government of India will now be under these 
different Labour Commissioners. Similarly, the Railway Inspectors 
who were also working separately under the Railway Conciliation 
Officer and doing the work of checking up the Payment of Wages 
Act and the hours of labour are also now being brought under 
the new scheme and we have made a consolidated scheme. 

With regard to the point relating to the Labour Investigation 
Committee, I think it will be recalled that last year or rather the 
year before that in 1943, the Tripartite Labour Conference passed 
a resolution that the Government of India should undertake social 
security measures on the lines of the Beveridge report. It was then 
felt that before any such scheme could be formulated, it would be 
necessary to have a fact finding committee which would investigate 
all questions, such as housing, wages, sanitary conditions 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and other data affecting the welfare of the workers, and that 
after the facts were found by the Committee, the Government 
of India should have another Committee in order to formulate 
such social security measures as can be based upon the data that 
were found by this Investigation Committee. This Investigation 
committee has now been working for nearly six or seven months 
and its report is promised sometime in June or July next. After 
the report is received, measures will be taken to constitute the 
second part of the enquiry and these facts will be placed before 
them according to the decision of the Tripartite Conference. The 
second counter-part of this Investigation Committee would be a 
committee represented by ‘employers, employees and members 
of Provincial Governments’. 

With regard to the other question, namely, unskilled labour 
supply, the position is this. It was found out that various 
contractors were competing among themselves and paying much 
higher wages than what the market rate permitted in order to 
snatch away labour to their own contracts and to leave other 
contractors high and dry. The result was that while there was a 
superfluity of labour in some parts, there was great scarcity of 
labour in other parts where military works found it extremely 
difficult to find the necessary amount of labour. Consequently 
the Government of India decided that it was necessary to ration 
man-power and therefore the first step that they took was to 
appoint this committee which is known as Unskilled Labour 
Supply Committee. To this Committee, every contractor has to 
make an application, if he wants to take away labour from an area 
where he is not working and it is only on the certificate given by 
the Supply Committee that he can go to some other area to tap 
labour from that area. There are various stations where these 
labour depots are kept. At the head is a contractor who manages 
this scheme. I cannot at this stage give my Honourable friend 
all the details under the scheme. But if he is more interested 
in the matter, he can put down a short notice question which 
I am prepared to accept and give information on this subject. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan (Madura and 
Ramnad cum Tinnevelly : Non-Muhammadan Rural): Sir, 
I should like first to thank my Honourable friend lor the 
long statement he has made and the information he has 
supplied to Prof. Ranga and his colleagues. But I think he 
has missed one essential question and that is whether the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


263 


DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR 263 

Coal Commissioner will consider the question of reimposing the 
ban on employment of women underground. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure that is 
not his function. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : I should like to know 
whether the Coal Commissioner or the Committee will consider 
whether under labour conditions prevailing now in mines, women 
should be permitted to continue to work underground any longer 
and whether it is not injurious to the health of women to do 
such work in mines. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That will not be 
a matter within their purview. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Then, what is the use of having them ? 

Mr. N.M. Joshi (Nominated Non- official): As I envisage, 
the function of this committee, when it was appointed, was to 
find out facts and certainly the Committee will find out facts 
regarding the question of employing women underground, and 
every question 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I understood 
Shrimati Radhabai Subbarayan to refer to the Coal Commissioner 
and his work. 

Shrimati K. Radhabai Subbarayan : And also to the 
committee to which my Honourable friend referred. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, they might. 

Mr. N.M. Joshi : That is the view I take that the Committee 
will consider every question. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I thought she was 
referring only to the Coal Commissioner. 

Mr. N.M. Joshi : Including the removal of the ban on the 
employment of women and all questions concerning labour in all 
fields. I therefore feel that this money should be voted. 

Mr. Chairman (Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang): The question is: 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 2,40,000 be 
granted to the Governor General in Council to defray the charges 
which will come in course of payment during the year ending 
on the 31st day of March, 1945 in respect of ‘Department of 
Labour ’ ”, 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


264 


45 

* The Mines Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. Deputy President, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Mines Maternity — 
Benefit Act 1941, be referred to a select Committee consisting of 
Mr. M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, Prof. N. G. Ranga, Shri K.B. 
Jinaraja Ilegde, Maulana Zafar Ali Khan, Sir Syed Raza Ali, 

Mr. Amarcndra Nath Chattopadhyaya, Mr. N. M. Joshi, Rao 
Bahadur N. Siva Raj, Mr. II. G. Stokes, Mr. S. C. Joshi and 
the Mover with instructions to report on Monday, the 2nd April, 
1945, and that the number of members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande (Rohilkhand and Kumaon Divisions : 
Non-Muhammadan Rural): Why is not there a lady Member ? 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar (Salem and Coimbatore 
cum North Arcot Non-Muhammadan Rural): I suggest 
Mrs. Subbarayan. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend might move an amendment at a later stage and I will 
deal with it. 

As the House is aware, we have already got the Miners 
Maternity Benefit Act, which was passed in the year 1941. This 
Bill seeks to amend that Act and the reasons why this amendment 
has become necessary can be very briefly stated. 

When the Act of 1941 was passed it was intended to cover 
cases of maternity benefit for women working on surface. We had 
no such case as we have now of women working underground. 
Unfortunately, for the reasons which I have explained to the 
House on more than one occasion ; we had to permit women to 
work underground in coal mines. As I have stated that provision 
is of a temporary character and I hope and trust that Government 
will be able to rcimpose the ban very soon. But notwithstanding 
the fact that the lifting of the ban is of a temporary character, it 
is felt that in view of the criticisms made in this house as well 
as outside, it is necessary to amend the Act in order to provide 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th March 1945, pp. 2265-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 265 

THE MINES MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL 265 

for cases of pregnant women working underground. It is to 
give some benefit to the women working underground that this 
amendment is intended. 

The provisions of this Bill are mainly two. As it is, there is 
already in the Act a provision which prohibits women working 
after delivery for four weeks. We now propose to add a provision 
prohibiting women working underground before confinement. That 
period will be a period often weeks, so that under the present 
Bill no woman would be allowed to work underground for ten 
weeks before her confinement. Similarly there is a provision for 
the benefit to be given to her. That benefit will be at the rate of 
twelve annas per day for fourteen weeks in all-ten weeks before 
confinement and four weeks after confinement. The qualifying 
condition for enabling her to earn the benefit is 90 days work 
underground withnin a period of six months. These are mainly 
the provisions of this Bill. 

Sir, I have noticed that there arc cerrtain amendments which 
have been tabled and I might tell the House that I have also 
thought of certain amendments which I want to move on behalf 
of the Government. But as the time is very short and as the 
matter is urgent, I think the interest of everybody concerned 
would be served, if the Bill were forthwith sent to the Select 
Committee. So that the amendments that I have in mind and the 
amendments that have been tabled could be considered round the 
table with mutual give and take. It is because of this proposal, 
viz., to refer the Bill to the select Committee (which was not my 
original intention) that I do not propose to dilate at any length 
on this Bill. With these observations I move. 

k k k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I do not think 
I need say much in reply to what has been said by the Honourable 
Members who have taken part in this discussion. One thing 
however I would like to say, namely, that I appreciate very much 
the spirit of the speakers which shows that the two questions, 
namely, the question of the women working underground and 
the questions arising out of this Bill should be separated and I 
am glad to say that they have been separated by the speakers 
who spoke on the Bill. They have expressed their opinion 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th March, 1945, p. 2270. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

on the question of the merits of allowing women to work 
underground. The views of the Government have already been 
expressed and I have no quarrel with those who differ from 
Government but I am glad to say that all those who have spoken 
have realised the necessity of the Bill I have brought forward 
and I hope I shall continue to have the co-operation which they 
have exhibited in this house now. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandra Datta) : The 
question is: 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Mines Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1941, be referred to a Select Committee consisting of 
Mr. M. An anthasayanam Ayyangar, Prof. N. G. Ranga, Shri K. 

B. Jinaraja Hegde, Maulana Zafar Ali Khan, Sir Sycd Raza Ali, 

Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya, Mr. N. M. Joshi, Rao 
Bahadur N. Siva Raj, Mr. H. G. Stokes, Mr. S. C. Joshi and 
the Mover with instructions to report on Monday, the 2nd April, 
1945, and that the number of members whose presence shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


267 


46 


* The Factories (Second Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, as 

reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration”. 

Sir, the report of the Select Committee has been before the 
House for quite a long time. I have no doubt that Honourable 
Members who take interest in this subject have read and 
digested what the Select Committee has to say. I will therefore 
do no more than to draw attention of the House to some of the 
fundamental changes which the Select Committee has made 
in the Bill as introduced by me. Sir, the select Committee has 
altogether made five important and fundamental changes. The 
first change that the Select Committee has made is to save the 
rights to any holidays with pay that might accrue to a workman, 
otherwise than under the Act, such as holidays that may be 
permissible under other enactments or holidays that may be 
permissible under an award or an agreement or a contract of 
service. That provision did not exist in the original Bill. But 
it has now been introduced by the addition of sub-clause (2) 
to section 49-A. The second change which the select committee 
has made is to extend the benefit of the holidays with pay to 
children which again was not found in the original Bill as it was 
introduced to this House. Not only the Select Committee has 
extended the provisions of the Bill to a child but the holidays 
themselves have been extended in number. For a workman 
the holidays are only seven days. But to a child, the holidays 
shall be 14 days. Honourable members will find that in the 
new amendment to section 49-B. Then, Sir, the House will 
remember that when the Bill was introduced it did not contain 
any provisions to cover cases of workman who was discharged 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th March 1945, pp. 2270-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

before he had earned his holiday or had resigned his post and 
therefore did not get his holiday. I said that that was a matter 
which might be left to be subsequently decided in such a manner 
as we thought best. The Select Committee thought that it was 
so important a case that provision ought to be introduced in 
the Bill and accordingly a new provision has been introduced. 

Another new principle which has been introduced in the Bill 
is the power given to the Inspector to act on behalf of a worker 
who has not been able to get his holidays or has not been able 
to get the pay which he is entitled to obtain as a result of the 
holiday. The Select Committee realised that it was no use leaving 
the worker to his resources in order to prosecute his employer 
either criminally or civilly in order to secuer the benefit which 
the Act gives him and which the employer has failed to give 
him. Therefore it was the duty of the State to take upon itself 
the responsibility of seeing that these benefits were secured to 
the workmen. This has now been done by the conferment of the 
power on the Inspector to act on behalf of a worker. 

Another important change which has been made by the 
select Committee is with regard to the making of the rules. 
Honourable members will recollect that in the original Bill, the 
power for making rules under the Act in order to give effect 
to the provisions was left to the provinces. Now, it was felt in 
the Select Committee that if the rule-making power was left to 
the provinces the different provinces might make different set 
of rules, and consequently there might be variety of provisions 
under the same Act. That undoubtedly would have very serious 
consequences on the different industries. One industry in one 
province may be subjected to one set of rules, a similar industry 
in another province may be subjected to a different set of 
rules and it would introduce a very undesirable clement in the 
competitive character of the industry taking India as a whole. The 
Select Committee therefore recommended that the Government 
of India should have the authority to give directions to the 
provinces in the matter of making rules so that the desire or the 
object of securing uniformity in these rules would be achieved. 
These are, Sir, some of the fundamental principles which have 
been incorporated in the Bill as a result of the deliberations 
in the Select Committee. The rest of the provisions are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


269 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 269 

more or less as they were in the original Bill and call for no 
comment. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Deputy President (Mr. Akhil Chandara Datta): 
Motion moved. 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, as 

reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

k k k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think 
it is necessary for me to deal with each and every point that 
has been raised by Honourable Members who have spoken 
on this motion, particularly because I find that every point 
which has been made by honourable Members is covered by 
an amendment. Consequently there will be a duplication of 
debate, which I do not propose to undertake. I will say what 
I have to say on the various points when the appropriate 
amendments are moved. 

k k k 

f The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am afraid 
it is not possible for me to accept either of the amendments 
which have been proposed by Mr. Joshi or Prof. Ranga. I quite 
understand that a workman who has put in the requisite 
amount of service should be entitled to get his holidays 
irrespective of the consideration as to whether he has served 
one employer or more than one employer. But two facts have 
to be taken into consideration. The first is the question of 
administrative feasibility. I am quite satisfied that unless we 
have a sort of an insurance system where the payments to 
be made by employers are de-personalised and fastened upon 
some fund, it would not be possible to work the provisions, if 
I were to accept the amendments proposed by my Honourable 
friends. If, for instance, a scheme of health insurance were to 
come into operation, than we would have the basis of a system 
of cards, stamps and the other administrative machinery 
for insurance purposes, and then an amendment of the sort 
which has been moved would be possible to accept. But for 
the present, I am sorry to say that I cannot see any way to 
accept this amendment. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill, 29th March 1945, p. 2276. 
t Ibid., p. 2280. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I should also like to submit that it was the desire of the House 
or of the Select Committee that a date should be fixed for the 
Bill to come into force. As my Honourable friends will recall, we 
had in the original Bill left the date for the operation of the Bill 
to the Provincial Governments. But we have departed from that 
procedure and we have now accepted the principle that this Bill 
itself should lay down the date on which it shall come into force; 
and the date as fixed in the Bill is the first day of January 1946. 
It is therefore quite clear that all administrative machinery that 
is necessary for the giving effect to this Bill must be brought 
into being within or before the 1st January, 1946 ; and I must 
confess my ultter inability to comprehend the possibility either 
of the Government of India or of the Provincial Governments 
being in a position to set into operation the machinery that 
would be necessary to give effect to the provisions contained 
in the two amendments. As I said, I have sympathy but the 
administrative difficulties are so great that I must at this stage 
oppose the amendment. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : May I make one suggestion, if it is 
agreeable to the Government- not otherwise ? In the first line, 
suppose we drop the words “or different managements” in the 
amendment proposed and merely say “or factories belonging to 
the same management” ? 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I find difficulty 
in all that: I have paid attention to that. 

•k "k "k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. President, I am not sure that those who have moved this 
amendment and supported it have much justification on their side. 
We always take as our standard measure the Conventions passed 
at the International Labour Conferences and the Honourable 
House will remember that the International Labour Conference 
in 1936, when it took up this question, fixed six days as the 
measure of holidays that ought to be allowed. Looking at the 
subject from that point of view, I am not prepared to accept nor can 
anybody say that the Bill as introduced falls short of the standard 
prescribed by the International Labour Conference. On my side I 
must also mention another difficulty. The Honourable House will 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV, 2nd April 1945, pp. 2315-16. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


271 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 271 

remember that this subject of labour legislation falls in the field of 
Concurrent Legislation. The administrative responsibility for carrrying 
out these measures entirely falls on the Provincial Governments, in 
which the executive authority for administration is vested by the 
Constitution. Having regard to that, there has been established a 
convention, viz., that as far as this Concurrent field of legislation 
goes, whatever measures are introduced, should have more or less 
the concurrence of the Provincial Governments. And I would like to 
tell the House that the period that is fixed in the Bill was fixed after 
consultation with the provinces. However, I am prepared to accept 
the amendment and I would very much like to state the reason 
which has prevailed upon me in order to accept this amendment. 
The reason which has prevailed upon me is the geographical reason. 
I realise that the centres of industry and the centres of population 
arc very vastly divided by long distances. A factory is situated in 
Bombay, the labourer lives either in the U. P. or C. P. and has to 
travel long distances in order to employ himself in a useful occupation. 
Having regard to this circumstances, viz., that he has to travel long 
distances, I think that perhaps a small departure may be made 
from the original proposal that stands in the Bill. It is therefore on 
that ground that I am prepared to accept this amendment. At the 
same time, I must stipulate one other condition. I find that there 
is another amendment standing in the name of Prof. Ranga and 
Mrs. Subbarayan, the object of which is to reintroduce the words 
“at least”, which were omitted by the Select Committee. Now, the 
introduction of these words “ at least” would create disharmony and 
I must say that I regard uniformity of principle in a matter of this 
kind to be of fundamental importance and my position therefore is 
that if those who have tabled this amendment will agree to drop it. 
I on my part, am prepared to accept the amendment for ten days. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga (Guntur cum Nellore: Non-Muhammedan 
Rural): We are prepared to drop the other amendment, for the present. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): You are not 
going to press the motion ? 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Not the other amendment, Sir. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The question 
is : 

“That in clause 3 of the Bill, in sub-sections (I) and (2) of the 

proposed section 49B for the word ‘seven’ the word ‘ten’ be inserted”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


272 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There has to be 
one consequential amendment that in sub-clause (2) the word 
‘ten’ shall be substituted for ‘seven’. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : I think 
the Honourable Member would do well to put down a proper 
amendment. That, I think, can be done afterwards. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : At the end of sub- 
section (2) in the last line, the word ‘ten’ shall be substituted 
for ‘seven’. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I think 
there ought to be a formal amendment. 

k k k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I regret I 
cannot accept this amendment. My Honourable friend, Mr. Inskip, 
stated that there was no definition of sickness. I wish we could 
define sickness ; I have searched for a definition in the Health 
Insurance Act, and I find that there is no definition of sickness for 
the simple reason that sickness cannot be defined. It is a matter of 
certification. If a medical person says that a certain person is sick, 
then everybody has got to accept that definition. If my Honourable 
friend’s contention was that certificate should be defined in a 
proper manner, I could have understood his complaint. But on 
that ground I submit he has no ground for complaint, because 
we propose to make rules in which persons who will have the 
authority to certify will be properly laid down : their qualifications 
will be prescribed. Consequently the fear that doctors who have no 
practice and who generally live on giving false certificates will find 
no place in this, because the rules, I hope, will be so framed that 
that sort of contingency will be altogether eliminated. The difficulty 
I find in accepting this amendment is this : my Honourable 
friend says that certificates should not suffice for sickness but 
that the employer should be allowed to sit in judgment, even 
when a certificate has been obtained, whether, notwithstanding 
the certificate, he would grant leave or he would not grant 
leave. I must say that that is a position to which Government 
cannot be a party. Government cannot allow an employer to say 
that notwithstanding the certificate given by a doctor whose 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV, 2nd April 1945, p.2318. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


273 


THE FACTORIES (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL 273 

qualifications are in accordance with the rules we have made, 
it must still be left a matter for the employer to decide. I think 
that would be placing too much authority in the hands of the 
employers ; and for this reason I am not disposed to accept this 
amendment. 

Another thing my Honourable friend remarked is this, that we 
have fixed a limit of ninety days for all the three contingencies- 
sickness, accident and authorised leave. Consequently in practice 
any malingering on the part of the employee cannot be carried 
on indefinitely; because for the three contingencies we have 
fixed a limit of ninety days ; and if the limit of ninety days is 
exceeded, then he automatically becomes disqualified for getting 
the benefit under the Act. Having regard to these circumstances, 
I must oppose this amendment. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“ That in clause 3 of the Bill, in the Explanation at the end 
of the proposed section 49B for the words ‘ sickness, accident or 
authorised leave’ the words ‘authorised leave granted on account 
of sickness, accident or for compassionate reasons’ be substituted.” 

The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


274 


47 

* Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B..R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill further to amend the Mines Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1941, as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into 
consideration.” 

Sir, the Bill, I must admit, has been considerably modified 
by the Select Committee. In view of that it is only proper 
that I should call the attention of the house to some of the 
important changes in the Bill which have been made by the 
Select Committee. 

(At this stage, Mr. President (The honourable Sir Abdur 
Rahim) resumed the Chair. 

The first change which the Select Committee has made is 
with regard to the period of prohibition of pregnant women on 
women working under-ground. The original Bill had provided that 
the prohibition should operate for ten weeks before confinement 
and for four weeks after confinement. The Select Committee 
has made no change in the period originally proposed, for 
prohibition before confinement. But with regard to the period of 
prohibition after confinement, the changes they have made are 
somewhat extensive. In the first place, the period of prohibition 
is extended from four weeks lo thirty-six weeks. This period 
of thirty-six weeks is broken up into two parts : There is a 
period of complete prohibition which is followed by a period 
of partial prohibition. The period of complete prohibition, is 
extended by the Select Committee from four weeks to twenty- six 
weeks. The period of partial prohibition covers ten weeks. 
The period of partial prohibition is again made subject to two 
different prescriptions dependent upon the existence or non- 
existence of a creche. During the period of partial prohibition, 
a woman is not to work underground for more than four 
hours if there is no creche, and, secondly, she is not to work 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central) Vol. IV, 11th April 1945, pp. 2788-89. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


275 


MINES MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL 275 

underground for more than four hours at any time even if there 
is a creche. These are the changes made by the Select Committee 
with regard to the period of prohibition on work underground. 

Coming to the question of maternity benefits to be paid to a 
woman working underground, the Select Committee has made 
the following changes; Originally the Bill had laid down two 
conditions which a woman working underground was required 
to satisfy before she became entitled to maternity benefit. Those 
conditions were, firstly, a minimum period of work extending 
to six months in a mine before confinement, and the second 
condition was minimum of 90 days work underground during 
such period of six months. The Select Committee has removed 
the first condition, namely the requisite period of six months 
of service in a mine, so that under the amended Bill all that a 
woman need do is to satisfy the condition of having worked for 
ninety days underground within the period of six months prior 
to delivery and she becomes entitled to maternity benefit. 

The Select Committee has also made certain amendments 
with regard to the period of benefit. In the original Bill, the 
period of benefit was ten weeks before confinement and four 
weeks after confinement. The select Committee has changed the 
period of benefit after confinement from four weeks to six weeks. 
Siimilarly changes have been made in the amount of benefit. 
Originally the amount of benefit was eight annas per day. The 
select Committee has changed it to six rupees a week, which is 
a little less than fourteen annas a day. Then the whole of the 
period of benefit is now declared to be a period of authorised 
leave, so that during this period an employer is not entitled to 
dismiss a woman who comes under the present Bill. 

Another important provision made by the Select Committee 
is to require that the medical examination of a woman entitled 
to benefit shall be by a woman doctor if the woman demands 
it, a provision which did not exist in the original Bill. I might 
also draw the attention of the House to the fact that during this 
period of thirty- six weeks of prohibition on work underground, 
a woman is free to work otherwise than on work underground 
during a period of thirty-two weeks and supplement her earnings, 
which was not provided in the original Bill. The only period 
during which she will not be free to work is four weeks after 
delivery. So that under the Amendment Bill, a woman is not only 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

entitled to get the maternity benefit of a woman working on 
the surface from eight to twelve annas. That is to say, she has 
also got an increase of fifty per cent over the previous benefit, 
admissible to her under the original Act. 

These are some of the important changes which the Select 
Committee has made. As I have said the Bill has been very 
considerably altered by the Select Committee. All the same, 
Government do not propose to raise any difficulty with regard to 
the amendments and having regard to the peculiar circumstances 
of the case they arc quite prepared to accept the Bill as amended 
by the Select Committee. 

Sir, I move : 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved : 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Mines Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1941, as reported by the Select Committee, be taken into 
consideration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


277 


48 


* Health Insurance for Industrial Workers 

Standing Labour Committee Discuss Adarkar Report 

Prof. Adarkar’s Report on Health Insurance for Industrial 
Workers in India was discussed at the sixth meeting of the 
Standing Labour Committee which concluded in New Delhi on 
March 17. The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, 
Government of India, presided. Mr. Stack and Mr. Rao of the 
I.L.O. also attended the meeting as visitors, and some comments 
made by them on the scheme were circulated. 

The delegates, including those representing employers 
and workers, warmly appreciated Prof. Adarkar’s Report and 
expressed their respective views on questions relating to medical 
and cash benefits, the qualifying or waiting periods, the type of 
treatment, medical organisation and State contribution. A number 
of delegates emphasised the importance of going ahead with the 
scheme as early as possible, and there was general agreement 
that in order to secure the benefits resulting from broadening 
the basis of the scheme it was advisable to extend its scope to 
all organised industries and perennial factories. 

Maternity Benefits 

It was also agreed that the Centre should go ahead with the 
preparation of a scheme, and, if they found it possible to do 
so, they should include in this scheme maternity benefits and 
workmen’s compensation. After the scheme was prepared, the 
Centre should consult provinces and the Employers’ and Workers’ 
Organisations and, after consideration of their replies, should 
introduce a Bill in the Legislative Assembly. 

Another item on the agenda for the meeting was a proposal to change 
the constitution and functions of the Tripartite Labour Conference and 

* Indian Information, April 15, 1945, p. 505. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


278 


278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Standing Labour Committee with a view to classify these 
functions in two lists, one dealing with general subjects such as 
terms and conditions of employment, labour legislation, social 
security, etc., and the other with concrete questions relating to 
labour welfare and administration of labour laws. 

In the memorandum placed before the Committee it was 
suggested that a Labour Welfare Committee should be set up 
to deal with functions in the second list, the intention being to 
secure through this Committee a body which would deal with 
the actual problems arising in the various industries, and to 
bring into such committee representatives of various important 
industries. The Labour Conference and its Standing Labour 
Committee should confine themselves to terms and conditions of 
employment, labour legislation, social security, etc., looked at on 
broad lines and from an all-India stand point. It was agreed that 
a sub-committee should be appointed to examine these proposals. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


279 


49 


* War Work of National Service 
Labour Tribunals 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar’s Tribute 

“At a time when the war was going none too well, when India 
herself was threatened with invasion, we were confronted with 
a serious bottlneck in the supply of technical personnel urgently 
required for the fighting Services and our war industries. The 
National Service Labour Tribunals were set up under the stress 
of urgency. Technical man-power had to be mobilised with the 
utmost speed and because of our lack of experience our plans 
had necessarily to be somewhat hazy. The task was fraught 
with difficulties but its accomplishment is a great tribute to 
your efforts.” 

Thus observed the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour 
Member, Government of India, in his address to the Chairmen 
of National Service Labour Tribunals, who assembled in Simla 
on April 19 to discuss questions relating to technical training 
scheme, the National Service (Technical Personnel) Ordinance, 
and Employment Exchanges. 

Continuing, the Labour Member said : 

The Tribunals have directed nearly 15,000 technicians into 
national service. They have also exercised effective control 
over the movement of technical personnel. It was necessary 
to ask workmen to take up employment away from their 
homes or to prevent them from bettering their prospects by 
seeking employment elsewhere. In the United Kingdom such 
action is comparatively easy because conditions of employment 
are more or less standardised and the Ministry of Labour 
and National Service have a vast welfare organisation to 
watch the interests of a conscripted worker especially when 
he is required to go away from his home. The Tribunals in 
India were, however, placed in different circumstances, and 
on the whole it may be said that they have exercised their 
powers with commendable tact and restraint to the great 


Indian Information, May 15, 1945, pp. 639-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


280 


280 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

advantage of the war effort but without undue disregard to the 
interests of the workers. 

There have been employers who have complained that the 
Tribunals have been unduly soft to the workers. On the other 
hand, there have been complaints that the Tribunals have 
been unduly harsh towards the workers. I have never tried to 
discourage these complaints cither from employers or workers 
because I have always believed that the careful consideration of 
complaints will enable Government to prescribe the right course 
of action. You will find therefore that on the one hand we are 
suggesting the tightening of control over the drift of labour 
regarding which there are still serious complaints in Calcutta. 
On the other hand, we are also requiring Tribunals to give closer 
attention to the conditions of employment of workers who arc 
directed into national service or prevented from bettering their 
employment. 

Control With Justice 

I do not propose to enter into any of the details of the suggestions 
which will come for consideration in the subsequent meeting 
but I should like to impress upon you the fact that the war has 
imposed a very heavy strain upon the workers and that if we 
have, on account of the war, to impose a further sacrifice upon 
them, we should ensure that this is not done arbitrarily. Whatever 
the pressure from employers, the war emergency should not be 
the occasion for deteriorating labour conditions or lowering the 
dignity of labour. 

In the United Kingdom vast powers are vested in the minister 
of Labour and National Service but they arc powers which can 
be exercised to an equal extent in both directions i.e., against 
the employer as much as against the worker. These powers have 
been used to bring employers and workers together so that there 
may be greater collaboration between them. It is this spirit of 
co-operation which I should like to sec inculcated in India and I 
am sure that it can be done if we exercise control with firmness 
but with full justice. 

There is one other aspect of the work of the National Service 
Labour Tribunals that deserves notice. The recruitment for our 
training schemes in India and the United Kingdom has been 
entrusted to them and I should like to express my sincere 
appreciation of the care with which this task has been undertaken. 
But for this our training schemes could not have been a success. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


281 


WAR WORK OF NATIONAL SERVICE LABOUR TRIBUNALS 281 

In the case of the Bevin Training Scheme I know that the 
Ministry of Labour and National Service were particularly 
impressed by the excellent selection of the trainees who were 
sent to the United Kingdom. No doubt there were some black 
sheep among the Bevin trainees but considering the numbers 
that have been sent, we may congratulate ourselves that they 
were so very few in regard to whom it cannot be said that the 
time and money spent on their training was wasted. On the 
other hand, most of the returned Bevin trainees will undoubtedly 
be of great help in raising the standard of our skilled workers. 
They have also brought back with them the unique experience 
of a nation fully mobilised for total war. What can a country 
not achieve when it is thus organised and why should these 
achievements be confined to war alone ? Can we not extend 
them to the peace that we hope will follow shortly. 

Resettlement Machinery 

This brings me to the post-war issues which will confront us 
in no less bewildering a manner than the issues of war. The 
first and most importnt problem will be the resettlement of 
demobilised personnel and here I am thinking not only of 
the fighting Services but also of the large body of industrial 
workers engaged in war factories. No Government can leave 
the demobilised ex-service personnel and workers in war 
industries to their own fate during the transition from war to 
peace. Resettlement is a civil responsibility and Government 
have decided that it will fall on the Labour Department. 
Our resettlement proposals will be discussed with you. In 
the machinery that we hope to set up, the Chairman of the 
National Service Labour Tribunals will be called upon to play 
a very important part. 

The problem of resettlement is one which has to be tackled 
by the Centre and the Provinces in the closest co-operation. In 
the Provinces the Chairman will be the head of the regional 
organisation. It will be his duty to maintain the closest contact 
with the organisation at the Centre and with the Departments 
of the Provincial Governments. Your duties will call for the 
highest degree of tact, energy and enterprise. I hope that in 
the discharge of these duties your contribution will be no less 
than in wartime. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Efficient Employment Service 

I need not enter into the details of our resettlement organisation 
but I should like to emphasise that in addition to a very 
necessary service for ex-service demobilised personnel, the 
main purpose of the organisation that we propose to set up 
is to lay the foundation of an efficient employment service in 
this country. The important feature of such a service is a co- 
ordinated system of Employment Exchanges. We have already 
set up a few of these Exchanges some of which have shown good 
results but it is clear that we must organise this machinery 
on a sounder basis. We require above all trained staff to run 
the Exchanges and suitable buildings to which workers and 
employers can come. In both respects our existing Exchanges 
have started with a very considerable handicap. So far as staff 
is concerned, we are proposing to inaugurate very shortly a 
training scheme for Managers and Assistant Managers. We 
hope that this training will enable newer Exchanges to be 
built up on the right lines. 

The resettlement organisation will also have to concern itself 
with the training and re-conditioning of demobilised personnel 
and their welfare (follow-up) and will have to watch their 
interests in the new employment. Provision has also been made 
for publicity and canvassing. The details of the organisation 
will come before you for consideration and we shall also await 
suggestions from Provincial Governments. 

Task Of Great Magnitude 

What is very important is that you. Gentlemen, should on 
your return to the Provinces discuss these proposals with the 
representatives of Provincial Governments and interest them 
in our scheme. We would like to avoid any misunderstanding 
as to its scope. If there are difficulties which you cannot 
resolve, we hope you will bring them to our notice and give 
us your own suggestions as to how they can be overcome. We 
have undertaken a task of great complexity and magnitude. 
We must therefore work together bearing in mind the higher 
interests that we have to serve. 

I have taken much of your time and now, Gentlemen, before 
leaving you to your labours, I should like to wish you good 
speed and good luck. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


283 


WAR WORK OF NATIONAL SERVICE LABOUR TRIBUNALS 283 

k k k 


*APPOINTMENT OF REGIONAL LABOUR 
COMMISSIONERS 

Three Regional Labour Commissioners — Mr. D. G. Jadhav, 
Dr. Seth and Mr. Abu Talib — have been appointed by the Central 
Government at Bombay, Calcutta and Lahore respectively for 
administering their new machinery which has been set up to 
deal with industrial relations in industries and undertakings in 
the “central sphere.” The organisation is under Mr. S. C. Joshi, 
the Central Government’s Chief Labour Commissioner at the 
headquarters. 

The new set-up also includes a Deputy Labour Commissioner 
at New Delhi, 9 Conciliation Officers and 24 Labour Inspectors 
(Central) located at various centres throughout India, and one 
Central Inspector of industrial canteens. 

Industries falling in the “ central sphere ” are (1) all industrial 
establishments owned or controlled by the Government of India ; 
(2) Federal railways ; (3) mines and oilfields and (4) major ports. 

• • 


*Indian Information, August 15, 1945 p. 152. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


284 


50 

* Multi-purpose Development of 
Damodar Valley 

Labour Member’s Speech at Calcutta Conference 

“ The project (harnessing the waters of the Damodar River) 
is a welcome one to the Government of India. It very clearly 
shows a fine prospect of the control of the River, a prospect of 
controlling floods, of securing a fine area for perennial irrigation 
with resultant insurance against famine and a much needed 
supply of power. I am sure it will be more than welcome to 
the Governments of Bengal and Bihar if they realise what the 
project will mean to them and their people.” 

Thus observed the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour 
Member, Government of India, in his address to representatives 
of Bengal and Bihar Governments at a Conference held in 
Calcutta on August 23 to discuss the Preliminary Memorandum 
on the Damodar Valley Multipurpose Project. The session 
lasted two days, and the Labour Member presided. 

Here is the full text of Dr. Ambedkar’s speech : 

“We are now meeting for the second lime to discuss the 
project for harnessing the waters of the Damodar River. As 
you will recall, our first meeting in this connection took place 
on January 3, 1945. We then considered the Report of the 
Damodar River Flood Enquiry Committee-appointed by the 
Government of Bengal in 1944. 

“The issue before us was whether we should be content 
with damming the river for the purpose of stopping the flood 
only or whether we should make it a multi-purpose project so 
as to cover generation of electricity and the supply of water 
for irrigation and navigation also. The consensus of opinion 
at that Conference was that we should go in for the latter. 
Accordingly, the Conference decided to take the next step, 
namely to create machinery for collecting the necessary data to 

* Indian Information, October 1, 1945, pp. 345-49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


285 


MULTI-PURPOSE DEVELOPMENT OF DAMODAR VALLEY 285 

draw up a multi-purpose scheme. On the part of the Government 
of India, I offered the fullest assistance of technical experts in 
carrying out this preliminary work. 

“The experts have now drawn up, with the co-operation of 
the engineers from Bengal, a Preliminary Memorandum on the 
Unified Development of the Damodar River Valley. Copies of this 
Memorandum have already been in the hands of the Government 
of Bengal and Bihar. 

“With regard to this Memorandum, I feel it my duty to say, 
and I am sure in this I am voicing your sentiments, that we 
are grateful to Mr. Voorduin for the preparation of this draft 
Memorandum and also to the ready co-operation which was offered 
to him by the engineering staff of the Bengal Government. Mr. 
Matthews, the Chairman of the Central Power Technical Board, 
has also given us the benefit of his advice, and at a later stage, 
I have no doubt, that we shall receive all the assistance from 
Mr. Khosla, the Chairman of the Waterways and Navigation 
Board. 

“For the present we have before us now a very clear, a very 
comprehensive and a very essential survey of the full possibilities 
of the Damodar River Valley, accompanied by adeqauate data to 
enable us to take the next step with confidence. 

“The reason why we have met today is to consider this 
Preliminary Memorandum and the points that arise out of it. 
These points are set in the agenda which is prepared for this 
meeting. The agenda contains a full list of matters arising out 
of the Preliminary Memorandum and which require immediate 
attention. As it has already been circulated to the Governments 
of Bengal and Bihar, it is unnecessary for me to go over it 
again. I shall, therefore, content myself with making two general 
observations (1) with regard to matters of policy, and (2) with 
regard to questions of method and procedure. 

“Flood control is a matter of policy. I hope that there will be 
general agreement as to the desirability of providing that measure 
of flood protection as will ensure full safety to the vulnerable area 
of the Damodar Basin against even the most adverse combination 
of foreseeable natural circumstances. I am glad to say that the 
scheme drawn up in the Preliminary Memorandum does provide 
for that full measure of safety. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


286 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“The second matter of policy is the collective responsibility of 
the three Governments assembled here to put their shoulders to the 
task. I believe that there will be general agreement that the findings 
in the Preliminary Memorandum justify the three Governments 
in proceeding energetically with the development of the Damodar 
River Valley on the general lines indicated in the Memorandum. 

“The project is a welcome one to the Government of India. It 
very clearly shows a fine prospect of the control of the river, a 
prospect of controlling Hoods, of securing a fine area for perennial 
irrigation with resultant insurance against famine and a much 
needed supply of power. I am sure it will be more than welcome 
to the Governments of Bengal and Bihar, if they realise what the 
project will mean to them and their people. 

“In concrete terms, the project will give them (1) an aggregate 
controlled reservoir capacity of about 4,700,000 acre-feed, 

(2) sufficient water for perennial irrigation of about 760,000 
acres besides water for navigation purposes, (3) electrical energy 
amounting to 300,000 kilowatts, and (4) it would serve to promote 
directly the welfare of 5 million people and indirectly of many 
more millions. 

“Coming now to the question of methods and procedure, we 
have to decide upon the following points which I am placing before 
you in order of priority : — 

(1) Selections of dam sites to be taken up first; 

(2) Further detailed investigations as to the selected dam sites 
before construction can begin ; 

(3) The agency for such further preliminary investigations ; 

(4) The agency for designing and construction of dams ; 

(5) The creation of high grade administrative machinery to co- 
ordinate and push forward the vast amount of work, both 
technical and administrative, that will have to be done 
during the stages of investigations and construction that 
are to follow ; and 

(6) A series of surveys relating to the best utilisation of water 
and power that will be eventually available in the developed 
areas. 

“I would like to emphasize the need for a quick decision on the 
points relating to method and procedure. The project is no doubt 
primarily for the establishment of safety and the development of a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


287 


MULTI-PURPOSE DEVELOPMENT OF DAMODAR VALLEY 287 

multi-purpose river basin project. But it cannot be forgotten 
that the project is a post-war employment project. As the war 
is now over on all fronts, we are faced with the problems of 
peace one of which is to prevent unemployment which, with the 
sudden cancellation and the reduction of war employment and 
expenditure, is going to be one of the gravest problems in our 
domestic economy. 

Central Government’s Part 

“From this point of view, the Damodar Valley Project is a matter 
of grave urgency, and it would be a criminal folly not to come 
to an early decision, without which it is not possible for us to 
proceed further in the matter. I, therefore, hope and trust that, 
with your cooperation, we should be able today to return with 
our decisions fully and firmly made. 

“ Before closing, let me tell you that the Government of India 
is very keen, very earnest and is prepared to play its full part 
in carrying through its project. 

(1) The Government of India in conformity with their earlier 
declarations recognise their responsibility for doing all that they 
can to speed up the project on approved lines, and to this end 
will endeavour to the best of their ability. Though the form of 
the authority to carry out the project and the manner of setting 
it up is yet to be defined, the original view of the Government 
that such an authority should be set up remains unaltered. 

(2) The Government of India is prepared to assume direct 
responsibility for securing the staff and organisation necessary 
to carry out all further preliminary investigation in such manner 
as will facilitate and expedite construction with such assistance 
as the two Provinces can render without any serious detriment 
to their post-war development works. The Government of India, 
however, realise the shortage of engineering manpower in Bengal 
and will endeavour to find the necessary staff by drawing 
upon the services, if found available, of a military unit and its 
equipment to assist in preliminary investigation. This will avoid 
drawing on the strained engineering resources of the Province at 
a larger extent than is necessary and will secure a most rapid 
supply of equipment. 

(3) The Centre is prepared to advance, initially, the funds necessary 
for the further preliminary investigations undertaken by them which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


288 


288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are necessary for the main project of the understanding that 
such preliminary expenses will be charged to the project if it 
materialises and divided half and half between the Centre and 
the Province if it does not materialise. 

“There is only one thing which the Government of India 
expects the Provinces to do. It expects the Provinces to bear in 
mind the absolute necessity of ensuring that the benefits of the 
project get ultimately right down to the grass roots, i.e. everyone 
living in the Valley and some of those in the vicinity, all have 
their share in the prosperity which the project should bring. 
This, in my view, is essential, and it is for this reason that we 
want the establishment of some agency early enough so that that 
agency can set about planning at once in the manner in which 
its essential and ultimate object can be secured.” 

CONFERENCE DISCUSSIONS 

The Conference decided to proceed rapidly with further 
investigation and progress in regard to the Unified and Multi- 
purpose Damodar Valley Development Project. 

It was agreed that the scheme should provide the maximum 
measure of flood protection that might be necessary against the 
most favourable combination of natural circumstances. 

Further investigation of possible dam sites on the Damodar 
River would be necessary before starting actual construction, 
and among the sites which required such investigation were 
Maithon, Aiyar and Sonalapur. The Conference discussed the 
technical aspects of the question and decided that the order of 
priority of investigation should be, Maithon first, Aiyar second 
and Sonalapur third ; and that the Central Technical Power Board 
should prepare project reports for each of those dam sites — in 
the case of Sonalapur dealing in particular with possible effects 
on coal production. 

Necessary Staff 

The Central Government would try to secure staff, at 
the earliest possible opportunity, for the further detailed 
investigations required for such project reports. Meanwhile, 
however, investigations should be carried on by such staff as 
was immediately available. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


289 


MULTI-PURPOSE DEVELOPMENT OF DAMODAR VALLEY 289 

The Conference agreed that the entire staff engaged on 
further investigation of dam sites should work under the technical 
direction of the Central Technical Power Board so that unified 
control of the preliminary operations could be ensured. 

It was further decided to invite four engineers from the U.S.A. 
to advise on the design and construction of the first two dams to 
be built under the proposed unified scheme. The engineers would 
constitute a Technical Mission and should arrive, if possible, 
in India early next year. It was hoped that by that time the 
required data would be collected and available. 

While the ultimate intention is to constitute a Damodar Valley 
Authority for the administration and carrying out of the Scheme, 
the Conference decided that, as an interim measure, the Central 
Government should appoint a high-ranking Administrative Officer 
to co-ordinate all preliminary action and rapidly to push through 
investigations connected with the proposed Project. 

It was agreed that investigation should be undertaken 
simultaneously for the various other problems connected with 
the scheme. The Irrigation Departments of the Bengal and 
Bihar Governments, in consultation with the Central Irrigation, 
Waterways and Navigation Commission, should investigate the 
best methods of utilising the water made available for irrigation. 

Other subjects to be investigated include the development 
of power demand, including the setting up of nursery stations, 
anti-erosion works, navigational, geological and the water supply 
aspects of the scheme and the lay-out of transmission lines. 

The following representatives of the Central Government and 
the Government of Bengal and Bihar attended the Conference : — 

Government of India. — Mr. H. C. Prior, Secretary, Labour 
Depart ment ; Mr. D. L. Mazumdar, Deputy Secretary, Labour 
Department; Mr. M. Ikramullah, Joint Secretary, Supply 
Department; Mr. H. M. Mathews, Chairman, Central Technical 
Power Board ; Mr. W. L. Voordin, Hydro-Electric Member, Central 
Technical Power Board ; Mr. C. Coates, Deputy Secretary, Supply 
Department; Mr. J. R. Harrison, Deputy Coal Commissioner. 

Government of Bengal. — Mr. O. M. Martin, Adviser to H. E. the 
Governor, Communication and Works Department; Mr. R. L. Walker, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Adviser to H. E. the Governor, Finance, Commerce, Labour 
and Industries Department; Mr. B. B. Sarkar, Secretary, 
Communication and Works Department; Rai Bahadur S. K. 
Gupta, Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, West Bengal; 
Mr. Man Singh, Superintending Engineer on Special Duty, 
Damodar Scheme ; Major M. Jafar, Director of Public Health 
and Mr. Aziz Ahmed, Joint Secretary, Post-War Reconstruction 
Department. 

Government of Bihar. — Mr. S. M. Dhar, Development 
Commissioner and Mr. W. G. Caine, Chief Engineer, Irrigation 
and Power. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


291 


51 

* Housing of India’s Industrial Workers 

The need to accelerate the provision of housing for India’s 
industrial workers, was emphasised at the seventh meeting of 
the Standing Labour Committee which was held recently in 
New Delhi. The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, 
Government of India, presided. 

The Committee resolved that a sub-committee should be 
appointed to consider the following matters relating to housing 
for workers : — 

(a) Whether there should be a Building Fund for the housing 
of workers, and the manner in which it can best be raised, 
and in particular the manner in which the cases of those 
employers who have already provided housing can be dealt 
with ; 

(b) the basis on which the workers can be required to pay 
rent; 

(c) the minimum standards required for workers houses ; 

(d) the most suitable manner of administering any fund which 
becomes available (whether from Government, employer 
or worker) for the housing of workers ; and 

(e) the facilities that arc required to be granted by the 
Central and Provincial Governments and local authorities 
to facilitate housing schemes for workers. 

The sub-committee should be composed of two representatives 
of the Central Government, two representatives of provinces, 
two representatives of Indian Stales and three representatives 
each of employers and employees including representatives of 
Municipalities and Municipal workers. 

Holidays With Pay 

The Standing labour Committee also discussed draft rules relating to 


Indian Information, December 15, 1945, p. 464. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

holidays with pay tentatively framed by the Central Government, 
under the Factories (Amendment) Act, 1945. 

There was a general agreement on the desirability of 
amending the Workmen’s Compensation Act so as to include in 
the definition of workmen, to whom the act is applicable those 
drawing Rs. 400 a month. 

The meeting was attended by representatives of the Central 
and Provinicial Governments, Indian States and Chamber 
of Princes, Organisation of Industrial Employers, Employers’ 
Federation of India, All-India Trade Union Congress, Indian 
Federation of Labour and other employers and workers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


293 


52 


* State’s Obligations to Labour 


Presiding over the Seventh Labour Conference, which will 
in future be called the Indian Labour Conference, held in New 
Delhi on November 26, the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Member 
for Labour, struck a balance-sheet of the State’s obligations to 
labour and urged legislation for raising Indian labour standards 
to the international level. 

Taking stock of Government action on the recommendations 
of the Royal Commission on Labour and the ratification of 
I.L.O. conventions Dr. Ambedkar said there were actually only 
ten recommendations which were still outstanding, whereas 
India has yet to ratify 19 out of the 63 Conventions. “But”, 
the Labour Member pointed out, “this is due not so much to 
the unwillingness of the Government” but to “the rule which 
requires that a Convention must be adopted without change 
or modification. It should be possible”, remarked the Labour 
Member, “for the I.L.O. to draft a Convention so as to provide 
for stages.” 

Welcoming the gathering, Dr. Ambedkar Said : 

“I am sure we are all happy to see that peace has come. 
It has cost us six years of hard struggle involving incalculable 
destruction of life and property, not to mention the hardship and 
the misery which all had to undergo in order to win victory. It 
is a matter of great relief to us that we have no longer before 
us the problem of war and of war effort which required us not 
only to make things ready, but to make them ready at the 
shortest notice. Thank God that all our worries are over. But 
you all know that, though the problems of war are no longer 
there to trouble us, there are before us problems of peace, such 
as the reconstruction of the social and economic life of the 
people. These problems affect India no less than they do other 
countries of the world. 


Indian Information, December 15, 1945, pp. 684-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

State’s Liabilities 

“Among these social and economic problems, this Conference 
will be concerned with the most important of them, namely, 
the problems effecting the welfare of labour and the relations 
of Capital to Labour. In order that the Conference may know 
what work lies before it, I think it would be desirable if I use 
this occasion to enter upon what might be called ‘stock-taking’, 
so that all of us may have a correct estimate of what has been 
done and what remains to be done in the field which is ours. 

“For the purposes of this stock-taking, I would like to begin with 
our liabilities first. Our liabilities are derived from two different 
quarters. Firstly, they are derived from the recommendations 
of the Royal Commission on Labour which reported in the year 
1930. The second source of our liabilities is the Conventions of 
the International Labour Organisation of which India has been 
made a member from the very beginning. 

“ The Royal Commission on Labour made 357 recommendations — 
a formidable total which serves to show how far behind India was 
in 1929 as compared with other countries in matters of labour 
legislation. Of these 357 recommendations 133 (in whole or in 
part) involved legislation. Of these 133, no less than 126 were 
accepted by the Government. Only seven were rejected out of 126 
which were accepted, 106 have generally been given effect to. 
Only 20 arc still outstanding. Of these 20, 10 relate to legislation 
for workshops for which discretionary powers already exist with 
the Provincial Governments under section 5 of the Factories Act. 
Really speaking, there are only 10 recommendations which are 
outstanding. Our liability on this account is therefore very small. 

I.L.O. Conventions 

“Turning to the second source of our liabilities, it will be noticed 
that the I.L.O. has between the years 1919 and 1943 passed 
altogether 63 Conventions on various matters effecting labour. 
Of these, India has ratified only 14. India has yet to ratify 49 
Conventions. 

“You will notice how the balance-sheet stands. Our Royal 
Commission account is better than our I.L.O. account. That is of 
course likely as the Royal Commission recommendations have specific 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


295 


STATE’S OBLIGATIONS TO LABOUR 295 

relations to the conditions of India while the I.L.O. Conventions 
are general in character. 

“The fact, however, remains that there is very little 
outstanding liability on account of the Commission and the 
magnitude of our liability on account of the Convention is great. 
Among the Conventions not ratified, there are some which are 
very important and it behoves us to examine these most carefully 
and raise our labour standards, in so far as national conditions 
allow, to standards laid down internationally 

“This brief survey will, I hope, enable you to see what is 
outstanding in the matter of legislation. I need hardly say that 
this debt we shall have to discharge. I am sure you will agree 
with me when I say that we do not wish to escape it. Permit 
me to say that we cannot escape it. World public opinion will 
not allow us to escape it. 

“If I have made a point of our honouring our liability it 
is because one hears in this country many misgivings being 
expressed about the necessity and urgency of labour legislation. 
There is always somebody to ask us to copy the British example. 
It is said that the British people have waited for a century, before 
they had their present Labour Code. There arc others who urge 
that it would be unfair to put the cost of labour legislation on 
Indian Industries, which are at present in an infant stage, and 
point to the example of Russia where the working class was 
forced to accept very low standards in order to enable industries 
to grow. One also hears it said that the administrative machinery 
necessary for enforcing labour legislation is not in existence in 
India and that, therefore, it is useless to enact laws which must 
remain a dead letter. There is also the plea, commonly raised, 
that India is a poor country and that it cannot afford the luxury 
of high standards of labour. 

Labour Legislation 

“I am not sure that these arguments will satisfy world opinion. 
Far from accepting them as good and valid reasons for holding 
back labour legislation of which we arc in arrears, labour is sure 
to regard them as so many excuses. 

“Labour may well say that the fact that the British took 100 years to 
have a proper code of labour legislation is no argument that we should 
also in India take 100 years. History is not to be studied merely with 
a view to know how well to imitate the mistakes of other countries. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

We study history with a view to know the errors people have 
made and how they could be avoided. History is not always an 
example. More often it is a warning. 

“Labour is bound to say that the example of Russia is entirely 
out of place in a discussion about labour standards in a country 
in which industry is run as a private enterprize working in 
pursuit of private and personal gain. In Russia, industry is a 
State enterprise and the profits of industry go to fill the Treasury 
of the State and not to swell the private fortunes of individuals. 
Where the profits of industry belong to the State, the subjects 
of the State may well be asked to undergo, during an interim 
period, reduction in wages and other standards of life in order 
that the State industries may be stabilised. No worker would 
mind such a sacrifice knowing that, in the end, the industry 
would belong to the State and that he would be able to share 
in the prosperity of the State. How can the workers be asked 
to agree to reduce standards of life in an economy in which the 
profits which are to result from such reduced standards are 
to go to private individuals. I am sure you will agree that an 
agrument on these lines has great force. 

Funds For Labour Welfare 

“The plea that we have no administrative machinery to give 
proper effect to labour laws cannot be admitted to be a strong 
plea. It is liable to be attacked by labour from many points and 
you will find it vulnerable at every point. The State maintains a 
large body of police force to maintain law and orders; the State 
maintains a body of Revenue Officers to collect taxes. Labour 
may well say, why should not the State maintain a force to see 
that labour laws arc given effect to ? Is the duty of the State 
to be confined merely to collecting taxes and punishing persons 
who disobey its laws ? Does not the duty of the State extend to 
the maintenance of terms and conditions of employment, which 
arc in consonance with civilised life ? If that is the duty of the 
State, is it not obligatory on the State to create and sustain 
such machinery ? The lack of machinery is too weak a plank to 
stand on. 

“The argument about the capacity to bear the burden 
of the cost involved in labour legislation is an argument 
of very serious import, and labour will have to take note 
of it. At the same time, the question is about the faith 
behind the argument. Is it a bona fide argument ? or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


297 


STATE’S OBLIGATIONS TO LABOUR 297 

it is merely a cloak for avoiding liability ? Labour may well 
say that this argument about cost loses much of its force when 
one thinks of the money spent on war. All of us know what a 
colossal amount of money has been raised for the war and how 
the monied classes have borne the crushing weight of high and 
heavy taxations for carrying on the war. 

“Labour may well ask statesmen to say how many houseless 
persons could have been decently housed, how many naked 
persons could have been properly clothed, how many hungry 
men and women could have been given full nourishment, how 
many uneducated persons could have been educated, how many 
sick persons could have been restored to health, if the money 
spent on war had been spent on public welfare ? Labour may ask 
monied classes a very pertinent question saying, if you do not 
mind paying taxes to meet expediture on war, why do you object 
to raising funds when their purpose is to raise labour standards ? 
I am sure these arc not very easy questions to answer. 

“I have given you an estimate of the labour legislation which 
is outstanding. I have shown why we cannot escape it. That being 
so, I do not think it necessary to make any apology for the large 
Agenda that has been placed before you. The Agenda includes 
eight items. Some of them are very important, particularly item 
II, which deals with reduction of working hours, item III which 
deals with minimum wage legislation and item VIII which deals 
with the Recognition of Trade Unions. 

Anti-Slump Measures 

“You can well imagine why I have singled out these items for 
particular emphasis. The peace we are glad to have will be 
bringing on its plethora of problems. The most serious of these 
will be the dreadful problem of unemployment. We must do 
our best and do it immediately to mitigate it and to prevent 
it from lowering labour standards. I believe three things are 
necessary to case the situation. Firstly, to reduce hours of 
employment so as to provide employment for many. Secondly, 
to provide machinery for fixing minimum wages. The absence 
of such machinery combined with unemployment is bound to 
cause labour standards to slump, which ought to be prevented. 
Thirdly, to provide the employers and workers with a resolve to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

collective bargaining and learn to work together in the solution 
of other common problems. Nothing in my judgment can bring 
this about more effectively than sound and responsible Trade 
Unions. 

“I do not propose to assert that the Labour Department 
does not linger on. I must mention I find one great handicap 
in pursuing our goal. It arises from the provisions of the I.L.O. 
with regard to Conventions. I said that our liability arising out 
of non-ratification of the Conventions is indeed very great. I must 
at the same time point out that this is due not so much to the 
unwillingness of the Government to recognise the essential good 
underlying the Conventions, it is due largely to the rule which 
requires that a convention must be adopted without change or 
modification. It must be adopted as a whole, or not all all. I am 
sure it is this provision, forcing on us a policy of ‘all or none’ 
is not very helpful. It does not permit us to realise our goal 
by progressive stages which is the only one by which vast and 
backward countries like India can hope to advance. 

Stage By Stage Progress 

“I want to press for a modification of this rule, as being very 
necessary for Asiatic countries which have a long and a different 
journey to cover. It should not be impossible to get a change made 
in the existing provisions. It should be possible for the I.L.O. to 
draft a Convention so as to provide for stages. It should also be 
possible for the I.L.O. to lay down that the convention should 
be carried out stage by stage, coupled with the provision that 
the whole list of Conventions should be carried within a given 
period. I am sure you will agree with me that a change which 
permits progressive realisation of international conventions is to 
be preferred to a rule which makes them so many dead letters. 

“There is one other matter to which I must make some 
reference lest you should misunderstand. You remember, the 
Conference last year appointed a Committee to consider some of 
the proposals I had made for changing the Constitution of the 
Conference. You might like to know what action Government 
propose to take on the report of the Committee. 

“As recommended by the Committee, Government do not at present 
propose to make any changes in the Constitution of the Conference. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


299 


STATE’S OBLIGATIONS TO LABOUR 299 

Government think it enough not to do anything more than to 
change the name of the organisation as recommended by the 
Committee. The Conference is meeting under different names, 
such as Ministers’ Conference, Tripartite Conference and Plenary 
Conference. I am glad that the Committee decided to call it the 
‘Labour Conference’. Notwithstanding what Shakespeare has 
said there is much in a name. The name ‘Labour Conference’ 
may not have a partite’ or ‘Plenary’. The only comment I have 
to make is that the name as proposed by the Committee lacks 
colouring — a defect which could be easily removed if instead of 
calling it ‘Labour Conference’ we decided to call it the ‘ Indian 
Labour Conference’. I take it that you are in agreement with 
me on this point. 

“There is another thing which Government propose to do, 
which is quite independent of the report. It is to enlarge the 
functions of this Conference. 

“At the last I.L.O. Conference held in Paris the delegate 
of the Government of India gave an undertaking to place all 
recommendations and Conventions passed by the I.L.O., before, 
this body for discussion. The Government of India have decided 
to honour that undertaking. I am sure you will welcome this 
extension of your powers and functions. It will enable the 
Provinces and States to know what was done at each Session of 
the I.L.O. and profit by the views of the employers and employees 
in regard to it.” 

CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS 

The Indian Labour Conference, consisting of the representatives 
of Central and Provincial Governments, important states and 
employers’ and workers’ organisations unanimously supported the 
principle of the 48-hour week in India’s factories at its meeting 
on November 27. There was, more or less, complete agreement in 
regard to the Government’s proposals for the statutory provision 
of industrial canteens and for the amendment of the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1934. 

The Labour Department’s memorandum on the reduction 
of working hours pointed out that it was both unjust and 
unwise to deny the workers a reasonable amount of spare 
time away from the factory, which was indispensable for 
the building up of citizenship and for the maintenance 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


300 


300 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of his physical efficiency. It emphasised that the present was 
an opportune moment for taking up this question because there 
was a need for giving relief to factory workers who had been 
put to a great strain during the war. Moreover, shorter hours 
would lead to greater employment. The memorandum made it 
clear that the reduction in hours should not be accompanied 
by any reduction in basic wages or dearness allowances unless 
there was a fall in prices. The rates of piece-workers should be 
adjusted on the principle that a piece-worker should earn not 
less than a time worker. 

The Conference also discussed the organisation and functions 
of the Employment Exchanges set up by the Labour Department 
to help the resettlement and employment of demobilised Services 
personnel and discharged war workers during the transition 
period. 

The Labour Department’s memorandum on the subject 
recorded that Employment Exchanges can only give useful 
assistance if they are in possession of information regarding the 
employment opportunities available or likely to be available. The 
use of the Employment Exchange organisation, it continued, will 
prove of mutual benefit to employers and employment- seekers 
and will ensure satisfactory distribution of manpower among 
various branches of production. It will also facilitate the mobility 
of Labour, both occupational and geographical, and will obviate 
any bottle-necks in the supply of various categories of workers. 

The attitude of Employment Exchanges during strikes or 
lockouts and the question of compensation to the workers during 
involuntary unemployment resulting from controls were the two 
other subjects considered in today’s session. The first subject was 
adjourned after some discussion for tomorrow’s session, and on 
the second the Conference was not able to arrive at an agreed 
decision. 

Minimum Wages 

When the Conference assembled on November 28 to conclude its 
seventh session, the Hon’blc Dr. B. R. Ambedkar announced that 
a committee consisting of two representatives of employers and 
two of employees will be formed shortly to advise the Government 
in drafting legislation for fixing minimum wages for labour and 
for amending the Indian Trade Unions’ Act, 1926. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


301 


STATE’S OBLIGATIONS TO LABOUR 301 

Though the principles of these two measures were agreed to 
by the Conference, various points of view were expressed during 
the discussions. The appointment of the Committee is to meet 
the point raised by many speakers at the Conference that, in 
view of the importance of these two measures, they should be 
examined in detail. 

The Conference was unanimous in its decision regarding the 
framing of standing orders in industrial concerns and on the 
attitude that should be adopted by the Employment Exchanges 
during strikes or lock-outs. It was agreed that, during strikes 
or lockouts, Employment Exchanges should acccept vacancies 
and inform suitable applicants of the existence of the trade 
dispute before submission. They should register workmen and 
submit them for other employment, informing the prospective 
employers that they are unemployed as the result of an existing 
trade dispute. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


302 


53 


* Multi-purpose Plan for Development of 
Orissa’s Rivers 


Dr. B. R. Ambedkar’s Speech at Cuttack 

“Orrisa wants to get rid of the evils of floods. Orissa 
wants to get rid of malaria and other — to use American 
phraseology — ‘low-income’ diseases causing ill-health and 
corroding the stamina of her people. Orissa wants to raise the 
standard of living of her people and advance their prosperity 
by irrigation, by navigation and by producing cheap electrical 
power. All these purposes can fortunately be achieved by one 
single plan, namely to build reservoirs and store the water 
which is flowing in her rivers” 

Thus observed the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour 
Member to the Government of India, in his Presidential 
address at a conference held in Cuttack on November 8 
between the representatives of the Central Government and the 
Governments of Orissa, the Central Provinces and the Eastern 
Slates, to discuss the possibilities of developing Orissa rivers. 

Orissa’s Problems 

Referring to the problems of Orissa, the Labour Member 
observed : “To say that the problem is one of floods is both 
an oversimplification and an understatement of the problem. I 
see the problem in somewhat different light. When I think of 
Orissa, the picture that comes to my mind is that of a people 
subject not to one affliction, but many. 

“One such affliction, which is on the lips of everybody, is the 
constant exposure of her people to floods which cause damage to life 
and property and, in a general sense, insecurity. This affliction is due, 
not merely to floods, but also to droughts and famines. Damage by 


* Indian Information, December 15, 1945, pp. 692-95. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


303 


MULTI-PURPOSE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ORISSA’S RIVERS 303 

droughts and famines can be as great as that caused by floods. 
It is said that in the drought of 1866, nearly 40 per cent 
of the population of Puri district perished. 

“Deterioration in health is another affliction of the people 
of Orissa. The total population of the province of Orissa is 77V 2 
lakhs. According to the health report of the province, the total 
deaths in 1944 were 2,35,581. Of these, 1,30,000 died from 
some kind of fevers and a majority by malarial fever. This 
means that three per cent of her people died in 1944, and of 
these nearly half died of malaria. This is a very high figure. 

In 1944, 19 per cent of the student population was found to 
show distinct signs of malnutrition and 8.7 per cent showed 
signs of vitamin deficiency. 

“If these facts arc true, Orissa cannot be said to be above 
the poverty line. The third affliction of Orissa — I think it could 
be called an affliction — is its want of internal communications. 
Orissa is a locked-up country. Except for the solitary railway 
line, running along her eastern sea coast, there is no means 
of communication either by railway or by canal to connect the 
vast hinterland with the sea coast.” 

“Should Orissa continue to be in such a wretched state as 
it is today ?” Dr. Ambedkar asked. “It need not. It has natural 
resources, and they are by no means meagre. Orissa has coal, 
Orissa has irion, chrome, graphite, bauxite, limestone, mica, 
and Orissa has also bamboo, to mention only some of its 
important natural resources.” 

“There is another precious possession which Orissa has, 
namely her water wealth. The amount of water that passes 
through the Orissa delta is just vast. The delta — comprising 
roughly the three districts of Cuttack, Puri and Balasore and 
covering an area of about 8,000 square miles — is traversed by 
a network of distributaries arising mainly from three rivers, 
the Mahanadi, the Brahmani, and the Baitarani. 

“Two more rivers — the Burabalang and the Subarnarekha — 
of relatively lesser importance, also pass through the delta. The 
three main rivers referred to above drain an area of 69,000 
square miles above the delta, lying in the Eastern States, 
Central Provinces and Bihar. Of these the Mahanadi — the 
largest of the three — drains 51,000 square miles. Between 
them, these three rivers carry each year to the sea a discharge 
of about 90 million acre feet.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Use Of Water Wealth 

The Labour Member continued : “Given the resources, why 
has Orissa continued to be so poor, so backward and so wretched 
a province ? The only answer I can give is that Orissa has not 
found the best method of utilising her water wealth. Much effort 
has undoubtedly been spent in inquiring into the question of 
floods. As early as 1872, there was a general enquiry by Mr. 
Rehnand. I do not know what happened to his report. Nothing 
seems to have been done thereafter till 1928. From that year 
down to 1945, there have been a series of committees appointed 
to tackle this problem. 

“The Orissa Flood Enquiry Committee of 1928 was 
presided over by the well-known Chief Engineer of Bengal, 

Mr. Adams Williams. In 1937, the enquiry was entrusted 
in the able hands of Sri M. Visvesvarayya, who submitted 
two reports — one in 1937 and another in 1939. His work 
was followed by the Orissa Flood Advisory Committee. The 
Committee submitted a preliminary report in 1938 and 
continued its work till 1942, during which period it submitted 
three interim reports. The latest effort in that direction was 
made as recently as March 15,1945, when a Flood Conference 
was convened at Cuttack by the Government of Orissa. 

“With all respect to the members of these committees, 

I am sorry to say they did not bring the right approach to 
bear on the problem. They were influenced by the idea that 
water in excessive quantity was an evil, that when water 
comes in excessive quantity, what needs to be done is to 
let it run into the sea in an orderly flow. Both these views 
are now regarded as grave misconceptions, as positively 
dangerous from the point of view of the good of the people. 

Conservation Of Water 

“It is wrong to think water in excessive quantity is an 
evil. Water can never be so excessive as to be an evil. Man 
suffers more from lack of water than from excess of it. The 
trouble is that nature is not only niggardly in the amount of 
water it gives, it is also erratic in its distribution — alternating 
between drought and storm. But this cannot alter the fact 
that water is wealth. Water being the wealth of the people 
and its distribution being uncertain, the correct approach 
is not to complain against nature but to conserve water. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


305 


MULTI-PURPOSE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ORISSA’S RIVERS 

“If conservation of water is mandatory from the point of 
view of public good, then obviously the plan of embankments 
is a wrong plan. It is a mean which does not subserve the 
end, namely conservation of water, and must, therefore, be 
abandoned. Orissa delta is not the only area where there is 
so much amount of water and there is so much amount of 
evil proceeding from that water. The United States of America 
had the same problem to face. Some of these rivers — Missouri, 
Miami and Tennessee — have given rise to the same problem 
in the U.S.A. 

“Orissa must, therefore, adopt the method which the 
U.S.A. adopted in dealing with the problem of its rivers. That 
method is to dam rivers at various points to conserve water 
permanently in reservoirs. There arc many purposes which 
such reservoirs can serve besides irrigation. I am told that if 
it were possible to store the entire run off of the Mahanadi 
it will be enough to irrigate thereby a million acres, provided 
that much area was available. Water stored in the reservoirs 
can be used for generating electric power. 

“If in the midst of its natural resources, Orissa has 
remained an industrially undeveloped area, it is due to 
want of cheap power to run its factories. Here there will be 
abundance of electric power, more than Orissa can hope to 
consume for a long time to come. Another use to which this 
water could be put to is navigation. 

“Navigation in India has had a very chequered history. 
During the rule of the East India Company, provision for 
internal navigation occupied a very prominent part in the 
public works budget of the Company’s Government. Many of 
the navigation canals we have in India today — and you have 
one in Orissa itself — are remnants of that policy. Railways 
came in later, and for a time the policy was to have both 
railways and canal navigation. By 1875, there arose a great 
controversy in which the issue was railways versus canals. 
The battle for canals was fought bravely by the late Sir 
Arthur Cotton — one of the few engineers with big ideas. 
Unfortunately supporters of Railways won. 

“I am not quite happy about this victory of railways 
over canals. Much more annoying is the ignorant opinion 
of supporters of railways that canals must go because 
they do not pay, without knowing that if the canals do 
not pay it is not because they cannot pay but because 


305 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


306 


306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their capacity to pay has been terribly mutilated by leaving 
them uncompleted. I am sure that internal navigation cannot 
be neglected in the way in which it has been in the past. We 
ought to borrow a leaf from Germany and Russia in this matter 
and not only revive reconstruction of our old canals but make 
new ones also and not to sacrifice them to the exigencies of 
railways.” 

Special Feature 

The Labour Member reiterated that the storage scheme, as 
applied to the rivers of Orissa, will have this special feature, 
namely, that it will not only give irrigation and electricity, 
but also provide a long line of internal navigation. “I am 
told it may be possible to connect Chandbali to Sambalpur 
and beyond by a navigable inland waterway by construction 
of, say, some three dams at (1) the point of its debouche 
from the hills (seven miles above Naraj), (2) Tikkirpara and 
(3) above Sambalpur. If this plan works out, there will be a 
navigable channel for 350 miles which could be maintained 
all the year round, affording a cheap and convenient artery 
for passenger and goods traffic. Imagine the possibility 
coastal craft or light vessels going right into the interior on 
a canal extending from the sea via Cuttack to Sambalpur, 
and beyond into the Central Provinces. Here is a scheme 
which converts forces of evil into powers of good. 

“Orissa wants to get rid of the evils of floods. Orissa 
wants to get rid of malaria — and other — to use American 
phraseology — ‘low-income’ diseases causing ill-health and 
corroding the stamina of her people. Orissa wants to raise the 
standard of living of her people and to advance her prosperity 
by irrigation, by navigation and by producing cheap electrical 
power. All these purposes can fortunately be achieved by one 
single plan, namely, to build reservoirs and store the water 
which is flowing in its rivers. 

Multi-purpose Reservoirs 

“I am, therefore, glad to note that the Orissa Flood 
Protection Committee held in 1945, struck the right note 
when it said that the final solution of Orissa’s water problem 
should be sought in the construction of multi-purpose 
reservoirs. My comment is that this should be regarded as 
the only method and treated as an immediate programme 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


307 


MULTI-PURPOSE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ORISSA’S RIVERS 307 

rather than as an ultimate aim. The potentiality of this project 
may not be clear to everybody. But it is indeed very great. 

It is desirable that some idea of its immensity should be 
conveyed to the Government of Orissa, the representatives of 
the States of Orissa and the people of Orissa as well, so that 
their interest in the project may be aroused. 

“A comparative statement may well give such an idea. One 
hears of the lake made at the Boulder Dam in the U.S.A. as 
the biggest man-made lake in the world. We also hear of the 
Mettur Dam in Madras and the proposed Tungabhadra Dam in 
Hyderabad, which are likely to be its rivals. Compared with the 
first, the total volume of water that flows annually through the 
Orissa rivers will fill three times the lake mentioned. Compared 
with the Mettur Dam in Madras and the Tungabhadra Dam 
in Hyderabad, it may be pointed out that the Mahanadi alone 
carries over 65 million acre-feet, which would be 30 times the 
capacity of the reservoir at the Mettur Dam in Madras and 
20 times the capacity of the proposed Tungabhadra Dam. How 
much of this water we can economically and effectively store 
is a matter for investigation. The Government of Orissa, the 
States in Orissa and the people of Orissa should, therefore, 
regard themselves as lucky and proud of this project and 
determine and endeavour to make it a reality.” 

Dr. Ambedkar continued : The agenda for the meeting 
is a very modest one. It is (1) to consider the disirability 
of undertaking forthwith surveys and investigations of 
Orissa rivers with a view to the preparation of schemes of 
unified and multi-purpose development comprising (a) flood 
control, (b) navigation, (c) irrigation and drainage, (d) soil 
conservation, and (e) power development; (2) to consider the 
desirability of concentrating, in the first instance, on surveys 
and investigations on the Mahanadi river for control and 
development of that river ; (3) to examine the desirability of 
surveys and investigations being carried out by provincial 
governments in conjunction with, and under the general 
direction of, the Central Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation 
Commission.” 

“Our main purpose today is to see if we can agree on 
the necessity for a thorough survey and investigation of the 
natural resources and physical features of the region with a 
view to prepare a comprehensive scheme for its development. 

For a balanced appreciation of the situation it is necessary 
to carry out comprehensive surveys and investigations 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


308 


308 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with a view to ascertain the possibilities of irrigation, 
navigation, power development and their facilities in the delta 
as well as in the drainage area as a whole. Investigations so 
far carried out have been mostly limited to the delta, although 
some work had been done in 1862 on the survey of dam sites 
for small reservoirs on the five tributaries of the Mahanadi, 
namely, the Telcoma, the Ibcoma, the Maudcoma, the Hasd 
and the Jonk. 

“The Central Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation 
Commission constituted by the Government of India under the 
chairmanship of the able and well-known irrigation engineer, 
Rai Bahadur Khosla, is shortly going to initiate hydrological 
and other surveys of Orissa rivers as part of their enquiry. 
It will be necessary for provinces and states to undertake 
connected surveys in conjunction with, and under the general 
direction and supervision of, the Commission. 

Submergence Of Areas 

“Before closing”, Dr. Ambedkar observed, “I would like 
to draw the attention of the parties which have met at this 
conference to two points. They are intimately connected with 
the success of the project and about which they will have to 
make up their mind at an early date. First is their readiness 
to consider the question of submergence of land. Reservoirs 
formed by construction of dams will submerge large areas of 
land, both in Orissa and the Eastern States. If these dams are 
carried higher up the river or its tributaries, certain areas in 
the Central Provinces will also be submerged. This question 
will need to be considered in detail in relation to the over-all 
benefits of the integrated scheme.” 

“Submergence of areas will be inevitable if the waters 
of the rivers have to be conserved for beneficial use instead 
of being allowed to run waste and to work havoc en route. 
The resulting benefits from a scheme of united and multi- 
purpose development should far outweigh loss of lands due 
to submergence. This project can be a success only if it is 
treated as a regional project. It cannot succeed with a local 
treatment. The province of Orissa will fail if it were to take 
up a project confined to its own boundaries. The same will be 
the reuslt if an Orissa State were to make a similar attempt. 

“The project being essentially regional, it raises the question 
of submergence of State and Provincial sovereignty to the extent 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


309 


MULTI-PURPOSE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ORISSA’S RIVERS 309 

necessary. This is the second question to which I wish to refer. 

It is for the Orissa States and the Government of the Province 
to come together in order to shed a part of their sovereignty 
over different sections of the rivers that are flowing through 
their territory so that the project could be undertaken, planned, 
devised and run by a single authority without disturbance cither 
from the province or from the states once it is established. I need 
hardly say that the welfare of the public is far more important 
both to the Government of Orissa as well as to the Rulers 
of Indian States affected than sovereignty. Their sovereignty 
should be used for advancing the welfare of the people and not 
for blocking it. With co-operative and co-ordinated effort on the 
part of the Central Government and the Provincial and State 
Governments, it should be possible to harness for beneficial use 
this perennial source of wealth waters of Orissa rivers — which 
are at present running to waste and causing untold suffering 
on their way to the sea.” 

SURVEY OF ORISSA RIVERS : CONFERENCE 
DECISIONS 

The conference decided to undertake a preliminary surveys 
of the Orissa rivers to prepare schemes of unified and multi- 
purpose development. Multi-purpose schemes which may 
be prepared after this preliminary survey are intended to 
comprise flood control, navigation, irrigation and drainage, 
soil conservation and power development. 

The Conference agreed that, in the first instance, the 
possibilities of controlling and developing the Mahanadi 
river should be surveyed. It was further agreed that surveys 
should be carried out by the Provincial Governments 
concerned in conjunction with and under the general direction 
and supervision of the Central Waterways, Irrigation and 
Navigation Commission. 

It was explained that the Commission would, in the 
beginning, carry out a preliminary reconnaissance over the 
entire length of the Mahanadi, and if, as a result of such 
reconnaissance, a prima facie case for the development of the 
river for the benefit of the provinces and states concerned was 
established, further detailed survey and investigation would 
have to be undertaken. It would only be at this stage that 
full participation of parties concerned, both administrative and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


310 


310 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

financial, would be necessary. Till then the Central 
Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation Commission propose 
to carry on preliminary reconnaissance with the help of the 
recently created Orissa Rivers Division of the Provincial 
Government. It was agreed that the C. P. Government and 
the Eastern States would supply the Central Waterways, 
Irrigation and Navigation Commission with all such data and 
information as they already possessed and would cooperate 
fully with them in order to explore the possibilities of the 
Mahanadi river. 

Mr. GOKHALE’S SPEECH 

Mr. B. K. Gokhale, Adviser to H. E. the Governor of 
Orissa, welcoming the plan outlined by Dr. Ambedkar, said : 
“Orissa is perhaps the most backward part of India and no 
single project is likely to do more to improve the conditions 
of the people than the multipurpose development which 
we have under contemplation”. He outlined the history of 
Orissa up to modern times, and said that Orissa expected 
that the thought which had been given to planning and 
regional development would start her on an era of happiness 
and prosperity. 

k k k 


POST-WAR IRRIGATION AND 
HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES 

“There is no doubt whatever about India’s lead to the 
world in irrigation. Nor of its vital importance to India; with 
our rapidly increasing population we must irrigate to live”, 
said H. E. the Viceroy opening the 16th annual meeting of 
the Central Board of Irrigation held on November 26 in the 
Council Room of the Viceroy’s House, New Delhi. Besides 
the experts of the Government of India and the Chief 
Engineers of Provinces and States, the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar, Member for Labour, and the Hon’ble Mr. H. C. 
Prior, Secretary, Labour Department, attended. 


Indian Information, December 15, 1945, p. 697. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


311 


MULTI-PURPOSE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ORISSA’S RIVERS 

The Viceroy said : 

“I am very glad to be able to open the 16th Meeting of 
this Central Board of Irrigation. Your branch of engineering 
is an ancient, important, and very honourable one. Irrigation 
engineers are the oldest experts in the world. The 2nd Chapter 
of Genesis tells us that ‘A river went out of Eden to water the 
garden’ obviously the first recorded example of irrigation. The 
two ancient civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia were of 
course built entirely on irrigation ; and the forerunners in your 
craft were presumably a much honoured guild or fraternity in 
those countries. 

“Amongst the most eminent of the early irrigation experts 
must be numbered Moses, of whose achievements, in the art 
of irrigation we know at least two ; when he smote the rock at 
Horeb, bidding drink and live the crowd beneath him ; and when 
he sweetened the bitter water at Marah, presumably by building 
a dam to keep out some brackish clement. 

India’s Achievements 

“Other engineers may give us speed in travel or comfort in 
our dwellings ; your gift is that of life itself. If you want a text 
for your labours you will find it in a verse of Isaiah ; ‘I give 
waters in the wilderness and rivers in the desert, to give drink 
to my people’. 


311 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


312 


54 


* Rejection of Railway men’s Federation 
Demands Re: Retrenchment 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Mr. Chairman, in the morning when this adjournment motion 
was admitted I did not think that the Labour Department 
would have to come into this debate in order to explain its 
position. But when the debate opened I found that two of 
the speakers who have supported the motion have come 
down somewhat heavily on the Labour Department. Their 
charge was that although the dispute has been going on 
for some considerable time, the Labour Department has not 
played the part which it is expected to play in this dispute. 
Sir, I admit that the Labour Department has a considerable 
amount of responsibility in this matter. It is a department 
which has been established in order to see that the working 
classes do get their dues and if the Labour Department can 
be found to have failed in its duty, it would undoubtedly be 
deserving of the censure that is moved. But I am sorry to 
say, Sir, that my Honourable friend, Sardar Mangal Singh, — 
who in the first instance alluded to the responsibility of the 
Labour Department and said in a somewhat, if I may say 
so, slighting manner, that the Labour Member was either 
sleeping or fiddling — was completely unaware of the facts of 
the situation and has certainly not informed himself of what 
the Labour Department has done in this matter. I think it 
would therefore be desirable that I should place before this 
House some very relevant facts with regard to this matter. 

First time when the Labour Department came to know 
that there was such a dispute between the Railwaymen’s 
Federation and the Railway Board was on the 5th 
October, 1945, when a letter was sent by an official of 
the Indian Railwaymen’s Federation forwarding a number 

* Legislative Assembly Debates, Vol. I-No. 2, 22nd January 1946, pp. 106-08. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


313 


REJECTION OF RETRENCHMENT 313 

of resolutions that had been passed at a session of the 
Railwaymen’s Federation. After that letter a second letter was 
received by the Labour Department on the 10th October, 1945. 
In that letter a request was made that the Labour Department 
should move and appoint an adjudicator in order to decide 
upon the terms mentioned in the resolution. Now, Sir, it will 
be admiitted that before any such grave step as that of the 
appointment of an adjudicator is taken, it is the duty of the 
Labour Department to bring the two parties together and to 
induce them to meet in a formal manner, discuss the various 
outstanding questions, reduce their differences as far as they 
possibly can agree to each other’s demands. That duty, I am glad 
to say, the Labour Department immediately performed and they 
induced the Railway Department to meet the representatives 
of the Indian Railwaymen’s Federation and to discuss points 
of dispute. Honourable Members might be aware that after the 
discussion had taken place between the Railway Department and 
the Indian Railwaymen’s Federation a communique was issued 
by the Railway Department stating that a meeting had taken 
place and certain matters which were matters of dispute were 
discussed between the two parties. Now that thing happened as 
late as the 5th of December, when this communique was issued. 
Certainly from the 51h of December up to day it cannot be said 
that an unduly long delay has happened or an unduly long delay 
has been brought about or that there has been any dilatoriness 
on the part of the Labour Department that they did not move 
in this matter as soon as they ought to have done. 

But there is one other point to which I would like to draw 
the attention of the House. It cannot be said — and I think 
Mr. Guruswami ought to be in possession of this fact — that the 
negotiations have not been concluded. Negotiations arc still going 
on and I may tell the House that it has been agreed between the 
Railway Department and the Federation of Indian Railwaymen 
that a small committee of the Indian Railwaymen’s Federation 
be appointed in order to carry on further negotiations with the 
Railway Department. The dale fixed for that meeting is towards 
the end of January 1946. The end of January 1946 has not yet 
come. There is still time for negotiation 

Shri Prakasa : ‘Towards the end’ has come. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, but that is a 
matter which I am afraid I cannot accept. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Diwan Chaman Lall (West Punjab — Non-Muhammdan): 
May I interrupt my Honourable friend for a minute ? Is it a fact 
that the demand for the appointment of an adjudicator has been 
definitely turned down by the Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am coming to 
that. The point I was making was this — that there can be no 
question of the appointment of an adjudicator unless the Labour 
Department is fully satisfied that the last attempt for a mutual 
settlement between the two parties has failed ; and what I am 
pointing out to my honourable friend is this — that an opportunity 
still exists, an opportunity is still provided, and it is for the 
Railwaymen’s Federation to inform the Railway Department 
what will be the exact date on which they will meet the Railway 
Department 

Diwan Chaman Lall: May I ask my honourable friend once 
again whether it is a fact that the Government have denied 
to the Railwaymen’s Federation any information regarding 
the number of people that they have decided to retrench, and 
secondly, whether they have refused to appoint an adjudicator, 
and thirdly whether they arc still continuing to retrench men? I 
think about 10,000 have already been retrenched. Where then is 
there the further question of negotiation when the Government 
has taken up this point of view ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think my 
honourable friend forgot, when I got up to intervene in this 
debate, that I said I would confine myself to the question of 
adjudication. The rest of the question as to how many will 
be retrenched, whether they will be retrenched, if retrenched 
how they will be dealt with, all that is a matter which I am 
sure will be dealt with by my Honourable colleague who will 
reply after I have finished. As I said, I am only discharging 
the responsibility that falls on the Labour Department. The 
point that I was making was that unless and until the Labour 
Department is satisfied that there is no further room for 
settlement, it would be impossible, it would be unfair and quite 
contrary to established procedure for the Labour Department to 
intervene and say “We shall appoint an adjudicator”. The point 
I was making, therefore, is this — that this motion, at any rate 
that part of the speech of my Honourable friend who accused 
the Labour Department of not having stepped in at the right 
moment, is certainly too premature, and I think if he will bear 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


315 


REJECTION OF RETRENCHMENT 315 

in mind the facts I have disclosed, he would himself voluntarily 
withdraw the statement that he made that the Labour Member 
was fiddling. I certainly was not. 

Then let me come to the other side of the question. It is 
true that under the Defence of India Act, the Government does 
possess the power to appoint an arbitrator under rule 81 of the 
Defence of India Act. But I think it is only fair to mention that 
although this is an emergency legislation, we are not altogether 
precluded from observing such canons of judicial consideration 
from exercising the powers that we possess under rule 81, that 
is, arbitration. For the purposes of arbitration we must have 
a dispute in existence. As I have said, at the present moment 
there is no dispute ; the matter is under consideration. Secondly, 
before any adjudication is made, we must be satisfied that the 
dispute relates to terms and conditions of employment — for 
instance, that the dispute relates to hours of work, to wages, 
and to points of that kind. What is the point that is at dispute 
between the Railway Department and the Indian Railwaymen’s 
Federation ? I am sorry to say that the Railwaymen’s Federation 
has certainly not conducted its case in the way in which it 
ought to have conducted it. They have certainly have gone and 
done a great deal of harm to themselves. The point, I would 
like to make in this connection is this — what is the point on 
which the Railwaymen’s Federation is stressing all through ? 
Is it a point that relates to hours of labour ? Is it a point that 
relates to wages ? I say definitely that the points of dispute do 
not relate to either of these two points. It is quite true that the 
Railwaymen’s Federation has passed a number of resolutions 
many of which refer to hours of work and to conditions of 
labour. But we have got to make a distinction between what 
are called fundamental points of dispute and points which are 
merely tagged on. If one were to examine the resolution that 
has been passed by the Railwaymen’s Federation, we find that 
the gravamen of their complaint is that the railways shall not 
reduce a single workman. Questions relating to hours of labour 
and questions relating to wages are just tagged on — they are 
not the points of difference. In order to substantiate what I am 
saying, the fundamental point of dispute between the railways 
and the Indian Federation of Railwaymen is the question of 
retrenchment, the question is as to how many persons will be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

employed and how many will be discharged. I would like to point 
out one or two other circumstances. 

The first is this — as I said, in their letter of the 5th of October 
1945, they had put forward some fifteen or fourteen demands. A 
conference was arranged between the Labour Department and 
the President of the Indian Railwaymen’s Federation, Mr. Gin, in 
order to assess and find out what exactly were the points which 
they regrded as fundamental, and I should like to tell the House 
that although there were fifteen resolutions, only three points 
were placed before the Labour Department for consideration. The 
rest of them were regarded by the Railwaymen’s Federation as 
matters of no consequence. Again when a formal meeting was 
brought about the Railwaymen’s Federation and the Railway 
Department, even the three points that were raised before the 
Labour Department were dropped, and the only point that was 
taken up was the question of retrenchment. With all respect 
to the gentlemen who have spoken and to the President of the 
Railwaymen’s Federation, I must confess my utter inability 
to understand how, for instance, a question as to how many 
people should be employed by a particular department, can be 
treated as a justiciable dispute. I am wailing, as I said, for the 
president of the Railwaymen’s Federation to evolve out of the 
negotiations with the Railway Department some point which 
might be regarded as justiciable, so that the Labour Department 
may find it is worthwhile to intervene and to persuade that an 
adjudication be made. Sir, I think that a censure motion is not 
deserved. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


317 


55 


* Proposed Evacuation of Villages in the 
Prosecution of the Damodar Scheme 


Mr. President: Then there is the motion of Mr. Ram 
Narayan Singh, about the proposed and forced evacuation of 
thousands of people of hundreds of villages of the Hazaribagh, 
Manbhum and Sonthal Parganas districts of Bihar from their 
homes and hearths in the process of the prosecution of the 
Damodar Scheme. I should like to know what exactly the 
Honourable Member means by this motion. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh (Chota Nagpur Division : Non- 
Muhammadan): Sir, land acquisition proceedings are going on 
in some of the districts. In the process of the prosecution of 
the Damodar Scheme, several villages are going to be occupied 
by the Government and the people are about to be asked to 
evacuate those areas. 

Mr. President: May I know when the scheme was started 
and how far it has proceeded ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
I would like to submit that at this stage there is absolutely 
nothing to be discussed. Government has no doubt under 
contemplation putting certain dams on the Damodar River, 
which flows through Bihar and Bengal; but with regard to the 
specific questions raised in this adjournment motion, which 
speaks of forced evacuation, all I have to say is this : that we 
are at a very very preliminary stage : we are merely making 
an inquiry as to how much land would be submerged by the 
enclosure of this water, what would be the area that would 
be affected, etc., and we are trying to see how many persons 
will have to be evacuated, the nature of their holdings and 
what rights they have. There is really nothing specific ; no 
action has been taken by Government at this stage which 
could be the subject-matter of discussion ; and what I would 
like to say is this : that I hope when the government has come 
* Legislative Assembly Debates, Vol. I-No. 12, 7th February 1946, p. 606. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


318 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to some definite conclusion in this matter I shall be able to circulate 
a paper to the House containing the conclusions of Government 
and members can then raise the matter for discussion in any way 
they like. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : My information is that the land 
acquisition proceedings are going on in the Hazaribagh district and 
they are asking people to go away. 

Mr. President: Is the Honourable Member sure that those 
proceedings are in respect of this very scheme ? 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : Yes. 

Mr. President: But it appears that the Government has done 
nothing so far. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government are 
merely acquiring some land for the purpose of having access roads. 

Mr. President: In connection with this scheme ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes: they have only 
served notices in order to prepare some access roads. No question 
of evacuation has arisen at this stage 

Mr. President: The acquisition is for the purposes of collection 
of data? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is no question 
of acquisition at this stage at all. No doubt if government decide 
to construct certain dams on the Damodar River, certain approach 
roads must be made for that purpose ; and for that purpose they 
have served notices on a few people in order to acquire small strips 
of land for the purpose of making roads. As to the specific question 
raised in the adjournment motion regarding forced evacuation of 
thousands of people in hundred of villages in the Hazaribagh districts 
and Manbhum and Sonthal Parganas, from their homes, it certainly 
does not arise at this stage because government has no idea as to 
what will happen, if I may say so. It is very very preliminary. 

Mr. President: The difficulty I am feeling about this is that, 
if government have decided that the dams should be put up and 
if they are taking steps initially for approach roads, what does it 
matter whether they have been able to ascertain or not as to how 
many people will have to be evacuated, because the dam will be 
an established fact ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No, Sir; we are still 
consulting consultants from outside to help us as to what correct 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


319 


PROPOSED EVACUATION OF VILLAGES DAMODAR SCHEME 319 

decision we should take. I submit it is very preliminary. I can 
make no statement to the House at all. 

Mr. President: What I want to know is, have the government 
decided that the dams should be put up ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is their project — it 
is not a final project as yet. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena (Lucknow, Non-Muhammadan 
Rural) : May I understand that it will come up before the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is under 
examination. We have not yet got the financial sanction for it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


320 


56 


* Workmen’s Compensation 
(Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move. 

“That the Bill further to amend the Workmen’s Compensation 

Act, 1923, be taken into considertion.” 

This is a very simple Bill and the purpose of the Bill is 
to rectify an injustice caused in the present circumstances 
to a workman who is drawing Rs. 300 as his wages. As 
Honourable Members are perhaps aware, under the definition 
of a “Workman” in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, the 
right to compensation is limited to those workmen who draw 
up to Rs. 300 as their wages. Before the war it was possible 
for every workman who drew Rs. 300 as his wages to get the 
benefit of this Act. Since the introduction of War allowances 
and other measures such as the grant of dearness allowance, 
bonuses, good conduct pay and other payments which have 
been granted to the workmen what has happened is that a 
workman who formerly got compensation is now deprived 
of that compensation because his wages come to more than 
Rs. 300. This is due to the reason that under the definition 
of the term “wages” as given in the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act all that extra remuneration which the workman gets other 
than wages is regarded as part of his wages for the purpose 
of computing his compensation. The result is that a workman 
who formerly was to get compensation now docs not get it. 
The Bill seeks to protect such a workman by increasing the 
maximum monthly wages from Rs. 300 to Rs. 400. The Bill 
therefore has two provisions in it, one is to amend the definition 
of the workmen so that instead of limiting the wages to 300 
it raises to 400, and secondly, to amend schedule IV to the 
Act which prescribes the compensation which a workman is 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 12, 8th February 1946, p. 714. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


321 


WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) BILL 321 

entitled to get for death, permanent total disability and temporary 
disability. 

As I said, Sir, the Bill is a very simple measure. It merely 
copies what has actually been done in Great Britain. There too, 
in order to protect the rights of a workman who originally got 
compensation, the limit of wages has been raised from £ 350 to 
425. The Bill is not only a simple measure, but it is also a non- 
contentious measure. The Provinces have been consulted with regard 
to the provisions of this Bill and they have unanimously agreed to 
the amendments which are made by this Bill. The proposal also 
was put forth before the Standing Labour Committee and there 
too it has secured the unanimous approval of all members of the 
Committee. Sir, I do not think I need expatiate at a very great 
length on the provisions of this Bill. With these observations, Sir, 
I move. 

k k k 

* Mr. President: The question is 

“That the Bill further to amend the Workmen’s Compensation 

Act, 1923, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 

Clause I was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move. 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

Mr. President: Motion moved. 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

k k k 

f Mr. President: Has the Honourable Member anything to say ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said this Bill 
is brought forward for the purpose of rectifying the injustice 
done to a particular class of workmen. It is not a Bill which is 
intended to do anything more than that. All that I can say at 
this stage is that I shall bear the points that have been made 
by my Honourable friends who have spoken on this Bill and see 
whether something can be done in order to give effect to the 
suggestions that they have made. I might tell the House that we 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 12, 8th February 1946, p. 715. 
t Ibid., p. 716. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


322 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have in contempletion a Bill which deals with State insurance, 
which will include sickness insurance, workmen’s compensation, 
maternity benefit, more or less on the lines of the social security 
measures adumbrated in England, and I think my friend will 
find that some of the suggestions, namely that the alteration of 
the system of lump-sum payments into periodical payments are 
being carried out in that measure. 

Mr. President: The question is 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


323 


57 


Indian Mines (Amendment) Bill 


* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move. 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Mines Act, 1923. 

be taken into consideration.” 

This Bill is a very simple measure. 

[(At this stage, Mr. President vacated the Chair which was 
then occupied by Mr. Deputy President (Sir Mohammad Yamin 
Khan).] 

The purport of the Bill is to impose an obligation upon the 
mine owners to provide pit-head baths “equipped with shower 
baths and locker rooms for the use of men employed in mines 
and of similar and separate places and rooms for the use of 
women in mines where women are employed and for prescribing 
cither generally or with particular reference to, the numbers of 
men and women ordinarily employed in a mine, the number and 
standards of such places and rooms.” I do not think there can be 
any dispute as regards the necessity of providing pit-head baths. 
It is bound to improve the self-respect of the miner and I am 
sure about it that it is very desirable that he should return home 
a clean person, if possible with clean clothes. This measure has 
been considered by the Coal Mines Advisory Committee which has 
been appointed by Government in order to administer the Coal 
Mines Welfare Fund. The Committee has unanimously accepted 
the proposal that pit-head baths should be an obligation of the 
colliery owners. In order to give effect to it, the Bill provides that 
under the rule-making power which is given to the Government 
of India under section 30 of the Mines Act, the Government shall 
have the power to make a rule prescribing pit-head bath. That 
is the main purpose of the Bill. 

The second clause of the Bill does nothing more than exempt 
Government from following the usual procedure in the matter of 
making rules under the Coal Mines Act which are prescribed by Section 
31. Section 31 says that any rules made under the Act shall be first 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 13, 81h February 1946, p. 716. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

published and then passed. We wish to exempt the rules that we 
propose to make under the provisions of this Bill from the provision 
of previous publication prescribed under Section 31. The reason 
for providing such exemption is that we are very anxious that 
this liability not only should be imposed, but should be earned 
out immediately, we wish to avoid delay. In fact, I might tell the 
House that the Government are so anxious to have this system 
of pit-head baths introduced in ah coal mines immediately that 
Government themselves have made a provision by which they are 
prepared to offer ten per cent of the capital cost of the baths to 
colliery owners if they undertake to provide such baths within 
twelve months. In order that this may be done, we do not propose 
to have these rules subjected to the provision of Section 31. The 
Bill is so essential and so simple and so non-controversial, that 
the House will accept it without much ado — Sir, I move. 

Mr. Deputy President : Motion moved. 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Mines Act, 1923, be 

taken into consideration.” 

k k k 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We want to hasten 
this thing and that is why we offer this kind of encouragement, 
that if a mine owner docs construct these baths within twelve 
months from a given date he will get this concession. Otherwise, 
he will not get it and he will have to do it at his own cost. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : Will not that purpose be served 
if it were laid down that the mine owners shall get those baths 
ready within twelve months 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We must give some time. 

k k k 

* The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I did not 
think that my Honourable friend Mr. Siddiqui, would be so 
much perturbed, — he is not here in the House just now — by the 
shower baths. But I would like to tell the House that the question 
whether there should be shower baths or not is not an idiosyncracy 
on the part of the Government or their own innovation. There 
is, as I told the House, an Advisory Committee, representative 
of coal miners, coal owners, representative of the Bengal 
Government and Bihar Government, which advise Government 
in the matter of the administration of what is called the Coal 
Miners’ Welfare Fund. This question of the sort of baths that 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 13, 8th February 1946, pp. 719-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


325 


INDIAN MINES (AMENDMENT) BILL 325 

should be provided was put before the Committee and I would 
like to tell the House that in this Committee there arc not only 
representatives of trade unions, but there arc representatives 
actually of workmen and workwomen. There is one representative 
of actual coal miners and there is one representative of women 
miners and it is with their unanimous assent that Government 
decided to have shower baths. 

So far as I am able to see, I should have thought that a 
shower bath would be far more effective in the matter of cleaning 
the person of a worker in coal mines than immersion in water or 
holding oneself under a running tap. I may also further add that 
this decision of having shower baths was taken by Government as a 
result of the experience of Messrs. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., at 
their colliery in Digboi. These shower baths have been in existence 
for a considerable time there and to our great satisfaction we found 
mat the workers were making very good use of the shower baths 
and that they had no sort of objection at all. With regard to the 
question of soap, I can give the assurance to the House that we do 
intend to provide soap to every miner under certain regulations, 
and I think the House need have no anxiety on that account. 

I hope this will satisfy Honourable Members. An Honourable 
Member said that this is merely a declaration and that there is 
no penalty. If the Honourable Member concerned were to refer to 
section 39, he will find that that is a general penalty clause which 
imposes penalties. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : There is only one little difficulty in regard 
to women. They do not want their hair also to be washed with 
mere water ; they may require oil or something. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They may be provided 
with caps. 

Mr. Deputy President: The question is 

“That the Bill further to amend the Indian Mines Act 1923, be 

taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and the Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move. 

“That the Bill be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


326 


58 


* Factories (Amendment) Bill 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. President I move : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, be 
taken into consideration”. 

The Bill has altogether seven clauses ; but of these seven 
clauses there are only two which are fundamental. They are 
clause 2 and clause 7 of the Bill. These two clauses deal with 
two separate questions. Clause 2 deals with the question of 
reduction in the hours of work and clause 7 deals with the rate 
of payment for overtime. 

Taking for consideration the first question, namely, the 
reduction in the hours of work. I would like to state to the 
House what the present position is. The present position is that 
under section 34 of the Factories Act, for perennial factories the 
maximum hours of work per week are fixed at 54, while for the 
non-perennial or seasonal factories the total is 60 hours a week. 
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to make changes in the maximum 
hours of work fixed by section 34 for perennial factories the 
maximum is fixed at 48, while for the seasonal factories the 
maximum is fixed at 54. It might be desirable to mention to 
the House why Government has thought it necessary to bring 
this amending measure. 

As some members of the House will remember, this question 
regarding the hours of work in factories was considered for the 
first time in a convention which was held in Washington in 
the year 1919. The convention fixed 40 hours as the maximum 
for factory labour, but on account of the special conditions 
prevalent in India, the conference agreed to allow India to 
retain the maximum of 60 hours, which was then prevalent. 
Consequently, the Government of India allowed the 60 hours 
limit to continue. The matter was then examined by the Royal 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 7, 21st February 1946, pp. 1304-6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


327 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 327 

Commission on Labour, and Royal Commission on Labour 
recommended that although the international convention did not 
put any obligation upon the Government of India to bring the 
Factory Law in consonance with the convention established in 
Washington, they recommended that nonetheless it was necessary 
that the hours of labour in India should be fixed at 54. That 
recommendation was accepted by the Government of India and 
an amending Bill was brought in the year 1934, underwhich the 
present maximum which is fixed by section 34 was brought into 
operation. The Government of India now think that time and 
circumstances have arisen whereby it is necessary that the Indian 
factory workers should be allowed the benefit of the maximum 
hours of labour that were fixed by the Washington Convention ; 
and that is the reason why this Bill has been brought forward. 

I need not eleborate the reasons why Government regards 
this matter as somewhat emergent. But I might mention briefly 
the considerations that have moved the Government of India to 
bring forward this measure. I think it will be agreed that apart 
from other considerations, if one were to take into account only 
the climatic conditions that prevail in this country, it would be 
agreed that for that, if for no other reason, the hours of work 
in a country like India ought to be much less than the hours 
of work that arc prevalent in other countries. There is also the 
other reason, namely, that during the war, under section 8 of 
the Ordinance, we had permitted the Provincial Governments to 
allow many exemptions from the provisions of the Factories Act 
which had the effect of increasing the hours of work for factory 
labour and the Government thinks that the strain arising from 
the extension of the hours of work during the period of the war 
was so great that it is necessary in the interests of the health 
of the workers that they ought to be now granted a substantial 
relief. I might also mention to the Flouse that the Government 
also thinks that this measure will have some salutary effect in 
the matter of relieving unemployment which is likely to arise as 
a result of retrenchment. If 48 hours and 54 hours which have 
been fixed by the present Bill 

Sjt. N. V. Gadgil (Bombay Central Division: Non-Muhammdan 
Rural): Make it 40. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : were to be of 

universal operation, it is, I think, logical that more people would be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

employed than are employed now and that to some extent it 
would be a relief in our post-war difficulties. Some members are 
probably thinking that this might be a very radical measure. I 
would like to disabuse them of any such notion. The Bill does 
not make any radical change in the practice which exists at 
present and I would like to give the house some figures in order 
to show to what extent 48 hours in perennial factories and 54 
hours in seasonal factories have become the order of the day. 
In the year 1939, there were altogether — I am giving figures of 
perennial factories — 8,644 factories. Of them 2,315 were working 
at the rate of 48 hours a week which gives a percentage of 27 per 
cent. In 1940, the total number of factories was 8,115 and those 
that worked on 48 hours were 2,525 which gives 28 per cent of 
the total. In 1941, the total was 10,261. Those that worked on 
48 hours were 2,921 which was 29 per cent. In 1942, the total 
was 10,483. Those that worked on 48 hours was 2,687 which 
gives a total of 26 per cent. In 1943, the total was 11,239. Those 
that worked on 48 was 2,761, which gives a total of 25 per 
cent. In 1944, that total was 11,835. Those that worked on 48 
hours was 3,191 which gives a total of 27 per cent. The same 
facts with regard to seasonal factories are as follows. In 1939, 
there were 6,252 factories. Of them 2,409 worked on a basis of 
54 hours which gives 39 per cent. In 1940, the total was 6,239. 
Of them 2,440 worked on the basis of 54 hours, which is again a 
total of 39. In 1941, the total was 6,265. Of them 2,439 worked 
on 54 hours which again is a percentage of 39. In 1942, the 
total was 5,925. Those that worked 54 was 2,358 which gives 
40 as the percentage. In 1943, the total was 6,255. Of them 
2,398 worked on a basis of 54 which gives a percentage of 40. 
In 1944, the total was 5,950 and of them 2,368 worked at the 
rate of 54. That gives 40. (An Honourable Member : “The rest 
is more than 54 hours” ) Not beyond the maximum but above 
the figures now fixed in the Bill. 

Shri Sri Prakasa (Benares and Gorakhpur Divisions: Non- 
Muhammdan Rural) What is the number of men employed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am coming 
to that. Looking at the matter from the point of view of 
the hands, we unfortunately have not got very complete 
data but from the reports of the Fact Finding Committee 
which the Government of India appointed recently, the 
figures collected stand as follows. The total factory hands 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


329 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 329 

both in seasonal and non-seasonal factories comes to 25,20,251. 
These are the latest figures for 1945. Those that were employed 
in factories working at 48 to 54 comes to 9,47,000 which is 
37 per cent, of the total. It will therefore be seen that there are 
already a great number of factories both perennial and seasonal 
which have practically adopted the maximum which is now fixed 
in the Bill and from that point of view it cannot be said that 
the Bill is making any very great radical change in the situation 
as it exists today. 

There is one other point which has been raised by the critics 
of the Bill to which I would like to give a reply. It has been 
said that this Bill will affect production, and that it will reduce 
production and this point has been emphasized, if I may say so, 
by the cotton textile mills. They have contended that from their 
point of view and from the point of view of the country this is an 
inopportune measure. There is a great deal of shortage of cloth 
in the country. In fact there is a cloth famine and they say that 
if anything was necessary in the circumstances of the day, the 
mills, particularly the Cotton mills, ought to have greater latitude 
in the matter of hours of employment, so that the deficiency in 
the matter of cloth production might be made up. Now, I had an 
examination made of the effect of the reduction in the hours of 
labour on production, particularly with regard to the cotton mills 
by the Labour Department and I have here some very interesting 
figures. I have a great lot of figures but I do not want to weary 
the House with them but I will just refer to the consumption of 
cotton, increase of loom, spindles and so on, so that the house 
may get an idea. Now, I take the figure for the year 1934, the 
year in which the change in the hours of work was made last 
time. They were brought down from 60 to 54. Now, in 1934, 
the position was as follows. There were 352 mills. There were 
9,613,174 spindles, 194,388 looms, 384,938 hands employed and 
the number of cotton bales consumed was 2,703,994. Take the 
next year, 1935, when the provisions of the Act became effective. 
The number of mills had increased to 365. Spindles had increased 
to 9,685,175, looms had increased to 1,98,867. The number of 
hands increased to 4,14,884. The bales consumed increased to 
3,123,418. I will take the last year available to me, that is 1938. 
The total number of mills had increased to 380. The number of 
spindles had increased to 1,020,275. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


330 


330 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sri Prakasa : Will the Honourable Member give them 
in lakhs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are all given 
here in millions. The notation which I am using is quite famliar to 
the Honourable Member on the other side. He is not so ignorant 
as he is showing himself to be. 

The number of looms is 200,286; hands employed were 437,690, 
the number of cotton bales consumed 3,662,648. Therefore, my 
submission is that so far as experience of the past is any guide 
to the consequences of the future, I am sure that any such fear 
that may be entertained is unfounded. However, the Government 
of India does recognise that there is cloth famine, if not famine, 
there is shortage of cloth and that under the circumstances, 
it would be necessary to make some provision, so that should 
occasion arise, the mills or the other establishments which 
require longer hours to work may have the liberty to do so. 
Accordingly, there has been inserted in the Bill a clause which 
is clause 5 and which amends section 44. It will be seen from 
the wording of the clause that power is given to the Provincial 
Government to extend the operation of the order for six months 
at a time, it was proved that public interest as distinguished 
from emergency existed. There is already provision for suspending 
the provisions of the Factory Act whenever there is emergency. 
It was felt that the shortage of cloth may not be regarded as an 
emergency and consequently Provincial Governments may not 
be in a position to use the sections which exist at present in 
the Act. Consequently as a measure of greater precaution, the 
Government has inserted in the Bill a clause which now makes 
provision for another category of situation which is called public 
interest. So, I hope that that clause will allay such fears as the 
cotton textile millowners may have with regard to the effect of 
the Bill on the production of cloth. 

Sir, the other clauses, namely, clauses 3, 4 and 6 arc 
purely consequential. Clause 3 reduces the daily maximum 
from 11 to 9 for perennial factories and from 11 to 10 for 
seasonal factories. That is in consonance with the major change 
which we are making by fixing a new maxima for perennial 
and seasonal factories. Clauses 4 and 6 merely reduce the 
spread over from 13 hours to 12 and I am sure they need no 
comment from me. With regard to the second main provision 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


331 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 331 

of the Bill which as I said deals with the rate of payment for 
overtime, Honourable Members will see that the existing Factory 
Act does not have a uniform rule with regard to payment of 
overtime. In fact, there are two different rules, one for perennial 
factory and the other for seasonal factory. For the seasonal 
factory, if the hours of work are above 60, then he gets 1V 2 for 
the non-seasonal factory, there are really two different rates. 
If the working hours are between 54 to 60, then the overtime 
is l 1 /, times, if it is above 60, it is 1V„ times. As Government 
thinks that as this distinction or differentiation in the rates of 
payment of overtime is unjustifiable, that it is desirable that 
there ought to be one single rule for overtime, irrespective of the 
nature of the factory, to which the rule applies. Consequently 
the amendment in the Bill proposes that for all overtime, the 
rates should be one and a half times. I hope that the house will 
realise that this is a simple measure, that it is a measure long 
overdue and that it will give its support to this belated measure 
of bringing Indian legislation in accord with the standards laid 
down by the International convention. Sir, I move. 

Factories (Amendment) Bill 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I have 
listened to the speech which the Mover made in support of his 
amendment and if that speech was the only speech in support of 
the amendment I certainly would have resisted the amendment, 
because, so far as I was able to hear, the Honourable the mover 
of this amendment said that the reason why he had moved 
his amendment was because I had not explained in my speech 
whether the Government of India, before putting forth this Bill, 
had consulted the different Parties to this measure. I certainly 
failed to say so but I thought that the Honourable member of this 
house were aware of the fact that for the last several years there 
has been in existence an institution called the Labour Conference 
which meets annually and which has a Standing Committee which 
meets every quarter. It consists of the representatives of labour, 
the representatives of employers and the representatives of the 
Provincial Governments. The Government of India, in so far as it is 
possible, for it to do so, always put forth their legislative measures 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 7, 21st February 1946, pp. 1312-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


332 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

before the Conference in order to ascertain the opinion of the 
different Parties to those measures. The same, Sir, has been the 
case with regard to this particular measure. I have no particular 
information with me now as to how many times this measure 
had come before the Standing Labour Committee or the Labour 
Conference but I have not the slightest doubt in my mind 
that this measure was discussed threadbare in one of the two 
bodies (I forget which). We had come to know that the cotton 
millowners had certain difficulties and certain objections and it 
was to meet their point of view that a particular amendment was 
made. Having regard to that, I do not think that there is any 
substance in the point made by the mover of this amendment. 
As I said, if that was the ground and the sole ground, I would 
have resisted, but, Sir, the debate as it developed has taken a 
very curious turn. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga (Guntur-cum-Nellore : Non-Muhammdan 
Rural): A very welcome turn. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is probably a 
welcome turn. I have noticed from the speeches that have been 
made from different part of the House that there is now a regular 
competition in love for labour. One section says one thing and 
another raises it as though it was an auction by making a higher 
bid and third one still further. 

An Honourable Member : You can bid higher. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In all these debates 
I am rather unhappy that there were persons in the House 
who were members of the Royal Commission and who ought 
to have taken a personal interest in seeing that the measures 
which they had recommended when they were members of the 
Commission were put forth, if not from the Government side, 
at least from the non-official side, should turn my inside out 
and represent that I was a Tory of Tories. I do not accept that 
charge but I do feel that it is necessary that this Bill should 
go to Select Committee so that all the statements that have 
been made, the claims that have been put forth and the view 
points that have been urged should be put to the test of actual 
voting in order to see whether the sentiments that have beeen 
expressed are mere sentiments or that they arc real convictions. 
If I did not do so, it is open to the members of the Opposition 
side to say that as I was a Tory and do not want to advance 
the Bill beyond the limits that have been fixed, that I on that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


333 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 333 

account shirked accepting this motion. I therefore accept the 
motion. (At this stage Honourable Members rose in their seats). 

k k k 

*Sri R. Venkatasubba Reddiar: To the names I have 
already submitted in regard to the Select Committee, I want to 
add two more names — Sri T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar and Rai 
Bahadur Bhattacharyya. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I accept them. 
Mr. Deputy President: The question is : 

“That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of the Honourable Sir Asoka Roy, the Honourable Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar, Prof. N. G. Ranga, Sjt. N. V. Gadgil, Mr. Vadilal 
Lallubhai, Diwan Chaman Lall, Pandit Balkrishna Sharma, 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman, Mr. Muhammad M. Killedar, Sir Hasan 
Ahrawardy, Mr. S. C. Joshi, Mr. A. C. Inskip, Miss Maniben Kara, 

Mr. S. Guruswami, Chaudhry Sri Chand, Sri T. A. Ramalingam 
Chettiar, Raj Bahadur D. M. Bhattacharya, and the Mover, with 
instructions to report on or before the 7th March, 1946, and that 
the number of members whose presence shall be necessary to 
constitute a meeting of the Committee shall be five.” 

The motion was adopted. 

• • 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I-No. 7, 21st February 1946, p. 1318. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


334 


59 


* Rehabilitation Plans 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. President, In the course of the observations that fall from 
the Leader of the European Group, he said that they were not 
quite sure whether the resettlement and rehabilitation plans 
of the Government of India were proceeding apace in order 
to meet with the volume of demobilization that was going on. 
Sir, it is for this purpose that I rise now in order to give the 
House the requisite information on this subject. Sir, the subject 
of resettlement is divided into two parts : settlement on land and 
settlement in industry. The question of the settlement on land 
is a matter which has been left for the Provincial Governments 
to carry on. The reason for leaving settlement on land to the 
Provinces is, I think, quite obvious to the House. The land, 
by constitutional law, is the subject matter of the Provincial 
Government. Obviously no matter what argument there may 
be in support of the position that the whole subject matter of 
resettlement should be under one Central Government, that 
argument could not dislodge the opposite argument which is 
founded on the fact that the land is a Provincial subject. It is, 
therefore, by mutual agreement that that question has been 
left to the Provincial Government. The only subject that the 
Government of India deals with is resettlement in industry. It 
is on this subject that I propose to give some account to the 
House. 

The subject of resettlement has been placed under the charge 
of the Directorate-General of Resettlement and Employment. 
The department or branch is divided into seven different 
categories ; (1) Employment Exchange, (2) Technical Training, 
(3) Vocational Training, (4) Rehabilitation of the Disabled Soldier, 

(5) Canvassing employment for ex-servicemen and the disabled, 

(6) Follow-up service, (7) Statistics of Discharges and Releases. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill-No. 4, 5th March 1946, pp. 1898-1900. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


335 


REHABILITATION PLANS 335 

The functions relating to canvassing of employment for ex- 
servicemen and the disabled soldier as well as the next function 
of what is called ‘follow-up’ service and that of statistics of 
discharges and releases, are obviously so necessary and so self- 
explanatory that I do not think it is necessary for me to spend 
any time to explain why these services have been instituted and 
what their purpose is. I will therefore leave these subjects for 
Honourable Members to study from this book which has been 
issued by the Government of India in the Labour Department. 
A copy of it is in the Library and if any Honourable Member 
desires to have a copy for his personal use, I shall be very happy 
to circulate them. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : What is the title ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is “ The 

Directorate-General of Resettlement and Employment “. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : Please circulate it. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Copies of it were 
given to the Labour Advisory Committee the last time when it 
met. The only question on which detailed explanation is necessary 
is in regard to the Employment Exchanges, Technical Training, 
Vocational Training and Rehabilitation. I will take each item 
seriatim. 

With regard to technical training, the position is this. The 
Government of India have certain technical centres for technical 
training. In those centres they have reserved at present 14,000 
seats for demobilized personnel. The training, the maximum period 
of it, will be for one year and the number of trades that will be 
taught in those technical training centres will be about 48, the 
detailed list of which is given on page 55 as Appendix VII of this 
booklet. Then, Sir, with regard to vocational training : it deals with 
training in agriculture, in dairy farming, in cottage industries, 
in clerical and commercial occupations. The scheme is at present 
prepared and is sent round to the Provincial Governments for 
their approval. The proposal is that in these vocational training 
centres 20,000 scats will be reserved for training in occupations 
relating to agriculture and 50,000 in other occupations. 

Coming to the question of Rehabilitation. This matter is shared 
between the War Department and the Labour Department, and the 
reason for such sharing will be obvious. The rehabilitation of a soldier, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


336 


336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

who has received injuries in the course of the war obviously 
falls into two stages. The first stage is the medical stage where 
questions of healing the wound and post-hospital rehabilitation 
are of primary importance. Obviously, the soldier being in the 
service of the War Department, this matter has been left to the 
War Department to deal with. After he has come out of the first 
stage of rehabilitation, which is the medical stage, he is handed 
over to the Labour Department and the Labour Department then 
deals with him. For the purpose of dealing with the rehabilitation 
of a soldiar, the Labour Department has two sorts of centres 
opened in this country. One is called the basic Centre. The 
accommodation provided is for 5,000 such persons. The second 
sort is the special training centre. There the accommodation 
provided is for 3,000 persons. The purpose of the Basic Centre 
is to test the aptitude of the man. What are his aptitude ? What 
is it that he is likely to be the special training centre where he 
is taught some occupation which is most suitable having regard 
to the particular sort of injury that he has received. The Labour 
Department plans to open altogether six centres for dealing with 
soldiers requiring rehabilitation. They have opened one at Jaladi 
near Bangalore and they propose to open another very soon in 
Aundh near Poona. 

I will now come to the question of Employment Exchanges, 
which of course is the most important part of the resettlement 
plan. With regard to the Employment Exchange, the labour 
Department has come to the conclusion that it would be enough 
to start with 71 such Employment Exchanges. They have today 
on the ground set up 38 such Exchanges and before long, they 
hope to complete the maximum number they have decided upon. 

Now, Sir, I know that there is a certain amount of criticism 
both from members of the House as well as from the public 
outside that the question of setting up of Employment Exchanges 
is not progressing as rapidly as it should and I should like to 
meet that criticism by submitting to the House certain facts 
which would show why the labour Department cannot rush the 
starting of these Employment Exchanges. The one thing which is 
necessary to remember is that unless and until an employment 
exchange is managed by a man who has had training, it is bound 
to fail. Let it be remembered that Employment Exchanges are a 
very specialised sort of work — the most specialised type of work. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


337 


REHABILITATION PLANS 337 

An Employment Exchange would completely fail if it were placed 
in the hands of a man who is not trained for the job. Therefore, 
before starting any Employment Exchange, it is necessary to give 
a certain amount of training to a man who is to be in charge 
of the Employment Exchange. That is, therefore, one difficulty 
why it has not been possible to rush in the matter of starting 
our Employment Exchanges. 

Mr. P. J. Griffiths: Where is the training done ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am just coming 
to that. We have therefore established a training centre in Delhi. 
It is a sort of a school in the charge of Mr. Jones, whose services 
have been lent to us by the Labour Department in England. He 
runs this training centre. In that centre training is given in all 
aspects of the employment of an Employment Exchange. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : How many are you training at a time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sorry I cannot 
give you the exact figure. These books will give the information. 
I believe 35 at a time. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : How long do you take to recruit them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The difficulty 
arises from the fact that all these posts to be filled on the 
recommendation of the Federal Public Service Commission and the 
minimum time that the Federal Public Service Commission takes 
is somewhere about three months. I do not know whether — and 
I am not prepared to say that the time taken by the Federal 
Public Service Commission is unduly long. (Interruption by Prof. 
Ranga) I am merely stating the reason why it has not been 
possible to start them soon. The first difficulty is that it takes 
a pretty long time to have a man recruited through the Federal 
Public Service Commission. Secondly, after he has been recruited, 
we have to give him training. All this therefore takes time and 
I do not regard the time taken as wasted. 

Another point which people, who criticise the Labour 
Department for not having set down all the Exchanges, raise is 
this. The Labour Department have not got all the Exchanges on 
the ground. This does not mean that there is no organisation 
on the ground which is able to deal with the subject. As might 
be known, there is already a Recruiting and Employment 
Bureau in the War Department which has been doing this 
work and the policy of the Government is that in course of time 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

this organisation should cease to deal with this work and the 
whole work should go over to the Labour Department. The Labour 
Department, while it goes on increasing its Exchanges also goes 
on taking over the work that is at present dealt with by this 
recruiting organisation in the War Department. Consequently, 
the fact today is that there are really two different organisations 
working in full cooperation, one in the Labour Department 
and another in the War Department and in course of time we 
hope that all the work that is now carried on by the recruiting 
organisation will come to the exchanges and we shall than be 
able to set up a full-fledged and competent organisation to deal 
with this question of resettlement. 

Sir, I hope the House will be satisfied that the Labour 
Department is doing its best in the circumstances in which it 
has been placed. I would just like to say one word. I think it 
will be appreciated that this question of resettlement came to 
us as matter of great surprise in view of the fact that the war 
closed before we expected. However, I am quite certain that 
whatever is possible to be done within the short space of time 
that is available to us is being done and I have no doubt that 
the soldier who is demobilised will find this organisation of great 
use to him in meeting the difficulties which he is confronted 
with in civil employment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


339 


60 


* Welfare and Social Security of Workers 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. President, the object of this cut motion is quite clear from 
the notice which has been given by the Honourable Member. 
He proposes to discuss the failure of the Executive Council 
to provide for three specific matters which he has mentioned, 
namely, unemployment relief, adequate dearness allowance and 
social security benefits. The first point of comment that I would 
like to make with regard to this cut motion is this that if the 
cut motion was a general one, I have no doubt about it that it 
should have stood on a different footing but as the House will 
see the cut motion is restricted to the employees of the Central 
Government. And I venture to suggest that this is a very grave 
fault in this cut motion. I do not know whether it is the wish 
and the desire of the Honourable Mover of this cut motion that 
the Government of India should frame its policy with regard 
to the three matters that he has referred to in such a manner 
as to create a privileged class of workers in this country on no 
other account except that they happen to be employed by the 
Central Government. 

In this country Government is not the only party that 
employs labour. There is a large amount of labour employed by 
private employers. As everybody in this House would agree the 
Government of India while framing its policy for the betterment of 
labour should frame it in such a manner that it should not create 
a privileged class on the one hand and an under privileged class 
on the other. The Government of India is not merely an employer 
of labour. It is a State. It is a government and it has not only 
responsibility for those who are in the immediate employment of 
the Government of India. It has also a responsibility for labour 
in general. If therefore all these complaints which have been 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. III-No. 7, 11th March 1946, pp. 2138-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


340 


340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

referred to by the Honourable Mover have to be dealt with by 
the Government of India, it is incumbent on the Government of 
India, as in duty bound to frame its policy in such a manner that 
the policy shall benefit labour in general and not any particular 
class of labour. 

Now Sir, my Honourable friend mentioned that the 
Government of India maintains various classes of allowances 
and salaries for different classes of its own employees. I confess 
that I am painfully aware of that fact but what I would like to 
ask is this — who is responsible for the gradation which one sees 
now in the scale of payment either of basic wage or of dearness 
allowance or of gratuity or any of the perquisites which the 
employees working under the Government of India are receiving 
today. I have no hesitation in saying that the fault entirely lies 
with the leaders of labour. Here we have got the Railwaymen’s 
Federation. Any one who studies the policy of the Railwaymen’s 
Federation, I think, will agree with me that it has always taken 
a parochial view of its own interests. The Federation happens to 
be in control of a strategic service on which the essential life of 
the community depends and they use that position for the purpose 
of coming down to the Railway Department and insisting that 
certain privileges shall be given to them. I may also say that 
they get certain Members of the Legislature interested in their 
case and there develops a partisan spirit which is blind to all 
other interests and concentrates itself on securing certain special 
privileges for railway workmen alone. The railwaymen, although 
there is no open declaration to that effect, maintain that they must 
always be in a leading position with regard to any other class of 
employees of the Central Government. If the Postal Department 
is given something which happens to equate the scale of wages 
of the postal employees with the railway employees, the railway 
employees immediately become dissatisfied and they say that 
owing to the margin of privilege which custom, usage or their 
position has enabled them to secure they must have a further 
increase, so that their privileged position is maintained. This sort 
of thing is going on and the position of (lie Labour Department 
has become completely difficult. My Honourable friend maintains 
or rather sugggested that the Labour Department was not 
establishing arbitration boards as it should do but what is the 
advantage of appointing adjudication boards for specific cases, for 
specific service each case being dealt with in isolation without 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


341 


WELFARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY OF WORKERS 341 

relation to the other. The result is you have ad-hoc boards, ad- 
hoc reports, ad-hoc decisions which have to be dealt with ad-hoc. 
The result is there is always a disparity, always a divergence. 
Therefore the situation which we have at present is entirely the 
result of the faulty organisation, if I may say so, of the working 
classes of this country and particularly those who are employed 
under the Government of India. I think the House will agree that 
the decision which the Government of India has recently taken 
in the appointment of a Salaries Commission is a decision in the 
wise direction because the whole question of the wage stracture 
in this country and the relation of wages paid by the Government 
of India to its different classes of employees and the relation of 
wages paid to them to the wages operating in private industry, 
will be examined by this Commission. I hope that we shall be 
able to get some recommendations from this Commission from 
which we shall be able to establish in this country some kind of 
a uniformity in the wage system, so that everyone would know 
the underlying principles on which the wages arc based. 

The other difficulty I find is that most of the employees of 
the Government of India, who arc employed in certain services 
which earn revenue, have come to regard that they have a 
first charge on the revenues of their Department. The railway 
employees think that because the railways are earning a profit, 
it is they who must get something, more than anybody else, 
out of the profits that the railways have earned. If the Postal 
employees find that the Postal Department has made a profit, 
they also raise a claim on the ground that their betterment, a 
rise in the standard of their living, should be regarded as a first 
charge on the revenues of that Department. Now, Sir, so far as 
I am concerned, I have not the slightest doubt that I cannot 
accept that position and I shall always resist it. The revenues 
earned by the Government of India — no matter whether they are 
raised by taxation or whether they are raised by any commercial 
undertaking — are the revenues of India. They are not the revenues 
of any particular class of people. They are not the revenues of 
any particular Department of Government of India. They are 
the revenues of the Government of India and the whole general 
public has a claim on those revenues and, as long as I am in 
charge of the Labour Department, I shall always resist any such 
claim made by any class of employees, namely, that because 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their Department earns any profit, they have the first charge 
upon it. That would lead to chaos and I am certainly not going 
to be a party to it at all. 

Now, Sir, my friend, the Mover of the cut motion, has raised 
the question of unemployment. I am not going to deal with the 
specific questions that he has raised, but I am going to deal 
generally with the question of unemployment benefit and I have 
no doubt that that is a most fallacious argument. Unemployment 
must be relieved by employment and not by any relief as such. 
Unemployment by the payment of relief is a possibility when 
unemployment is on a very small scale, when it is only a tail and 
not the body of it. In this country, as everybody knows, practically 
over 50 to 60 per cent, of the people are unemployed and we have 
to find employment for them. If anybody were to come forward 
and say that the 50 or 60 per cent, of unemployment that exists 
in this country ought to be relieved by the payment of relief, I 
have not the slightest doubt in my mind that the State would 
come to a ruination if it undertook that kind of obligation. My 
friend, therefore, must agree that so far as unemployment is 
concerned, relief must be sought in the direction of a greater 
industrialisation. It is only rapid and greater industrialisation that 
can give us relief from unemployment, and as this House knows, 
the Government of India has already prepared its plan and has 
already announced its decision with regard to Industrialisation. 
I will, therefore, not dwell on that subject at any great length 
but I would like to tell the House what exactly the Government 
of India has done with regard to the advancement of general 
betterment and providing for social security with regard to the 
workers in this country. 

At the Honourable House knows, the Government of India 
has already announced its policy with regard to labour. I have 
no time to read the portions which deal with that question. This 
information will be found in the second part of the Reconstruction 
Committee of Council under Head XXV, pages 55 and 56. Nobody 
can, therefore, say that the Government has not an objective in 
this matter. We have and we have laid down the objective. I will 
go a step further and say that it is not that the Government 
of India has merely laid down its objective but the Government 
of India has also prepared programme of action. With regard 
to the programme of action, the House will know that the 
Government of India has appointed or did appoint two years ago, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


343 


WELFARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY OF WORKERS 343 

a fact-finding Committee in order to take a survey of the entire 
condition of workers in this country. So far, we have received 34 
reports from this Committee on 34 different industries besides 
one general report giving a bird’s eye-survey of all the specific 
reports that have been made. Of these reports, 18 have been 
already printed and the rest of them are with the printers. 
Apart from obtaining this general survey of industrial condition 
of workers, the Government of India have appointed a Special 
Officer, Professor Adarkar, to prepare a report on the health 
insurance of workers in this country. As I said, we have not 
only an objective, but we have a programme, and we are now in 
possession of the facts on which any plan of social security could 
be based. The next step now for the Government of India is to 
decide how to plan for social security. As the House will know 
there are at present two views. One view is that we should go 
stage by stage, as other industrial countries will, dealing with 
each case of insecurity specifically and building an administrative 
machinery for the purpose of giving relief in respect of that 
case of insecurity. There is another school which is more or less 
influenced by the Beveridge Plan and which proposes to have an 
over-all policy of security covering all cases of insurance at one 
shot. I do not wish to approach the issue in any matter and to 
say as to which plan would be better. The Government of India 
propose to appoint a Committee or such other body as it may 
be advised to tell the Government of India, after examination 
of the reports that have been made as to the method by which 
they should proceed in this matter whether they should proceed 
stage by stage or whether they should take up such ambitious 
plan as the one adumbrated in the Beveridge report. This survey, 
which I have given which I am afraid is all too brief, I have 
had no time to elaborate or to develop, will convince the house 
that the complaint made by the Honourable Mover of this Cut 
Motion that the Executive council is complacent is indifferent 
and has taken no steps to provide for the welfare and security 
of the workers is entirely unfounded and I hope that the House 
will not accept the Cut Motion that is moved by him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


344 


61 

* Muslims have fared much better in Labour 

Department 

Mr. President : Discussion will now be resumed on the cut 
motion of Mr. Jaffer. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : (Labour Member): 
Mr. President, it must be within the recollection of many Members 
of this House that many stones have been hurled at the Labour 
Department 

Nawabzada Liaquat Ali Khan (Meerut Division — 
Muhammadan Rural) — Bricks, not stones 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Or bricks, during 
the last week which preceded this cut motion. It is only fair that 
I should rise in my seat to state how the position of Muslims 
stands in My Department. Yesterday I listened to a sort of 
running commentary by the two speakers who spoke on this cut 
motion, they gave some figures regarding the position of Muslim 
employees in the different Departments of the Government of 
India. As I listened to that commentary, I cannot help saying 
that, having the facts before me, I felt considerably proud that the 
Muslim employees under the Labour Department had certainly 
fared much better than the story that was revealed by the 
speakers with regard to other Departments of the Government 
of India. That this is no vain boast but that it is supported 
by facts is what I propose to do during the few minutes that 
I propose to occupy today. I have collected, and if I may say 
so, I have taken great pains in collecting figures regarding 
the percentage of the employees of the Government of India 
in the Labour Department, not only in the Labour section, but 
in the P.W.D. and in all other attached offices, figures which 
show what the position of the communities is, the position of 


^"Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. III-No. 10, 14th March 1946, p. 2406. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


345 


MUSLIMS HAVE FARED MUCH BETTER 345 

the Muslims is as well as the position of the other minorities. 
But I quite realise that within the time that I have it would be 
quite impossible for me to lay out in completeness the position 
of these different communities, and therefore I propose today 
merely to give the figures of Muslims — not only the totals but 
also the percentages, so that the members of the Muslim League 
Party may know what exactly the position is. 

I begin with the communal composition of the Labour 
Department secretariat, and in doing so I propose to give not 
merely the figures as they stand now, but to give the figures 
on a comparative basis. I think the comparative basis is very 
necessary and very essential. So far as I have been able to 
understand the working of this rule, I think I may say that it 
is somewhat like shooting at a target — a target has a bulls eye, 
it has an inner circle and it has an outer circle. The percentages 
are the bulls-eye, undoubtedly. But I do not think that it would 
at all be possible for any member of the Government of India, 
no matter what his personal predelictions may be, that he can 
arrange the services under him in such a manner that he would 
always be able to hit the bulls eye. What I submit is that there 
should be an endeavour on the part of every member to see 
that no community as far as possible is pushed out of what is 
called the centre, and the question therefore that we have to 
consider in passing judgment upon the doings of any particular 
Department is to know whether the position of any particular 
class of employees in that Department has deteriorated or has 
bettered, and from that point of view I think a comparative 
statement is the proper way of studying this matter. 

I have collected figures in all cases for 1939 and for 
1946-March. I said that I will first present the figures with regard 
to the Labour Department Secretariat. The gazetted posts in the 
year 1939 were 12 and the Muslim percentage was 8 per cent. 
In 1946, the total number of gazetted post is 80 and the Muslim 
proportion is 20 per cent. I will give the figures for the non- 
gazetted posts. In 1939 the total number of such posts was 75 
and of that the Muslims had 23 per cent. In 1946 the total 
number of posts was 457, and the percentage of Muslims is 24. 

Now I will come to that much-talked of C.P.W.D. I will give the 
figures for the gazetted posts. In 1939 the total number of gazetted 
posts in the C.P.W.D. was 43., of which the Muslims had 21 percent. In 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


346 


346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

1946 the total number of posts was 181, and notwithstanding 
the difficulties to which my Honourable friend the Home Member 
referred in the matter of observing the communal proportions 
during the war emergency, the Muslims had 21.1 per cent. Now, 
this probably may not quite give enough comfort for the Mover of 
this cut motion, and I therefore propose to take the time of the 
house further to analyse the composition of the gazetted posts in the 
C.P.W.D. in the year 1946, taking the different grades for finding 
out the percentages. In Superintending Engineers, the total posts are 
14 and there is one Muslim — which gives 7 per cent. Of Executive 
Engineers there are 64 and the Muslim percentage is 18 per cent. 
Electrical Engineers are 12 and the Muslim quota is 6 2/3 per cent. 
Assistant Executive Engineers — the quota for Muslims is 14 per cent. 
Temporary Engineers total 72 and the Muslim percentage is 32 
per cent. While discussing the C.P.W.D. one of my Honourable 
friends — I forget which it was, mentioned the question of contracts 
of the Lodi Road 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer (Bombay Southern Division — Muhamma- 
dan Rural): Myself. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I think yourself. I 
forget exactly the figure mentioned by the Honourable Member. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : 5 Crores. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : His complaint was that 
in the contracts for the Lodi Road works, the Muslim contractors 
got a very small percentage. I ‘forget the exact figure. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : I referred to the Lodi Road colony in 
particular and there are so many others in general. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The Honourable Member 
made his speech towards the end of the day and it was impossible 
for me to get the necessary figures but the figures are these. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmed (United Provinces Southern 
Division — Muhammadan Rural): There was no necessity for you to 
intervene at this stage. You could have waited for some time longer. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am very much obliged 
to my Honourable friend for this advice but I thought it desirable to 
let the Muslim League have sufficient time for their oilier cut motions. 
That is the reason why I intervened. Otherwise it was really a general 
motion. I had no desire to intervened at all and there was no necessity 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


347 


MUSLIMS HAVE FARED MUCH BETTER 347 

to. It is only to alley the fears which some Members have about 
the Labour Department that I go up. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : Very kind of you. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The position with 
regard to the Lodi Road works was this. According to the 
information supplied to me by the Chief Engineer, the Muslims 
have got altogether contracts worth 10.5 lakhs of rupees, which is 
a figure much higher than the figure mentioned by my Honourable 
friend. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Out of? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Out of three crores. 
My Honourable friend will also remember and take the fact into 
consideration that on these works the Executive Engineer was a 
Muslim ? 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : What about the official pressure 
put on him not to give it to Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : My friend is making 
all sorts of allegations. I hope he has got sufficient evidence to 
back them up. Nobody has drawn my attention to them. If my 
friend will give me the facts, I will certainly make inquiries. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : I will give it to you on the floor 
of the House. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The fact is that 
there is a Muslim Executive Engineer in charge of these works. 
The second fact is that an officer of the Central P.W.D. who is 
in charge of works, whether he is a Muslim or whether he is a 
Hindu, no matter what community he belongs to, he is bound by 
the Central P.W.D. Code. The Central P.W.D. Code requires that 
the contracts shall be given to a man whose tender is the lowest. 
I have made inquiries overnight and I have been informed by the 
Chief Engineer that there was no Muhammadan whose contract 
was the lowest who did not receive the contract. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : On a point of order 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am not giving way. 
I have very little time. 

Mr. President : Let the Honourable member go on. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : These rules of the Central 
P.W.D. that the contract shall be given to the lowest bidder are subject 
to scrutiny from two different directions. One is the Auditor General 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and the second is the Public Accounts Committee. Both of them 
would require the departmental officer who broke this rule to 
give the necessary explanation as why he did so. 

Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang : That will be a post-mortem. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is a question 
whether the rules arc observed or not. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : The rules can be changed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member knows more about it. He did a great deal of work in 
the Aligarh University. He ought to know something about the 
P.W.D. and doing the work of this kind. I cannot go into it now. 

Let me take the Estate Office. In the Estate Office there are 
altogether 8 gazetted posts. Of them one is vacant. There the 
position is that there arc six Hindus, one Scheduled Caste. There 
was one Muslim who recently was sent to his parent province. 
With regard to the non-gazetted posts, the total posts are 235. 
Of them the Muslims have 18.2 per cent. 

Let me come to what arc called the attached offices and I 
can only give the figures in a collective form — not item by item, 
which would take me very long. Here again the position in 1939 
was this. There were altogether 64 posts. The Muslims had only 
1.5 per cent. In 1946 the total posts were 155 and the Muslim 
percentage has risen from 1.5 per cent to 11.5 per cent. Let 
me take the non-gazetted posts in the attached offices. In 1936 
the total number of posts were 2,238. The Muslims had 34 per 
cent. In 1946 the total number of non-gazetted posts had risen 
to 3,929 and the Muslim quota is 30 per cent. 

Now, Sir, I will take the geological Survey. As everybody in 
the House knows, the Geological Survey so far has been only 
a skeleton. It is during the war under the new projects of the 
Government of India relating to post-war development that 
we have taken up the work of the expansion of the Geological 
Survey. We recently made a beginning by the appointment of 
13 permanent posts of Assistant Geologists. Now, I would like 
to tell my Honourable friend the real position so far as these 
appointments are concerned. We were naturally bound to fill 
these posts through the Federal Public Service Commission, which 
recommended altogether 40 names in order of merit. We had only to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


349 


MUSLIMS HAVE FARED MUCH BETTER 349 

select 13. Out of the 13 there was only one Muslim whom we 
could select. 

Nawabzada Liaquat Ali Khan : Out of 40 names. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes. The names were 
given in order of merit and we had only 13 posts. Obviously we 
had to stop with the 13. If we had stopped with the 13, there 
was only one Muslim in that list of 13. As I said, these posts 
are technical posts and therefore we had to be very certain about 
the qualification. If the Labour Department had stuck to their 
original proposition that they shall only take men recommended 
by the Federal Public Service Commission on a purely meritorious 
basis, they would have had only one Muslim Candidate but the 
Labour Department knowing that tills would not be satisfactory 
from the point of view of the Muslims went down the list and 
picked 3 candidates who were far below 13 in order to make up 
their quota of 4. Another thing we have done and which I know 
some people might regard as very improper is this. We found 
that in the office of the Director General of Geological Survey 
there were no Muslim officers. What did we do. We selected 
two Muslim students from the University represented by my 
Honourable friend Sir Zia Uddin Ahmed 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : The credit does not go to you. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : They were not 
geologists by their training. They had qualified themselves only in 
geography but notwithstanding this we selected two. We trained 
them so that they may be subsequently, recruited to the office 
of the Geological Survey. 

Now, Sir, I come to the School of Mines. There were some 
questions in the last Assembly on that. 

May I know, Sir, how much more time I have. 

Mr. President : The Honourable Member can have 20 
minutes. I am prepared to give him more time if necessary. He 
can go on till 1/15. 

Shri Sri Prakasa (Benares and Gorakhpur Divisions — Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): You can take 25 per cent of the time. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I do not wish to 
deal with this subject in that half-philanthropic and half- flippant 
manner that my friend has done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


350 


350 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sri Prakasa : I was not flippant at all. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Coming to the School 
of Mines, the position is this. We have from 1937 restricted 
admissions to the School of Mines to 24, originally, there 
were about 50. It was discovered that there was not sufficient 
accommodation for such a large number of students and, therefore, 
it was restricted to 24. Now, the selection for the admission to the 
college is primarily provincial and not communal. Sixteen seats 
are allotted to the provinces and two to the Indian States. I had 
examined the figures up to 1937 and I did not discover any single 
year in which there were not at least 2 Muslim students, who 
had sought admission to the School of Mines. I, therefore, did not 
think that any particular reservation was necessary to safeguard 
the interests of the Muslim students joining the School of Mines. 
However, when the matter was pressed by some Members of the 
Muslim League here, Members of the last Legislative Assembly, 
I did pass orders that two seats at least should be reserved for 
the Muslims in the Indian School of Mines. 

Sir Mohammad Yamin Khan : Out of how many ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Out of 24. Now, 
Sir, even here I would like to tell the House what steps the 
Labour Department have taken in order to see that the Muslims 
are able to realise the full quota which has been reserved for 
them, and I shall give the figures for this year. This year we 
have altogether admitted 48 students on the recommendation of 
the Governing Body. Out of these 48 students there is only one 
Muslim who had satisfied the qualifying test. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman (Patna and Chota Nagpur-cum- 
Orissa, Muhammadan) : That is what I referred to you. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : But, Sir, in order 
to make good the reservation that was made, it was ordered 
that the fifty-ninth student, who was a Muslim, may be taken, 
over-ridding the claims of practically 11 other boys. 

Now, Sir, I will refer briefly to the various training schemes 
which have been sponsored by the Labour Department — some 
overseas — and to show that even here the Labour Department 
has not only been correct but has been very considerate. 
I will first refer to the training scheme sponsored by the 
Labour Department for training of Assistant Geologists in 
the Melbourne University of Australia, as a part of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


351 


MUSLIMS HAVE FARED MUCH BETTER 351 

re-organisation of the Geological Survey. This took place in 
1946. The total number of men that were selected was 9. Out 
of them, 5 were Hindus, 3 Muslims and 1 of other minorities. 
It will be seen that in this selection the Muslim proportion has 
been 33 / 3 per cent. 

The second scheme sponsored by the Labour Department 
was to train men in commercial and administrative side of 
electricity. Electricity is going to play one of the greatest part in 
the reconstruction of India’s economic and social life. Obviously, 
there must be people in India who are trained in the commercial 
and administrative side of it and we decided to train some men. 
Obviously, for a training of this sort, you could not take up raw 
boys from the university. You ought to have some men who have 
had some experience in this matter. We, therefore, decided to ask 
the Provincial Governments whether they would suggest names 
of some of their employees in their Electricity Department for 
being sent abroad. The selection, therefore, was not a selection 
made by the Labour Department or in the Government of India. 
The selection was entirely within the purview and charge of 
the Provincial Governments. The total number of men selected 
was 10. Out of them one was a Muslim. He was selected by the 
Hyderabad State. The other provinces did not suggest the name 
of any Muslim. I do not know why. Probably because there were 
not any Muslims in their Electricity Department. 

Khan Abdul Ghani Khan (North-West Frontier Province- 
General) : In the Frontier Province there are about 90 per cent, 
Muslims in the Electricity Department. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am sorry, but your 
Province did not recommend any Muslim name. You had better 
address a question in the Assembly of the Frontier province. 

I am coming now to three other schemes which were sponsored 
by the Labour Department for training abroad. One was the 
Bevin training scheme. The total number of boys who were 
sent was 787. Out of them, Muslims were 154, or 19 per cent. 
Then, we have in the Government of India a scheme for training 
Labour Officers for welfare purposes. These officers are not 
selected by the Labour Department, they are selected by the 
different Departments concerned. And here the position is this. 
Altogether 23 have, so far, been sent. Out of these 23, 18 are 
Muslims, which is a proportion of 79 per cent. Then. Sir, we have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

another scheme which is a scheme for giving higher technical 
training to the employees of private employers. The Government of 
India circularised private employers that in view of the necessity 
of improving technical efficiency of Indians if they desire to send 
any of their employees for training abroad, the Government of 
India in the Labour Department would do their best to secure 
opportunities for training in foreign countries. In this connection, 
so far, 6 men have been sent. Unfortunately, there was no Muslim 
amongst them, but that certainly is not the fault of the Labour 
Department, because they were not responsible for the training. 

Now, Sir, another point which I would refer to is the 
recruitment of what are called project Officers and Utilisation 
Officers and 8 of what are called Project Officers. These 
appointments, again, had to be filled through the Federal Public 
Service Commission. Unfortunately, there was no Muslim among 
the 9 posts that were filled. In this connection, I would like 
to draw the attention of the Mover of the cut motion to the 
correspondence which the Labour Department had with the 
Federal Public Services Commission. We queried when we got 
the selection and found that there was not a single Muslim. I 
asked my Department to address a query to the Federal Public 
Service Commission as to why there was no Muslim in the 
names that they had suggested. The reply of the Fedral Public 
Service Commission was this. It is interesting, I think, because 
it throws a different light on the subject. The Federal Public 
Service Commission said that, in response to their advertisement, 
altogether 240 applications were received. Out of that number, 
only 8 were Muslims, and out of these 8 Muslims, they invited 
3 for interview. Out of three, they found not one suitable for the 
post. Well, Sir, this is in brief a record of the Labour Department 
in the matter of communal representation. I claim, Sir, that 
during the period that I have occupied this post, it can be fairly 
said that the position of Muslims far from having deteriorated 
has considerably advanced. Sir, I do not claim anything more 
for the Department in which I hold charge. I should like to 
conclude just by making two observations. I have no idea how 
many Honourable Members of the Muslim League Party know 
what I played in the issue of this communal Ratio Resolution. 
I think if any Member of the Muslim League Party was 
present when the Round Table Conference was held in London, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


353 


MUSLIMS HAVE FARED MUCH BETTER 353 

he would very well realise that among those who fought for 
securing these privileges to the minority communities, I claim 
that I have played a considerable part. It cannot therefore be 
said that I am out of sympathy with the demand of the Muslims 
or the demand of any other minority community. It is for this 
that I have fought, it is for this I have been fighting, and it is 
for this that I will fight. 

The second proposition that I should like to make, if my 
Honourable Colleague, the Home Member would permit me to 
say so, is that the action which he promised the House that 
he will take in order to see that the Government of India will 
not be merely content with rearguard action on the various 
Departments making default in this matter but that he will take 
some substantial steps so that as and when appointments are 
made, proper check is applied at the time, the credit must go to 
me because it is I who wrote to him a letter that this state of 
affairs ought to be rectified. I do not want to say anything more. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : On a point of information, Sir, I 
want to know whether in the figures which he just now quoted, 
are the appointments in the resettlement also included ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes, it is a 
consolidated section of the Labour Secretariat. 

Mr. Ahmed E.H. Jaffer : Including resettlement. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I have so many 
figures. I must say they are so interesting that if my Honourable 
friend wants, I am quite prepared to pass it on to him for his 
further study. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


354 


62 


* The Indian Finance Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Mr. President, I must at the outset thank you for the opportunity 
that you have given me to intervene in the discussion on the 
Finance Bill. Sir, I say so because the points on which I propose 
to dwell are not points which refer to the Labour Department of 
which I am in charge. In fact, so far as the discussions on the 
Finance Bill have gone, I am glad to say that no serious comment 
has been made against that Department. But I rise because I feel 
that my Honourable friend, Pandit Govind Malaviya, yesterday 
in speaking on the Finance Bill made certain observations 
with regard to the project of a college for the scheduled castes. 
Sir, ordinarily that matter I should have left in the hands of 
the representative of the Education Department to deal with 
because that project was examined by them and the Finance 
Department sanctioned it. All the part that I have played was 
to initiate the measure. But, Sir, the reason why I have thought 
it necessary not to leave the defence of that project in the hands 
of the representative of the Education Department is because 
I find that in presenting the case against that project I think 
my Honourable friend sought to give it a political colour. It is 
because of that I have risen today to reply to the comments 
that he made. 

My Honourable friend started by saying that he was amazed 
at the project, and when I read his speech I found that the 
amazement which he felt was based upon his understanding 
that this was nothing but the introduction of a sectarian spirit 
in the educational field. Sir, there is a proverb, and a very well 
known proverb, that a man who lives in glass houses should 
not throw stones. I wonder whether my Honourable friend, 
Pandit Malaviya, recognizes this fact. I am far more than 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol., IV-No. 7, 26th March 1946, pp. 2926-31. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


355 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 355 

amazed — I am astonished — that Mr. Malaviya should have risen 
up in his seat to preach nationalising to me or to any Member 
of this House. It is not a new thing to anybody that, so far as 
his personal habits are concerned. I think it is true to say that 
he will not even take water not only from an ordinary Hindu 
but I know he will not take water even from a Brahmin of 
another caste. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar (Madras Ceded Districts 
and Chittoor : Non-Muhammadan Rural) : He does equal justice ! 

Shri Sri Prakasa : Even Brahmins can be stupid ! 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : His ideals, if I may 
say so, are the ideals of rat who believes that in order to keep 
his personal purity he must live in a hole by himself without 
any contract with any human being. And I should have thought 
that a man who believes in that kind of a thing should certainly 
think twice before talking against sectarianism or preaching 
nationhood to the people of this country. I should have thought 
that he ought to have known that he was or he is a great deal 
concerned with an institution which we all know as the Benares 
Hindu University. If it is not a sectarian institution, I would like 
to know what is a sectarian institution. Sir, I know and I can 
say that this University is not even a Hindu university ; it is a 
University which is managed in the interest of that particular 
community. I would like to ask my Honourable friend whether it 
is not a fact that on the staff of the Benares Hindu University 
there are hardly any non- Brahmins. 

An Honourable Member : There are. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I would like to ask 
him whether there is not a standing resolution of the Benares 
Hindu University Court passed in 1916 whereby a non-Brahmin, 
no matter how well he is educated in Hindu Dharma (in Hindu 
Law) is not entitled to function as a Professor of Hindu Religion. 
I would like to ask him whether he has forgotten that only a 
few months ago a Kayashtha girl had to go on fast because she 
was refused admission in the Benares Hindu University in the 
Faculty of Theology. If that is not sectarianism, I would like to 
ask what it is. 

As I was reading the proceedings of the debate yesterday, I found 
my Honourable friend, Mr. Ayyangar, uttering an exclamation, which 
is recorded by the Official Reporter, on a separate college for the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


356 


356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Scheduled Castes. I wonder whether he is aware of what has recently 
happened in that town of Salem. He probably is forgetful of it. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : I do not know. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Or he is so much 
preoccupied with politics that he did not know what his own 
community members are doing. I like him to peruse the papers of 
the ‘Hindu’ of Madras, not of some past year but of the 12th of this 
month. He will find that Salem Brahmans met in a solemn conclave 
for the purpose of establishing a Brahman Sangh, for the purpose 
of protecting the interests of Brahmans, for the purpose of starting 
a college for Brahmans, for the purpose of starting industries for 
Brahmans. And who was the President of that Conference ? The 
great man Sachivotama Sir C.P. Ramaswami Ayer. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Your erstwhile colleague. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I do not know. When 
everybody in this country while talking of nationalism is practising 
sectarianism 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : I am sorry for both. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : for Members 

to come here and to tell a struggling community like that of the 
Scheduled Castes, who for the first time in their life have become 
conscious of their disabilities and are trying to found educational 
institutions in which they will be able to get higher education that 
they are acting in a sectarian spirit to my judgment is nothing short 
of imprudence. I would like to tell this House that it is complete 
misnomer to say that this is a Scheduled Caste college. It is a 
college which like any other college is open to every community. 
There is no bar to any body. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya (Allahabad and Jhansi Divisions : 
Non-Muhammadan Rural): What is stated in the Budget ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The Budget was 
before you for full one month, and you ought to have put a 
short notice question to ask for full details before you got up 
to oppose it. Now, as I said this is an institution which is open 
to every community. The college is not only open to all but the 
staff selected is also cosmopolitan. There are Hindus, there are 
Brahmins, there are non-Brahmins, there are Parsis, there are 
Christians, there are Muslims on the staff. And I like to tell 
the House that when the affiliation application came before 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


357 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 357 

the University of Bombay they had not the slightest hesitation to 
granting affiliation. In fact it was admitted that there was never 
such a project placed before the University of Bombay during 
all these years so sell thought out. And if I may say so, this is 
the first instance in the whole history of the Bombay University 
where permission has been given to start a full-fledged college 
at the start. This is because, the organisation, the staff and the 
arrangements have been so good. The College therefore is in 
no sense a Scheduled Caste College. The only thing which the 
College will do so far as the Scheduled Castes are concerned is 
to give them preferential treatment in the matter of admissions 
and freeships and reservation in the hostel. I like to tell the 
House why the establishment of this college became necessary. 
Honourable Members are probably not aware that the Bombay 
Province at present is suffering from a terrible congestion of the 
student population. My Honourable friend, sitting opposite, Mr. 
Gadgil, will know that during last year nineteen new colleges 
were allowed to be opened by the Bombay University, That 
shows how difficult it is for boys to get admission. The Scheduled 
Caste boys suffered the most from this congestion because the 
Scheduled Caste boys after passing their matriculation were not 
able to get their admission in the different colleges. I therefore 
represented the matter to the Government of India that there 
should be an institution whose primary function should be to 
give preferential treatment to these boys. There is nothing else 
in this project which may be called sectarian or which may be 
called communal. 

Now, Sir, there was another matter which my Honourable, 
friend introduced, and I am at a loss to understand why he 
introduced it. He introducted politics and he said that so far as 
the elections were concerned, I was a wash out. I do not know 
what he wanted to convey. But I believe what he wanted to do 
was to give a hint that I should not have been listed to by the 
Government of India, or some such thing, which I do not know. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : Don’t you ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Well, Sir, 
from what has happened in the elections it may be said 
that I am now a withered plant. But I like to tell my 
Honourable friends opposite that I am not dead at the roots. 
Not at all. My Honourable friend talked about the results 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


358 


358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the election. He said that the Scheduled Caste seats were 
won by the Congress. Yes, they were. But what I like to ask my 
Honourable friend is, does he care to examine the ways and means 
by which this victory was obtained by the Congress ? 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : We are ready ! 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: I would like to tell 
my friend of the ways and means that were adopted. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : The usual accusation! 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not the usual 
accusation. It is a matter of proof which can be put to the test. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : Do not tread on doubtful ground ! 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : My Honourable friend 
ought to know that in many places the Untouchable voters have 
not been allowed to go even to the polls. I am referring to a case in 
the Satara District, which ought to be familiar to many Members 
of this House because in that district there was in existence what 
is called a parallel government. The Scheduled Caste voters from 
361 villages were taken to the village Katcheri by the Hindu 
villagers. They were asked whether they were prepared to vote 
for the Congress candidate. When they refused, they were asked 
to sit in the Katcheri and a watch and ward was kept around 
them. They were not allowed to move. I can give many cases. 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : Yes ? please do ! 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Even the candidates 
of the Scheduled Caste opposed to the Congress were assaulted. 
Take a nearer case like that of Agra which has happened only 
recently. Fifty houses of the Untouchables were burnt on the day 
of election. Some twenty houses were looted in the absence of the 
voters who had been to the polls. In Cawnpore seven persons 
were murdered. 

Diwan Chaman Lall (West Punjab : Non-Muhammadan): 
Who looted ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Hindus. Those 
are the ways and means by which these elections have been 
won. (Interruptions). I would like to tell my Honourable 
friend that the test whether the Congress has won these 
seats, or whether the Scheduled Castes Federation, which I 
represent, has won these seats, is to be decided not by the 
final elections. It would be stupid to do so. In a final election 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


359 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 359 

where the Untouchables sometimes form a microscopic minority of 
5 per cent as against a majority of 95 per cent. Hindus, it would 
be idiotic for any man to think that the final election was any 
test as to who represented whom. The real test is the test of the 
primary election. For the primary election is an election through 
a separate electorate of the Scheduled Castes. What has happened 
in the primary elections. Let me give my friends opposite some 
idea of the results of the primary elections. In the Punjab there 
were three constituencies in which a primary election took place. 
In Bombay there were also three constituencies in which primary 
elections were held. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Out of how many ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Let me finish. 

Mr. President : Let him proceed. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : In the Central 
Provinces there were four. In the Madras Presidency ten, in 
the United Provinces two. (Interruption). If my Honourable 
friend wants to know the fact, he ought to know that a primary 
election is not compulsory. Unless five people stand there cannot 
be a primary election and no Scheduled Caste wants a primary 
election because it involves a lot of expense and we have no black 
market money to finance it (Interruptions). In all there have been 
22 primary elections. They were all contested by the Congress. I 
want to tell the House that out of the 22 primary elections, 19 
have been won by the Scheduled Castes Federation. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : How many in the Punjab ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Wait a minute. In 
the Bombay Presidency — I cannot give the whole lot of figures 
because my time is short 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : It may go against you ! 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : In the Bombay City 
there were two Constituencies in which the primary election was 
fought. One was the Byculla constituency. The Scheduled Castes 
Federation candidate got 11,334 votes and the Congress candidate 
got 2,096 votes. In the Suburban Constituency of Bombay City the 
Scheduled Castes Federation candidate got 12,899 votes and the 
Congress candidates got only 2,088. In the Central Provinces — I 
again take two constituencies for illustration 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : The black market did 
not prevail. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : In the Nagpur 
constituency the Scheduled Castes Federation got 1,933 votes and 
the Congress candidate got 270. In Bhandara District the Federation 
candidate got 3,187 and the Congress candidate, including others 
who were independent, got altogether 976. In the Agra constituency 
in the United Provinces the Scheduled Castes Federation candidate 
got 2,248 while the Congress and others put together got only 840. 
In the Punjab, Ludhiana — Ferozepur Constituency, I am taking 
one as an illustration — the Scheduled Castes Federation got 1,900 
votes and the Congress got only 500. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : There was no Scheduled Caste candidate 
in the Punjab. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Will my friend let 
me go on. I know more about these matters than I think he does. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : My Honourable friend knows there 
was not one single candidate. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The Scheduled Castes 
Federation who 

Diwan Chaman Lall : It is a tissue of lies. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : My Honourable friend 
will withdraw it. Sir, I seek the protection of the Chair. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : I challenge my friend to deny the fact 
that there was not a single candidate of his Federation put up 
in the Punjab. 

Mr. President : Order, order. It is no use introducing heat in 
the debate when the Honourable Member is giving the facts. The 
point was raised and the reply was invited and whatever he has to 
say must be heard patiently. I am not concerned with the question 
as to whether what he said is a fact or not but no Honourable 
Member of the House is entitled to or can say that what the other 
Honourable Member was saying was “a tissue of lies.” 

Diwan Chaman Lall : I withdraw it, Sir, and substitute for 
it “a tissue of terminological inexactitudes.” 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I will give one 
constituency from Madras, viz. Amalapuram. The Federation 
candidate got 10,540 votes and the Congress candidate 2,683. 
That is the result of the primary election and I say that 
if anybody wants to apply an honest test, that test ought 
to be the test of the primary election. I want to tell my 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


361 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 361 

Honourable friends opposite that if what they have done in this 
election is of any value, it has to my mind substantiated and 
proved the case which I have been fighting for that the electoral 
system is a humbug and that the Scheduled Castes must have 
separate electorates. 

My Honourable friend, Pandit Malaviya, tried to make out 
another point. He said that the Hindu community has been taking 
interest in the Scheduled Castes and that they could subscribe 
a great deal of money for the moral and material advancement 
of the Scheduled Castes. Sir, I do not know 

Pandit Govind Malaviya : On a point of order, Sir: May 
I know from you that if an Honourable Member of this House 
goes on misrepresenting and misquoting and stating utterly 
wrong facts about any other Member, who has already spoken 
and who is not likely to get a chance to reply to or expose those 
misstatements and terminological inexactitudes, may I know 
from you what is the way open to the other member to meet 
that situation ? 

Mr. President : The question is hypothetical and I do not 
think I need take the trouble of replying to it But statement of 
facts is one thing and version is another and the Honourable 
Member need not confound versions with facts. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I was dealing 
with the point which my Honourable friend made in the course of 
his speech that the Hindu community was taking a great deal of 
interest in the welfare and the material and moral advancement 
of the Scheduled Castes. All that I would like to say is that if one 
were to judge by what happens within the four corners of this 
House, I think it would be very difficult for any honest man to 
subscribe to the statement that my Honourable friend has made. 

I have been, it is true, a member of this House for a very short 
time but I have been a very regular reader of the proceedings 
of this House and there is nothing about this House which I 
have not read, which is worth reading. And, Sir, having regard 
to the past, I think it is correct to say that it is very seldom 
that any member of the Opposition has ever asked any question 
of any member of the Government sitting here with regard to 
the many atrocities, tyrranies and oppression that have been 
practised upon the Scheduled Castes in every village from day 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to day. I have not seen it in the proceedings. I have never seen 
any Honourable Member moving a resolution 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : You would say that 
it is a Provincial subject. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : that certain 

things might be done for the uplift of the community. There was 
one occasion which I remember, in which Honourable Members 
opposite made a bold bid in order to abolish untouchability. I 
believe, it was in the year 1932 or 1934, I forget exactly which 

An Honourable Member : 1933. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : when a Bill 

was brought in for temple entry. And what a hullabaloo was 
made when the Viceroy refused to give his sanction. Men went 
on fasts and threatened to commit suicide if permision was not 
given to introduce the Bill. And when permission was given 
what happened ? What happened was that these gentlemen 
threw away the Bill. They disowned it. They left Mr. Ranga Iyer 
with the baby in his hand. He abused them roundly for having 
betrayed him. There were only two occasions I remember when 
the question 

An Honourable Member : You have not read the debates. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I have read every 
thing about what happened in this House. I find only two occasions 
when this House discussed the question of the Scheduled Castes. 
One was in the year 1916 when Mr. Maneckji Dadabhoy, now 
the President of the other House, moved a resolution asking 
the Government to appoint a committee to investigate into 
the grievances of the Scheduled Castes and if my Honourable 
friend opposite who started this debate were to brouse into the 
proceedings of that debate, he will find that it was his father 
who turned out to be the most vehement opponent of that 
resolution. The other occasion was in 1927, that was when the 
late Lord Birkenhead happened to refer to the Scheduled Castes 
as a minority to be protected under the Constitution. My friends 
opposite are very fond of me only when I try to make a political 
issue of my existence. If I ask for separate electorates, if I ask 
for reservation in the services, if I ask for an educational grant, 
then they know that I exist. Otherwise, I am dead to them 

An Honourable Member : Nothing. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


363 


THE INDIAN FINANCE BILL 363 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : and all social 

and political rights are denied to me because they say that I am 
a Hindu. If fraternity is to involve this cost, then I say that I 
am their cousin and not their brother. 

The other thing that I would like to say, is this and I would 
like to say it very positively. I want to tell my Hindu friends 
that I shall not live on their charity. I do not want their charity. 
I am a citizen of this country. I am entitled to claim from the 
Government Treasury whatever rights and benefit every other 
community is claiming for itself. I do not want charity; charity, 
the object of which is to enslave and demoralise me and my 
community. The Scheduled Castes want to stand on their rights 
and I take this opportunity to tell the House that if their claims 
are met with opposition, they will not hesitate to shed their blood 
in order to get their rights. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


364 


63 


* Strike by the Workers of the Government 
of India Press, Calcutta 


Mr. President: I have received a notice from Sree 
Satyapriya banerjee of his intention to move for the adjournment 
of the business of the Legislative Assembly for the purpose 
of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance, 
namely: 

“Strike by the workers of the Government of India Press, 

Calcutta, on account of the failure of the Government to redress 

their grievances.” 

I find that the Honourable Member had put in a question 
on the subject some two or three days back and wanted to 
have it answered as a short notice question, but the honourable 
Member for Labour did not accept the short notice question. At 
that time there was no strike actually going on. The present 
notice alleges a strike. There, it was a question of impending 
strike. Is there any strike at all ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
I have no information with regard to this matter. 

Sree Satyapriya Banerjee (Chittagoing and Rajshahi 
Divisions : Non-Muhammadan Rural) : I have definite 
information that there is a strike going on and yesterday’s 
Free Press Journal also contained that news. 

Mr. President : The source of the information is the Free 
Press Journal ? 

Sree Satyapriya Banerjee : The Leader of the Opposition 
has also got a telegram. 

Mr. President: Is the Honourable Member in a position to 
state the nature of the strike ? Is the whole Press on strike ? 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V-No. 4, 4th April 1946, pp. 3522-24. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


365 


STRIKE BY THE WORKERS INDIA PRESS, CALCUTTA 365 

Sree Satyapriya Banerjee : Yes, Sir, about 1200 workers 
are involved. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The position is this. 
A notice of strike was given on the 13th of March by the press 
workers of the Calcutta Press. Similar notices of strike were 
given by presses belonging to the Government of India located 
at various other places. The Calcutta Press workers gave a list 
of 13 demands and the Government has taken into consideration 
all of them and has made the following concessions to the press 
workers — compensation leave granted for attendance on gazetted 
holidays on which the press is closed, promotion of piece workers 
to classes above efficiency bar accelerated, increased rates of 
dearness allowance to have retrospective effect from 1st July 1944 
instead of from 1st January 1945 ; half the dearness allowance 
to count as pay for calculation of pension; inferior servants to 
draw pension up to a limit of half average pay ; the full period 
of strike will be treated as leave on average pay and debited 
against leave account due to uncertain conditions ; an officer on 
special duty appointed to report on anomalies existing in the pay 
and conditions of service of the Press workers ; hours of work 
have been reduced from 48 to 44 for day shifts and from 44 to 
38 for night shifts ; piece-workers have been granted 23 days 
holiday with pay, same as salaried workers. 

With regard to other demands which relate, for instance:, 
to revision of scales of pay and increase in subsidy rates, 
Government has informed all workers in all the presses belonging 
to Government that this matter must remain pending until 
the report made by the Salaries Commission, and Government 
therefore is not in a position at present to make any announcement 
with regard to these demands. 

I may tell the House that so far as the strike in the Delhi 
Press is concerned, these concessions have been accepted by 
the workers and they have gone back to work. I do not see any 
reason why the same attitude should not be taken by the press 
workers in the Calcutta Press. I understood just now from office 
that one of the demands which they are pressing immediately 
is that further reduction should be made from 44 hours to 40 
hours. I am unable to say anything definitely immediately, but 
that is a matter which I am prepared to consider. I do not think 
that any useful purpose will be served by discussing this matter 
on an adjournment motion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sree Satyapriya Banerjee : Sir, it may be within the 
knowledge of the Honourable Member that the Regional 
Commissioner of his Department recommended 42 hours and he 
turned down that proposal and insisted on 44 hours. Moreover, 
Sir, the workers of the Bengal Government Press work only 40 
hours a week. 

Mr. President : That is cross-examination on the merits. I 
am at present wanting to know how, in view of what has fallen 
from the Honourable Labour Member, the matter is of sufficient 
urgent and public importance. 

Sree Satyapriya Banerjee : Sir, so many workers are 
involved and the lives of such a large number of workers and their 
dependents are at stake, being faced with starvation; Sir and if 
that is not a matter of sufficient urgent and public importance, 
I do not know what else can be. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga (Guntur cum Nellore : Non-Muhammadan 
Rural): Sir, may I also make one submission. If it is possible 
for the Department to send any special officer to go and explain 
their own concessions to these workers and reason with them, 
it may be possible for them to prevent the continuance of this 
strike. After all, 1300 workers going on strike is a very serious 
matter even from the point of view of Government getting all 
their work stopped there. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I understand there 
is a Regional Labour Commissioner stationed in Calcutta who 
has been instructed by the Labour Department to get into touch 
with the workers and see what can be done. 

Seth Govind Das (Central Provinces Hindi Divisions : Non- 
Muhammadan) : The Honourable Member said that notices have 
been received about strikes in various presses. Is there any strike 
or danger of a strike anywhere else besides Calcutta ? 

Mr. President : I do not think that is relevant to the present 
issue. In view of what the Labour Member said, I do not think 
the matter is of such a type that I should give my consent to 
the adjournment motion being moved. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


367 


64 


* Factories (Amendment) Bill 


Mr. President : The House will now proceed to the 
consideration of the Factories Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I propose to deal 
with that point. I have been asked by my Honourable colleague to 
speak on that point and I am quite competent to speak because 
every Member of this Government can speak on behalf of the 
Government as a whole. 

Diwan Chaman Lall (West Punjab: Non-Muhammadan): Sir, 
I have to say something on this question unless the Honourable 
Member is agreeable to my speaking afterwards. 

Mr. President : Even if he is agreeable I do not think I can 
permit it under the Rules after the Honourable Member has 
replied to the debate. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : So 
much has been said already that it is not necessary to say more. 

Mr. President, Sir. The debate that has proceeded so far has 
really left very little for me to say because what has been said by 
the one side against the Bill has, if I may say so, been effectively 
replied by the other side, and, therefore, certainly at this stage 
there is no great necessity for me to repeat what has been said 
already. If I rise at all it is to deal with the criticism that has 
been made by my Honourable friend, Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai. I have 
listened to his speech and I must say tha I have been quite unable 
to understand what complaint he has to make with regard to this 
Bill. I am quite aware and everybody else is that today there is 
a threat of cloth famine and that whatever we do with regard 
to the amendment of the Factories Act affecting the provisions 
relating to hours of work, we should be cautious to see that the 
situation with regard to cloth is not aggravated. My reply to the 
criticism of my friend is this that we have not only taken into 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V-No. 4, 4th April 1946, pp. 3526-27. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


368 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consideration the situation regarding cloth famine, but we have 
taken into consideration the situation that might arise with 
regard to the shortage of other articles of consumption, and the 
Government of India has not only introduced an amendment 
which would give relief to the cotton industry but is so widely 
worded that it would also give relief to many other industries 
which are engaged in producing consumers goods. I do not quite 
understand why he is not satisfied with so general a provision 
which not only gives him relief but also gives relief to many 
other industries. I am still unable to understand the significance 
of his comment. 

He made two other points to which I think he is entitled to 
a reply from me. The one comment that he made was — I have 
got the text of his speech before me — that this exemption ought 
to be given by the Government of India itself in this very Act 
and not to be left to the discretionary authority of the Provincial 
Government. My answer to this criticism is twofold : In the first 
place, as my Honourable friend knows, granting exemption is 
what in law is regarded as an exercise of executive authority 
under the constitution which is now in operation ; although 
labour is placed in concurrent list, that fact merely gives the 
Government of India the authority to make the law. It does 
not give the Government of India authority to put that law 
into execution. All execution must remain in the hands of the 
Provincial Government and if, therefore, we have not granted 
exemption straight-away in this Act it is because it is beyond the 
powers of the Central Legislature to do so. The second difficulty 
which I find in meeting the demand that he has made is this : 
It is impossible for the Government of India to single out any 
particular industry such as the cotton textile industry to be 
mentioned in the Act itself for exemption without at the same 
time giving a list of other industries which might require similar 
exemption. It is impossible for anybody in the Labour Department 
to anticipate the needs of other industries and to make specific 
provisions in that behalf. He expressed the fear that Provincial 
Governments will not grant the exemption for which they have 
been empowered very readily, and if I understood him correctly 
he said that labour in Provinces will create difficulties in the 
matter of Provincial Governments granting such exemptions. 
I do not share the fear because I believe that the Provincial 
Governments while they would undoubtedly listen to such 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


369 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 369 

reasons as labour may have to put forward against granting 
exemptions will no doubt bear in mind the exigencies of public 
needs and public interests and do what may be needful in the 
circumstances. Therefore so far as his first point is concerned. I 
do not think that I can meet it because the law will not permit 
me to do so, and, secondly, I do not see why the Provincial 
Governments should not be trusted to do what is needful in the 
interest of the public in general. 

The other question which he raised was whether the Industries 
and Civil Supplies Department was prepared to take responsibility 
for this measure. I do not think he should have raised this 
question because if he had only taken into consideration the 
way in which the Government of India operates, he would have 
known that no measure can go before this House unless it has 
had previously the consent of the Executive Council in which 
the Member in charge of Industries and Civil Supplies has 
every right to make his say, but I can say positively that the 
labour Department had paid the greatest considertion to what 
was urged by the Department of Industries and Civil Supplies 
in this matter and it is at their instance mat clause 5 was 
introduced in this Bill. They were apprehensive that while the 
general provisions regarding the restriction of hours of labour 
were essential and necessary and could not be postponed, yet 
the circumstances in which this country was placed with regard 
to certain articles should also be borne in mind, and it was at 
their express instance that this clause was introduced. I hope 
my Honourable friend will be satisfied that the Industries and 
Civil Supplies Department has in no way been rushed by this 
Bill and that this measure has their fullest support. Sir, I move. 

Mr. President : The question is : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, as 

reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. President : I shall take clause 2 first and clause 1 at 
the end. There is an amendment to clause 2 by Messrs. Vadilal 
Lallubhai and Ramalingam Chettiar. 

Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai : I have got to make some observation. 
Dr. Ambedkar says that the law does not provide for exemptions but as 
the amendment has been drafted it is possible that it will come under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


370 


370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the law. I would like to know whether the amendment of clause 2 
as drafted by me docs come under the Law. 

Mr. President : I am not clear as to what the Honourable 
Member is driving at. 

Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai : The Honourable Member said 
that the law did not provide for exemption. If he reads my 
amendment to clause 2 he will see that there is no legal bar. 
I would like to know whether it is because that there is a 
legal bar that he wants to oppose my amendment or there 
are other reasons. 

Mr. President : I believe the Honourable Member has 
clarified the position sufficiently in his speech. I do not think 
there can be any doubt on the question. He said that the legal 
bar was one argument. There was a further argument also 
that, in his opinion, whatever is necessary will be done by the 
Government. Am I right ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

k k k 

*Mr. President : Amendment moved : 

“That in Clause 4 of the Bill, for the words ‘ten and a half 
hours or where the factory is seasonal one, eleven and a half ’, 
the word ‘twelve’ be substituted”. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I am afraid I 
am opposed to this amendment. There are two objections which 
I see. One objection is a general one. The Honourable Mover 
of this amendment seems to hold the opinion that if employers 
in any particular industry have devised a particular plan of 
employing their labour in their factories, then the law ought to 
be so framed that it would suit the practice that is prevalent. 
That is a position which I am not prepared to accept. Many 
employers may devise many means that may be primarily in 
the interests of the employers and I think it would be wrong on 
the part of the State to accept the obligation that in whatever 
legislation they may propose, the legislation should be made 
to suit the practice, and that the law should not alter the 
practice if it is found that the practice is bad. That is my first 
argument why I am unable to accept this amendment. 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), 4th April 1946, p. 3532. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


371 


FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 371 

The second argument which I have against this amendment 
arises from a direct consideration of the matter. If I have 
understood my Honourable friend correctly, the sort of way 
in which he employs his labour could, I think, be described in 
a simple manner in some such fashion : he has as a matter 
of fact two corps of labour under him, which for purposes of 
explanation may be called ‘A’ corps and ‘B’ corps358 ! and 
the way he would like to employ them would be somewhat in 
this fashion : ‘A’ corps would start work at 8 a.m. and work 
till 4 O’ clock in the afternoon. At 4 p.m. ‘B’ corps would be 
discharged and ‘A’ corps would again come in and work till 8 
p.m. At 8 p.m. ‘A’ corps will be discharged and ‘B’ corps will 
be brought in for work and would work till 12 midnight. That, 
if I understood him correctly, would be the method by which 
he would work his labour 

Sri T.A. Ramalingam Chettiar : Quite right. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Now, it seems to me 
that this arrangement is fundamentally opposed to the principle 
of spreadover. What is the principle of spreadover ? It is this, 
that as far as possible no worker should be required to stay 
on the factory premises for any period longer than is necessary 
for the full employment of the maximum hours prescribed by 
law. In this Bill we arc providing that the maximum hours per 
day should be 9. If the amendment was accepted, the worker 
would have to be kept on the premises, for three hours more, 
which I submit is not in consonance with the general principle 
of spreadover. A factory, if I may say so, is not a garden and 
certainly today has not got all the amenities which a factory 
ought to have ; and it is very desirable that an employee should 
be allowed to quit the factory as soon as he possibly can get 
back to his home, breathe free air, and enjoy such amenities 
as he can and make the best use of the leisure that the law 
gives him. For these reasons, I think this amendment is not a 
good amendment and I am therefore not prepared to accept it.. 

k k k 

*The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I do not think I need 
say anything at this stage except to express my gratitude to the House 
and to the Members of the Select Committee who have so greatly 


*Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V. No. 4, 4th April 1946, p. 3540. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

co-operated with me in carrying this measure through. With 
regard to the many suggestions which have been made by many 
speakers who have spoken on this motion, all that I need say 
is that whichever Government comes into operation, it will 
undoubtedly have to bear those suggestions in mind. As my 
Honourable friend, Diwan Chaman Lall said, we are not living 
in the same time when the Factory Commission reported. Time 
has advanced. The world has advanced and we have to show that 
we too, like other modern countries have a regard for the moral 
standards on which our industrial relations are to be based, and 
I have no doubt about it that what they have said will be borne 
in mind and that their suggestions will be given effect to. 

Sir, I thank the House for the courtesy they have shown me. 

Mr. President : The question is : 

“That the Bill as amended be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


373 


65 


* Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill to constitute a fund for the financing of activities 
to promote the welfare of labour employed in the mica mining 
industry be taken into consideration.” 

The important provision of the Bill is contained in clause 3, 
where it is proposed that a levy should be made upon the export 
of mica in order to constitute a fund for providing for the welfare 
of the labour employed in the mica mining industry. The nature of 
the welfare activities which this fund will undertake are detailed 
in clause 2 of the Bill. It is not necessary for me to go over these 
clauses and read them to the House. Before I go further I would 
like to explain to the House why the Government of India have 
thought it necessary to institute a fund of the sort mentioned 
in clause 3 of the Bill and I do not think I could do better than 
read a few extracts from the report of a Committee on labour 
conditions in mica mining and mica manufacturing industry. 
The report is made by Prof. Adarkar who was a member of the 
Fact Finding Committee appointed by the Tripartite Labour 
Conference. With your permission, Sir, I propose to read a few 
extracts from this report. 

On page 27 of this report Prof. Adarkar says : 

“We did not see urinal or latrine accommodation provided 
in any mine. Reference to this breach of the Mines Act, 
has already been made above. One just wonders what the 
workers do while working 500 feet below they arc called 
upon to answer calls of nature. Lack of arrangements for 
good drinking water is a crying evil of the mica mining 
industry. The doctors told us that diseases like dyspepsia, 
intestinal trouble, etc., were caused by the presence of harmful 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V-No. 7, 9th April 1946, p. 3745-47. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

minerals in the water supplied to the workers. As I said earlier, 
some of the bigger firms carry water in lorries to mines but 
generally women are employed to fetch water from dirty pools 
five to six miles away. This water is carried and stored in filthy 
earthen pitchers or drums. The supply of even such water is 
inadequate. No water is usually made available for washing 
purposes. The problem is a very serious one and deserves 
immediate attention.” 

Speaking of housing the report says : 

“No adjectives can properly describe the ‘houses’ in which 
workers are housed. The more temporary amongst them look like 
tents of leaves held in position by a strong bamboo or wooden 
pillar. Houses proper are of two types ; we may describe them 
separately : — 

(i) Built entriely of bamboo and grass. — We saw a house 
built by mine owner for workers which was typical 
and the roofing was of green leaves. The general 
appearance was that of a cattle shed. There was hardly 
any necessity for doors and windows as it was airy 
from every side. This shed housed one family worker 
with his wife and two children along with 10 other 
workers. There was no privacy for the family. The 
choolhas were separate. Grass had been spread on the 
floor and workers slept upon that at night. No rent 
was however charged for the accommodation provided. 
It may be noted here that the other 8 or 10 occupants 
had been put into the cottage by the employer after 
the family worker had occupied. As the worker was 
not paying any rents, he could not possibly grumble. 

(ii) Better type of houses. — Their number is very small 
and generally they are meant for durbans, Khalasis 
or carpenters. There are single-room tenements 
built in lines and are rent free. Their walls are 
built either of brushwood or of kuchcha bricks and 
roofs are built of wooden beams. They are closed 
rooms with doors but ventilation is very poor. It 
must be emphasised again that these quarters are 
not meant for ordinary workers but are reserved 
for the superior skilled staff. It is important to note 
here that no latrines or urinal accommodation is 
provided even for those who live in these quarters 
with the result that they go out into the open to 
attend to calls of nature. As has been pointed out 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


375 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 375 


earlier, this causes them to develop diseases like 
ankylostomiasis and anaemia. Workers do not like 
to stay in these quarters, despite the efforts of the 
employers to make them do so. Workers like to walk 4 to 
6 miles each way and prefer to ignore such exhortations. 
Moreover, their own huts arc definitely better built than 
the quarters provided by the employers.” 

I will read another passage which deals with occupational and 
other diseases which are prevalent in mica mines. The report says : 

“Diseases which mica workers suffer from may be classified as 
(a) those that are directly attributable to mining operations and 
working conditions and (b) those that are caused by the configuration 
and natural vegetation of the mining area. In this connection, we 
could collect some information in the Bihar area, and the following 
analysis is based mainly on the information. 

(a) The following diseases may be considered under the 
first category: — 

( i ) Silicosis. — This is a disease of the lungs and is 
attributed to dry machine-drilling of quartz rock. 
Machine drills have octagonal ends with a regular 
bore running right through the drill. The drill is 
rotated by machine and quartz dust produced in the 
drilling process escapes with great force through the 
bore and strikes the driller right on his bise. Within 
a few seconds thick clouds of quartz dust envelope 
the driller and he inhales that dust continuously. 

The tiny quartz pieces enter the body and injure the 
lungs. The first symptom of silicosis is bronchitis 
and this gradually develops into silicosis proper. 

The incidence of the disease is fairly high but 
due to the excessive turnover of labour it is not 
detected early. What saves most of these workers 
from early death is their seasonal migration to 
agriculture. If the driller works continually even 
for one whole year he cannot escape catching the 
disease and within five years or so he may die. 

One employer stated that he had lost 16 of his 
best drillers within the past live years. It seems 
that the only possible way of saving the drillers 
from this disease which proves fatal in nearly all 
cases is to prohibit dry machine drilling by an order 
under the Indian Mines Act. Of their own accord 
so far only the Chrestien Mining company have 
introduced wet drilling in some of their mines. But 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no other firm is planning even to follow suit at 
any rate during the course of the present war. It 
may be noted here, however, that all employers 
declared themselves in favour of statutory 
prohibition of dry drilling.” 

Then a description is given of the prevalence of dyspepsia, 
rheumatism, bronchitis, malaria. I need not go through the whole 
list of them. But I would like to draw the attention of the House 
to the following paragraph in the Report: — 

“Welfare Activities are conspicuous by their total absence. 
Canteens, creches, entertainments and washing or any other 
facilities arc things entirely unheard of in the mica mining 
area. The bigger firms like the Chrestien Mining Company, the 
Chatturam Horilram Company, and the Indian Mica supply 
Company, have made arrangements for medical aid”. 

Then they give details below : — 

“Medical aid, wherever it is provided, is free. No arrangments 
have been made, however, for child or adult education.” 

Now, Sir, I can go on for a length of time quoting passages 
from this Report in order to show that the conditions of work 
in mica mines have really become intolerable and that the time 
has arrived for Government to intervenue in this matter and to 
do something for the workers in the mica mines. 

The next question, Sir, is the best method of dealing with 
this subject. So far as that question is concerned it seems to me 
that there are really two ways of dealing with the subject. One 
way is to impose the liability upon the employer and to prescribe 
certain measures of welfare and to leave it to the employer 
to carry them into effect and reserve to the Government the 
power to inspect and to sec that the obligation imposed upon 
the employer is carried out by him. The second method is for 
Government to take charge of the welfare measures themselves 
and to make the employer bear the cost of it. The first method, 
to my mind, is an imperfect method, and for two reasons. 
Firstly, different employers have different capacities to bear 
the cost of welfar measures. That being so, it is not possible 
for small employers to keep up the standard which may be 
prescribed by the act. Secondly, it is hardly possible for the 
Government to engage such a large body of inspectors so that 
they could constantly go round, keep a vigil and see that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


377 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 377 

standards are maintained. Government, therefore, has come to 
the conclusion that the better method would be for Government, 
in matters of this sort, to take the responsibility on their own 
shoulders and to compel the employer to pay the cost of these 
welfare measures. Sir, it is this principle on which this Bill 
relating to the welfare of workers in mica industries is based. 
If I may say so, so far as the Government of India is concerned, 
this is by no means a new principle which they have adopted. 
As the House knows, during the war the Government of India 
issued an Ordinance for the Welfare activities of the population 
engaged in coal mining. It was done by Ordinance. But the 
principles embodied in the present measure are exactly the same 
as the principles embodied in that ordinance. It is, therefore, 
unnecessary for me to dilate upon the necessity or the advisability 
of the principle on which this measure has been based. 

Sir, there is one other point to which I would like to make 
some reference. As Honourable Members will see, under the 
Bill it is proposed to constitute two Committees to advise the 
authorities who will be administering this fund as to how this 
money should be spent. One Advisory committee will be for the 
Province of Madras and another will be for the Province of Bihar. 
Some Members might feel that the Government of India has shown 
no reason why, for instance, another area which is also a mica 
producing area has been omitted from this consideration, namely 
Rajputana. I would like to explain to the House the reason why 
we have not thought it necessary to constitute a third Committee 
for Rajputana. Rajputana occupies a very small place, for the 
moment, in this mica industry and I like to give the House some 
figures on that point. Take the mica mines in India. I have got 
the figures for 1941. In Bihar the total number of mines in 
1941 were 623. Of them those that worked throughout the year 
were 297. In Madras the total was 108 and those that worked 
throughout the year were 47; while in Rajputana, although the 
total was 62, those that worked throughout the year were only 8. 
Taking the question of the number of workers, I have got figures 
for 1943. The figures arc as follows. In Bihar the total number of 
workers working in mica mines was 81, 431 ; in Madras it was 
18,379 ; in Rajputana it was only 15,000. It is, therefore, thought 
that it would be better not to constitute a separate Committee 
for Rajputana. The reason is obvious. All these Advisory 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Committees involve a great deal of administrative cost, and I 
do not want that the money in the Fund should be spent on 
mere matters of administration more than we can help it. We, 
therefore, propose that it would be better to economize by not 
having one Committee and to leave the matter to be provided 
for in some other way. Sir, I do not know whether there is any 
other clause in the bill which requires any explanation or any 
specific comment. As the House will see, the matter is very 
urgent and I am very keen to see that this Bill is put on the 
statute book. 

I find there is an amendment in the name of Honourable 
Members, the object of which is to send this bill to a Select 
Committee. I am not willing or rather I am opposed to referring 
this Bill to a Select Committee, because I do not think that this 
Bill can be said to be cither controversial or complicated as to 
require the labours of a Select Committee to be spent upon it. 
However, if the members of the House arc keen on having the 
matter referred to a Select Committee, if they agree that the 
Select Committee shall be authorised or directed to return the 
Bill before the Session ends, so that I can move the second 
reading of the Bill, I would not object to such an amendment. 
Sir, I move. 

Mr. President : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill to constitute, a fund for the financing of 
activities to promote, the welfare of labour employed in the mica 
mining industry be taken into consideration.” 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer (Bombay Southern Division : 
Muhamma-dan Rural): Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of the Honourable Sir Ashoka Roy, the Honourable Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar, Miss Maniben Kara, Mr. S.C. Joshi, Babu Ram 
Narayan Singh, Sri R. Venkatasubba Reddiar, Mr. Gauri Shankar 
Saran Singh, Sri A. Karunakara Menon, Prof. N.G. Ranga, 

Mr. Geoffery W. Tyson, Mr. Madandhari Singh, Dr. Sir Zia Uddin 
Ahmad, Khan Bahadur Hafix M. Ghazanfarulla, Mr. Muhammad 
Nauman and the mover with instructions to report by the 15th 
April, 1946, and that the number of members whose presence 
shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee 
shall be five.” 


Mr. President : Will 15th be all right ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


379 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 379 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : No, it will be too late. 

k k k 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I did not say that 
I would have out Rajputana. I shall be constituting a separate 
committee. 

Diwan Chaman Lall: I did not hear my Honourable friend 
say that he would constitute a separate committee. I heard him 
say, “Some other means”. I am glad he says “some separate 
committee” now. As for as this measure is concerned, Rajputana 
is left out. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : There welfare 
measures will be carried out with the aid of this fund. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Will the money from Madras and 
Bihar be taken to help the Rajputana workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We might employ 
some other agency, some other organisation in order to carry out 
the activities connected with welfare workers. The Fund will pay. 

k k k 

*The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not propose 
to take very long in replying to the criticisms which have been 
made against this Bill. I wish to state very briefly my opinion with 
regard to the points that have been raised to state very briefly 
my opinion with regard to the points that have been raised by 
three speakers. I shall first deal with the points raised by my 
friend Mr. Tyson. I had made no reference in the speech that I 
made in support of my motion with regard to the surplus stock 
of mica or the additional cesses that were proposed to be levied 
and the report of Mr. Justice Reuben. Sir, I deliberately did 
not touch upon these points in my speech, because I knew that 
these points would be raised by my friend Mr. Tyson and that 
I would have to reply to them. If I did not do so it was largely 
because I wanted to save the time of the House. 

Now, Sir, the position is this, that although the Labour 
Department and the Government of India have decided 
to proceed with measures of social welfare on the basis of 
the report made by Prof. Adarkar, the decision was taken 
by the Labour Department long before the report of Prof. 
Adarkar was made. I am glad to say that the decision taken 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V-No. 7, 9th April 1946, pp. 3757-59. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


380 


380 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by the Labour Department has been fully supported by 
Mr. Justice Reuben in his report on the Mica industry. 

In fact he himself has suggested that there should be a 
general levy on the mica produced or exported and that about 
5/12 of the receipts under the general cess should be set apart for 
labour welfare in the mica mines. Therefore in proceeding with 
this measure we are in no sense departing from the report made 
by Mr. Reuben. All that we have done is that instead of having 
a single cess as suggested by Mr. Reuben to be distributed and 
allocated for different purposes we have thought it necessary to 
have a separate fund for welfare and another fund for certain 
administrative measures that may be necessary for the industry 
as such. The reason for making this decision is obviously due to 
the fact that the welfare fund will have to be administered by 
a separate agency, while the fund for other purposes will have 
to be administered by a separate agency. There my Honourable 
friend Mr. Tyson will see that the decision of the Government 
of India is in full accord with the report of Mr. Reuben. 

With regard to, the additional cess we have, as my Honourable 
friend will see, fixed the cess in the initial stage at a very low 
figure. The figure suggested in the Reuben report is 6 per cent, 
ad valorem 

Mr. Geoffrey W. Tyson : Labour or General ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : General. This is 
a matter which will have to be examined at a later stage as to 
exactly what should be the pitch of the cess in order that the 
cess may produce sufficient revenue which would be adequate 
both for welfare and other purposes. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : How much does my Honourable 
friend expect ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Wait, I will come to 
that a little later. With regard to the question of surplus stock 
I would like to inform the House that the Government of India 
has been in negotiation with His Majesty’s Government for a 
long time over the question of the disposal of surplus stocks of 
mica which have been held by His Majesty’s Government as well 
as by the United States. I am glad to say that we have come to 
an agreement whereby no sort of harm will be done to the mica 
industry by the disposal of the surplus stock. The negotiation 
has reached the final stage and in a few days time a press note 
will be issued informing the industry and the general public 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


381 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 381 

of the arrangement which has been arrived at between His 
Majesty’s Government and the Government of India. I might 
say that this arrangement has the fullest support of the mica 
industry itself. 

With regard to this measure I would like also to inform the 
House that this measure has been undertaken with the fullest 
consent of the industry itself. This question was first broached 
by me at a conference which was held at Kodarma on 29th 
April 1944, at which I presided and the representatives of the 
mica industry were also present, and I was glad to find that the 
industry as a whole responded to my suggestion for having a 
welfare fund. The matter was again taken up on 9th November 
1945, at a conference held at Dhanbad under the chairmanship of 
the Coal Mines Welfare Commissioner. There again, the producers 
of mica accepted the suggestion. Lastly, a third conference 
was held on 19th December, 1945, also at Dhanbad under the 
chairmanship of the Secretary of the Labour Department, where 
a final agreement was reached between the Government and the 
Mica mineowners. I would also like to state that our proposal to 
levy a cess on the industry does not seem to have discouraged 
the industries from further exploiting the field of mica production 
and I find that during the last few months, there have been to 
my knowledge at any rate, three big flatations of new companies 
which have entered into the field of mica. I find, for instance, 
a new flatation under the name of Micantic and Mica Products 
Co., Ltd., from Madras with an authorised capital of Rs. 5 lakhs. 
Another is called the Saraswati Mica Industries Limited, from 
Calcutta with an authorised capital of Rs. 5 lakhs and I know 
as a matter of fact that the Christian Mining Industries Ltd., 
have also applied for capital issues for mica mining and for the 
establishment of a micanite factory. These circumstances would 
show that the cess has not been viewed by the industries in any 
tragic manner and I think that they believe that it would be 
possible for the industry to bear the burden of this welfare cess. 

Coming to the points made by my friend Diwan Chaman 
Lall, I must apologise for not supplying him with a copy of the 
report which he had asked for at some early stage. I must say 
that I altogether forgot about it. But I do not think that he has 
in any way lost in dealing with the matter in the way in which 
he has dealt with it. All that probably he would have done if he 
had the report is that he would have made a speech of double 
the length of what he did. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

With regard to the question that he put to me as to how much 
revenue the cess will produce, I hestitate to give the house any 
definite figure and the reason is quite obvious. The production 
of mica has not been at a very steady figure. For instance, I 
have figures here from 1934 to 1944. In 1934, the value of mica 
produced was Rs. 6,30,525, while in 1944, it was 2,73,01,458 
and there have been various figures for the different years in 
the intervening period. It is no use, therefore, for me to give the 
House any particular figure. We must allow sometime for the 
industry to stabilise itself in the post-war period. But taking the 
figure for 1944, I calculate that the cess would be somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of Rs. five lakhs. I quite appreciate that 
that is not a very large sum. Personally, if I may say so, what I 
am fighting for is the establishment of a principle. If later on it 
was found that the fund was not sufficient, it would be still open 
for any member of the Government who would be in charge of 
this to come forward and increase the cess and thereby augment 
the amount and carry on the measures of social welfare which 
otherwise would not be possible. 

With regard to the Mica Purchase Mission, the point to which 
my friend made reference, is a matter not relevant to the Bill 
which we are considering and I do not therefore propose to enter 
into the questions arising out of the Mica Purchase Mission’s 
activities. But I can tell my friend that so far as I know anything 
about it, the industrialists engaged in the production of mica in 
this country have not only not had any harm done to them but 
I am quite satisfied that they have made more than ordinary 
profits. 

My friend, Diwan Chaman Lai, spent a great length of his 
speech in discussing the lax administration of the Mines Act. 
He referred to the employment of children and of other matters 
relating also to employment of women. As I said, I am quite 
aware of this fact, and the Labour Department has on the anvil 
legislation to remove all the defects which have been reported 
upon by Mr. Adarkar in the course of his Report dealing with 
the workers in mica mines. And if there was time available to 
Government, it would have been possible even in this session, 
to bring forth a Bill to remove those evils. But I have no doubt 
that that will be done without delay. 

Coming to the points reaised by my friend, Mr. Ram Narayan Singh, 
I know he made a great point, that this was a very delayed measure. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


383 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 383 

He said that the mica industry was there, the evils have been 
there, Government has been here and nothing was done. If I may 
tell him, he only forgot to mention one tiling, that lie also was 
there, and for a long number of years. If he had taken the earliest 
opportunity to move in this matter to energize and organize the 
conscience of the Government and of the industrialists, I have 
no doubt that the delay of which he has complained would never 
have occurred. But I hope he will agree that it is better late 
than never. 

With regard to the question of administration of the Fund, 
I think the point that he made was that the administration 
should be left to the Provincial Governments. I am sorry to say 
that I cannot accept that principle. This legislation is a Central 
legislation. It is a legislation for which the Central Government 
is responsible. The Fund is raised by the Central law. The Fund 
is raised for a particular and specific purpose. Having regard 
to these circumstances, it seems to me unjustifiable on the 
part of the Government of India to allot the whole of this sum 
to the Provincial Governments, where they might be merged 
in the general revenues of the Province and spent, I suppose, 
in accordance with the wishes — I do not say whims of the 
Provincial Government. I am of opinion, since the responsibility 
for the Fund is a Central responsibility, since the Fund is for a 
specific purpose, and since it would be a sort of a trust which 
the Government of India would be administering, it is in every 
way desirable — not only desirable but necessary — that the Central 
Government from beginning to end should keep its hand on the 
administration of this Fund. While this is so, I should like to tell 
my Honourable friend that he has probably not studied the way 
in which , the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund is administered. 
I would therefore like to tell him some details about it because 
the administration of the Coal Mines Welfare Fund would be the 
model — indeed not only the model but the pattern — on which the 
administration of this Fund will be carried on. In the matter of 
the Coal Mines Welfare Fund, the administration is vested in a 
Commissioner who is generally a provincial officer, an officer lent 
by the Provincial Government. If I may tell him, the person who 
is now administering the Coal Mines Welfare Fund is an officer 
lent by the Bihar Government, and he should rest assure that 
even in the matter of the administration of the Mica Fund we 
shall be applying to the Bihar Government to lend us an officer 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


384 


384 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the Bihar Government. As I said, and as the Bill provides, the 
constitution of the Committee will be such that the representatives 
of the mica industry from Bihar and also from Madras, would 
be local people knowing local conditions. Further, according to 
the constitution of the Coal Mines Welfare Fund, the orders 
provide by rules that the Provincial Governments shall send their 
representatives to be members of the Advisory Committee. The 
same procedure will be followed with regard to the Mica Advisory 
Committee. We shall provide that by rules. These Committees 
meet every three months, certain agenda is prepared and the 
advice of the Committee is sought. There are men drawn from 
producers, owners, workers and from Provincial Governments 
as well. The annual budget is also placed before the Advisory 
Committee. Their advice is obtained. It is after their advice is 
obtained that the Funds begin to operate on the various purposes 
for which money has been provided. 

With this I believe my friend, Mr. Ram Narayan Singh, will 
see that there is not going to be any autocracy from the centre. 
Here is a great deal of decentralization, a great deal of co-operation 
in the administration of this Fund between the producers, the 
workers and the Provincial Government. Sir, I do not think that 
there is any other point which has been raised in the course of 
the speeches on this Bill to which I have not given my reply, 
and I do not think, I need say anything more than this. 

Mr. President: The question is : 

“That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee consisting 
of the Honourable Sir Asoka Roy, the Honourable Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar, Miss Maniben Kara, Mr. S. C. Joshi, Babu Ram 
Narayan Singh, Sri R. Venkatasubba Reddiar, Mr. Gauri Shankar 
Saran Singh, Sri A. Karunakara Menon, Prof. N. G. Ranga, 

Mr. Geoffrey W. Tyson, Mr. Madandhari Singh, Dr. Sir Ziauddin 
Ahmad, Khan Bahadur Hafizz M. Ghazanfarulla, Mr. Muhammad 
Nauman and the mover, with instructions to report by the 12th 
April, 1946, and that the number of members whose presence 
shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the Committee shall 
be five.” The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


385 


66 

* Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Mr. President, Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill to require employers in industrial establishments 
formally to define conditions of employment under them be taken 
into consideration. 

Sir, this is a very simple measure and, so far as I can see, 
is a non-controversial measure. The object of the Bill is to have 
the terms and conditions should be certified by a competent 
officer appointed for that purpose, and that it should form a 
sort of register of what the terms and conditions of employment 
are in any particular establishment. The Bill seeks to make 
a difference between mere registration of the terms and 
conditions of employment and adjudication upon the fairness and 
reasonableness of those terms and conditions of employment. This 
Bill does not touch the question of adjudication of the fairness 
and reasonableness of the terms of employment. Every employer 
is free under this Bill to fix whatever terms and conditions of 
employment he may like to fix. All that the Bill requires is 
this, that he should, after framing the terms and conditions of 
employment applicable to workmen employed in his establishment 
submit them to an officer employed by the Government and 
that the officer will take a note of those terms and conditions, 
enter them in his register, and this register will be the basis 
of determining what actually the terms and conditions were. 
In other words, if I may put it differently, the Bill is merely 
enacting what might be called a rule of evidence, so that if this 
Bill passes, if there is any dispute as to what the terms and 
conditions were with regard to any particular establishment as 
between the employer and the workman, the evidence that the 
law will admit will be the documentary evidence, a certified 
copy furnished to the employer by the certifying officer, and 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V,-No. 9, 12th April 1946, p. 3914. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


386 


386 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that oral evidence will not be permitted. If the House will refer 
to clause 12 of this Bill they will see this point made abundantly 
clear. It says : 

“No oral evidence having the effect of adding to or otherwise 

varying or contradicting standing orders as finally certified under 

this Act shall be admitted in any Court.” 

That is really the purport of this Bill. As I said, there is no 
new principle involved in it. Such an Act exists in the province 
of Bombay already and all that the Bill proposes to do is to 
extend the provisions of that Act to other provinces in India. 

The Bill has several clauses which are mere matters of 
procedure, defining how the certifying officer shall proceed in 
the matter when he receives the text of the terms and conditions 
from the employer. He is required to give notice to the workman 
employed in that establishment and to hear them before giving 
any certificate. The employer, if he finds that the terms and 
conditions he has proposed are perfectly in accord with the 
provisions of this Act and the certifying officer does not issue 
to him a certificate, he has the right also to go to an appellate 
court and get the decision of the certifying officer reversed. 

I do not think it necessary for me to take the time of the House, 
especially when we are so short of it, to dilate upon the different 
clauses in this Bill. But I think it necessary for me to state 
why the Government thinks that this Bill is not only necessary 
but is also very urgent. This Bill is very integrally related to 
another measure which Government has in contemplation and 
that relates to the Health Insurance, which the Government 
proposes to bring forth at the next Session. The Health Bill 
gives an employee certain rights with regard to benefits ; it 
levies certain obligations upon them to make contributions to the 
Health Insurance Fund. These rights and obligations are very 
integrally related to, for instance, the wages which the employee 
would be drawing in different establishments. Now, disputes may 
arise as to the contribution that an employee is bound to pay to 
the fund. Disputes may arise as to what benefit an employee is 
entitled to draw under the insurance fund. In order that such 
disputes may be settled finally, Government thinks it necessary 
that the terms and conditions of employees should be certified 
and laid down in a document, so that when the dispute arises we 
will have before us unimpeachable evidence as to the wages and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


387 


INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) BILL 387 

other conditions by which the employee is bound. In fact it is 
felt that it would be very difficult to work the health insurtance 
fund unless and until we have placed beyond cavil, beyond doubt 
and beyond dispute certain questions relating to the employment 
of the workers in the industrial establishments. 

With these observations I move that this Bill be taken into 
consideration. 

•k "k 

*The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Mr. President, 
I did not think that my motion that the Bill be passed would 
invoke the sort of debate that we have heard just now. I cannot 
help saying that I was particularly amazed at the speech of my 
Honourable friend Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad and I have a sort 
of fear that his speech was due to the fact that he probably had 
eaten something which was indigestible for his lunch, because 
as we know Dr. Zia Uddin Ahmad has been a most persistent 
advocate of labour legislation and more than once he has on 
the floor of the House urged upon me the necessity of bringing 
in labour legislation of far greater magnitude and without any 
delay. Today he has made a speech of just the opposite tenor. 
But I am glad to see that his observations on that point have 
been so completely answered by my friend Mr. Siddiqi that I 
think I would not be justified in taking the House over that 
matter again. 

There is only one point which he made to which I would like to 
give a reply. He said that he had not sufficient notice about this 
Bill. The position with regard to that matter stands as follows. 
The agenda on which this Bill was placed was circulated to the 
Honourable Members on Friday, the 6th instant. On that agenda 
this Bill was placed as the first item of Legislative Business 
and not only it was placed as part of the Legislative Business 
but there was added a footnote in which it was definitely stated 
that this item would be taken on Friday, the 12th April, 1946, 
as the first item of Legislative Business. I do not know whether 
six days notice can be regarded as insufficient. 

So far as the Bill itself is concerned I had hoped that I should be 
able to get it through within 15 minutes but we have now practically 
spent nearly one hour and five minutes in dealing with this Bill and 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V-No. 9, 12th April 1946, p. 3926. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


388 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I cannot therefore see how anybody could say that I am trying 
to rush this measure through the House. 

With regard to the point made by my friend, Mr. Inskipt, that 
in this matter they had not had sufficient notice to consult their 
clients, I cannot help saying that he has entirely misunderstood 
the previous history, or forgotten the previous history of this Bill. 
This Bill was placed before the Standing Labour Committee in 
the year 1944. The Committee was completely unanimous and the 
Committee suggested that the Bill was so necessary and that it 
was so non-contentious that Government might as well pass the 
Bill in the form of an ordinance, which we did not do. Thereafter, 
the matter was again discussed in the Indian Labour Conference. 

Another point which he made was that the Bill, as it is now 
presented to the House, was not in the same form in which it 
was placed before the Labour Conference. I would like to tell 
him that it is entirely a mistaken view. Government has made 
no changes whatsoever in the form of the Bill as it was placed 
before the Tripartite Conference. 

My friend, Professor” Ranga, raised a question regarding the 
applicability of this Bill to smaller factories. My friend, Mr. Gwilt, 
also emphasized it and said that I should give an explanation. 
Anyone who read sub-clause (3) of clause 1 would not certainly 
be labouring under any such misapprehension that the Bill is 
intended only to industrial establishments wherein one hundred or 
more workmen are employed, because that clause itself states that 
Government will have the power and the authority to extend this 
“to such class or classes of other industrial establishments as the 
appropriate Government may from time to time, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.” Government, therefore, 
has retained the power in its own hands to make it applicable 
to industrial establishments which may have less than hundred 
people. Therefore, any fear which is entertained on the ground that 
this is intended primarily to apply to industrial establishments 
wherein one hundred or more persons are employed and that 
consequently other establishments employing lesser number of 
people would be excluded, is a fear which I submit is completely 
unfounded. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I intervene for a minute ? On page 
2, in clause 2(e) (ii), under definition of industrial establishment it is 
stated that “ it means a factory as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


389 


INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) BILL 389 

Factories Act”. I take it that factory as defined there is covered 
by the Factories Act. But a factory of twenty people will not be 
covered by the definition of “industrial establishment” given here. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : But Government 
may apply it even to a factory having twenty persons. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : It may ; but it does not mean that 
it should. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : We are starting 
with those having one hundred. 

Mr. Leslie Gwilt: Why not start with less ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : There is nothing to 
prevent Government from starting with even a lesser number. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : If the Indian Factories Act can 
apply to an establishment where there are only twenty people 
employed, why should not this also apply similarly to an industrial 
establishment under this Bill ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As it is, there is 
nothing under the Act which will not enable Government to impose 
the obligation upon even factories employing twenty persons. We 
thought fit to make a beginning. Further, the administrative 
machinery may probably have to be very vast if it were to apply 
to every factory. The number of certifying officers and appellate 
authorities may be too many and no Provincial Government may 
be in a position to provide that administrative machinery. It is 
necessary to make a beginning on a modest scale, reserving to 
ourselves the power to extend it to all those where such extension 
may be necessary. 

I do not think there is any other point which was made in the 
course of the speeches on this motion which calls for explanation. 

Sir, I move : 

Mr. President : The question is : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


390 


67 


* Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I move: 

“That the Bill to constitute a fund for the financing of 
activities to promote the welfare of Labour employed in the Mica 
Mining Industry, as reported by the Select Committee be taken 
into consideration.” 

The Bill has emerged practically as it was from the Select 
Committee with changes which are so inconsequential that I think 
it would be wrong on my part lo take the time of the House to 
refer to it. I will therefore do no more than move the motion. 

Mr. Deputy President : The question is : 

“That the Bill to constitute a fund for the financing of 
activities to promote the welfare of Labour employed in the Mica 
Mining Industry, as reported by the Select Committee be taken 
into consideration.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy President : The question is : 

“That Clause 2 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 

Clauses 3 and 4 were added to the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy President : Clause 5. 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava (Ajmer-Merwara : 
General) : Sir, I beg to move : 

“That in sub-clause 3(a) of clause 5 of the Bill, after the 
word ‘fund’ and before the word ‘and’, the following be inserted, 
namely : — 

‘Provided that no officer shall be deemed to be competent 
to enter a private dwelling house between the hours of 
sunset and sunrise and in case of such dwelling house being 
occupied by women without proper notice of such entry to 
the inmates ‘.” 

Mr. Deputy President : The Honourable Member just now 
has given notice of this amendment. It has not been circulated 
to the Members. 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V, No. 4, 15th April 1046, p. 4024. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


391 


MICA MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL 391 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I object to it. 

Mr. Deputy President : I am afraid this amendment has 
come too late and it cannot be permitted at this stage. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga (Guntur-cum-Nellore : non-Muhammadan 
Rural): Have you any objection to that ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I strongly object 
to it. 

Mr. Deputy President : Does the Honourable Member want 
to speak on clause 5 ? 

Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava : No, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy President : The question is : 

“That Clauses 5 and 6 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clauses 5 and 6 were added to the Bill. 

Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 

The Title and Preamble were added to the Bill. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Sir, I move : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 

Mr. Deputy President : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill, as amended, be passed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


392 


68 


Miscellaneous 

* SCHOLARSHIPS FOR SCHEDULED CASTE STUDENTS 

With a view to improving the educational and economic 
condition of the Scheduled Castes, the Government of India have 
decided to give scholarships for the year 1946-47 to students 
belonging to these classes in British India who wish to pursue 
their studies in scientific and technological subjects beyond the 
Matriculation stage. These scholarships are tenable in India 
only. No scholarships for studies abroad will be awarded by the 
Board this year. 

The amounts awarded will cover the entire cost of education 
including the tuition fee and other maintenance charges. In the 
case of Shorthand and Typewriting, short period stipends of the 
value of Rs. 20 p.m. only will be awarded. 

The courses for which awards will be available are : 

(1) Intermediate with Science, (2) B. Sc. (Pass or Honours), 
(3) M. Sc., (4) Engineering, (5) Technology, (6) Medical, (7) 
Agriculture, (8) Teacher’s Training and (9) Shorthand and 
Typewriting. 

Women students offering Arts subjects in the Intermediate and 
Graduate courses will be eligible for the award of scholarships 
provided they give an undertaking that they will pursue the 
Teacher’s Training course at the end of their approved courses 
of study. If they do not fulfil this condition they will be required 
to refund the amount of their scholarships. 

@ T.V.A. EXPERTS TO ADVISE ON DAMODAR 
VALLEY PROJECT 

Mr. Ross M. Riegel and Mr. Fred C. Schlemmer, leading engineers 
of the Tennessee Valley Authority, have arrived in India on a mission 


*Indian Information, March 15, 1946, p. 310. 
@ Indian Information, April 1, 1946, p. 403. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


393 


MISCELLANEOUS 393 

to advise on the plans being made by the Central Technical 
Power Board for the Maithon. Alyar and Panchet Hill Projects. 
These are the first three of the dam sites in the Damodar 
Project for which outline designs and detailed estimates are 
being prepared at present. The plans and designs for the 
Maithon Project are in a relatively advanced stage. In regard 
to the other projects, a good deal of topographical and other 
data is still in course of preparation. 

Four Reports 

Mr. Riegel and Mr. Schlemmer do not expect to be in India 
for more than eight weeks, their services having been made 
available to the Government of India by the Tennessee 
Valley Authority, with the approval of the State Department, 
Washington. It is hoped to associate two leading Indian civil 
engineers with the Mission, but the present circumstances in 
which exceptional efforts are being made to carry out irrigation 
projects in connection with the “Grow More Food Campaign” 
have made it difficult for the Indian engineers to join the 
Mission as yet. 

The Mission is to make four reports. Two are to be made to 
the central Technical Power Board, and are to comprise a critical 
examination of the Board’s proposals for the form of design to 
be adopted and the construction schedule at the dam sites. The 
other two reports will be made to the Government of India and 
will cover recommendations as to the methods of preparing 
detailed working designs and carrying out construction work. 

*WELFARE TRUST FUNDS FOR WORKERS 

The creation of Welfare Trust Funds for industrial employees 
was discussed at the eighth session of the Standing Labour 
Committee, held on March 15 and 16 in New Delhi with the 
Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Member for Labour, in the chair. A 
proposal that the Funds should be financed by the employers on 
the basis of a certain percentage of the profits and administered 
by a committee consisting of representatives of both workers 
and employers was examined. The question whether welfare 
schemes should be made compulsory by Statute for all classes 
of employers was also discussed. 

*Indian Information, April 15, 1946, p. 442. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


394 


394 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Other items discussed by the Committee were the desirability 
of Central legislation for unregulated factories, amendments to 
the Trade Disputes Act, the extent of unemployment likely to 
occur in industries, the attitude of Employment Exchanges during 
strikes or lock-outs and the Mine Workers’ Charter proposed by 
the I.L.O. 

Representatives of the Central and Provincial Governments, 
Indian States, and employers’ and employees’ organisations 
attended the meeting. Lala Kripa Narain, Mr. Shanti Lai 
Mangaldas Mr. Bhagwandas C. Mehta, the Hon’ble Mr. H.D. 
Townend and Rai Bahadur Syamnandan Sahay were the delegates 
on behalf of the employers and Messrs. N.M. Joshi, N.V. Phadke, 
V.S. Karnik, A.K. Mukerjee and R.R. Bhole represented the 
workers. 

*SOCIAL SECURITY OF LABOUR 
Rege Committee Reports 

Data relating to all aspects of labour conditions embodied 
in 35 reports running to nearly two million words have been 
complied by the Labour Investigation Committee appointed 
by the Government of India on February 12, 1944, with 
Mr. D.V. Rege I.C.S., as Chairman and Mr. S. R. Deshpande, 
Dr. Ahmad Mukhtar and Prof. B. P. Adarkar as members. Twenty 
of these reports were placed on the table of the House in the 
Central Legislative Assembly on April 9, by the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar, Labour Member. 

The data collected by the Committee relate to the wages and 
earnings, employment, housing and social conditions of labour 
in 38 selected industries, namely : Mining — Coal, Manganese, 
Gold, Mica, Iron Ore and Salt: Plantations — Tea, Coffee and 
Rubber: Factories — Cotton, Jute, Silk, Woolen, Mineral Oil, 
Dockyard, Engineering, Cement, Matches, Paper, Carpet weaving, 
Coirmatting, Tanneries and Leather Goods Manufacture, 
Potteries, Printing Presses, Glass Chemical and Pharmaceutical 
Works, Shellac, Bidi-making, Mica Splitting, Sugar, Cotton, 
Ginning and Baling and Rice Mills ; Transport — Tramways and 
Buses and Non-gazetted Railway Staff; and Other Types — Port 
Labour, Municipal Labour, Central P.W.D., and Rickshaw Pullers. 
This is expected to help the future planning of social security 
for labour and legislation by the Government. 

*Indian Information, April 15, 1946, p. 568. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


395 


MISCELLANEOUS 395 

The Sampling Method 

As it was felt that the peculiar problems of labour had more 
an industry-wise than a region-wise dispersion, the Committee 
adopted the sampling method and conducted an industry-wise 
survey throughout India. During their two years of work, the 
Chairman and the members individually toured the whole of the 
country visiting 65 Industrial centres as far apart as Srinagar 
and Trichinopoly, Quetta and Shillong. On-the-spot investigations 
were carried out in 528 centres including plantation estates and 
mines. No less than, 1,631 establishments relating to various 
industries were surveyed. Questionnaires containing hundreds of 
questions were issued to various industrial concerns, Provincial 
and State Governments, Officials and Employers’ and Employees’ 
Organisations. The quantity of factual material analysed on the 
Committee may be illustrated by the fact that with regard to 
the wage census alone 34,080 forms were received. 

The Committee employed a field staff containing of 16 
Supervisors and 45 Investigators who were sent out on ad hoc 
surveys. This staff not only collected information on the spot 
at the various centres but also drew upon some other possible 
source of information. They personally contacted employers, 
workers and officials during the course of their investigations. 

Representative centres were selected region-wise for the survey 
so as to discover differences in the conditions of labour in the 
same industry in different parts of the country. The selection of 
a concern was generally based on its importance, size, etc., and 
whether it was subject to statutory regulations or not. Enquiries 
related to protection given by existing Labour legislation, wages 
and earnings of labour, working conditions, indebtedness, age 
and mortality statistics, welfare activities and social security 
measures. 

The Committee were considerably assisted in their work by 
Provincial and Stale Governments, local bodies, port authorities 
and Employers’ and Employees’ Organisations. 

DEPARTMENT OF WORKS, MINES AND POWER 

The division of the Labour Department with the establishment 
of a new Department of Works, Mines and Power, came into 
effect on April 8. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


396 


396 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Department of Works, Mines and Power will deal with 
such subjects as the central Public Works Department and 
execution of Central Works Projectors, Civil Engineering, Mines 
and Minerals, the Geological Survey of India, Major Irrigation 
Works including Central Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation 
Commission, Electricity and Stationery and Printing. 

The Labour Department will continue to deal with 
all subjects connected with the I.L.O., Welfare of Labour, 
Labour Relations, and Security Measures, Legislation and 
Enforcement of Labour Laws, Safety Measures, Resettlement 
of Ex-Servicemen and Women, Technical and Vocational 
Training Schemes, Labour Laws and Statistics, Research and 
Investigation. 

Both Departments will be in the charge of the Hon’ble 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member. Coal production will 
however remain temporarily in the charge of the Industries 
and Supplies Member. 

The Hon’ble Mr. H.C. Prior will be Secretary of the 
Department of Works, Mines and Power and Mr. S. Lall, 
Secretary of the Department of Labour. 

*THE DAMODAR PROJECT 

Quick investigation of the possibility of starting immediately 
the construction of the first dam (at Tilaiya) in the Rs. 55 
crores Damodar River Project was recommended at a conference 
of the representatives of the Central Government and the 
Governments of Bengal and Bihar held in New Delhi, on April 
23 and 24 under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar, Labour Member, Government of India. 

This multi-purpose scheme is intended to control the floods 
of the Damodar and its tributaries, provide perennial irrigation 
and power for the benefit of nearly 4,000,000 people living in 
the valley and also provide navigation facilities. The whole 
scheme comprises a series of eight dams and reservoirs which 
when constructed will impound about 4,700,000 acre-feet of 
water for irrigating some 800,000 acres of land and produce 
nearly 350,000 kws. of electricity. 


Indian Information, June 1, 1946, p. 682. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


397 


MISCELLANEOUS 397 

Maithon Dam 

After considering the reports of the central Technical Power Board 
and the advice of the Tennessee Valley Authority engineers, 
Messrs. Ross Reigel and Fred C. Schlemmer, and their associates, 
Rai Bahadur A.N. Khosla and Mr. M. Narasimhaiya, Chief 
Engineer, Mysore State, the conference was convinced-of the 
advisability of pushing forward as rapidly as possible the scheme 
as a whole. It has accepted the proposal that the dams across 
the Barakar, tributary of the Damodar, should be at Tilaiya 
(near Kodarma) and at Maithon, just above its confluence with 
the main river. 

The conference felt, however, that the start of construction of 
the larger Maithon dam must be postponed to October 1947, as 
it was not posssible for both the Bihar and Bengal Governments 
to enter into definite commitments in sufficient time to enable 
contracts to be entered into with engineers and contractors, 
which must necessarily be done almost at once if a start were 
to be made by October 1946 — the only other alternative. This 
postponement would, however, give time to consider in detail a 
proposal to raise the height of the dam at Maithon rather than 
consturct a second reservoir in the mid-Barakar area. 

In respect of the Tilaiya dam, it was felt that there were 
fewer difficulties in making a start. Its early construction would 
not only provide water for irrigation and facilitate resettlement 
problems but also power which would be useful in the construction 
of the Maithon dam. The conference, therefore, advised quick 
investigation of the possibility of starting work on the Tilaiya 
dam in advance of other projects. 

The representatives of the Bengal and Bihar Governments 
stated that their Governments would not be able to carry out 
the scheme themselves and suggested the appointment of an 
Authority for administering the scheme. The Government of 
India said they proposed to appoint Mr. B.K. Gokhale, formerly 
Adviser to the Governor of Orissa, to look into administrative 
aspects and prepare within six months a scheme for the Damodar 
Valley Authority. 

Compensation for Land Acquired 

It was decided that full and fair compensation should be paid for 
the land acquired for the purpose of constructing reservoirs and that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


398 


398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

payment should, as far as possible, be in kind, by giving land 
for land. The officer-in-charge of administration will prepare a 
detailed scheme for the settlement of dispossessed persons on 
new land so as to ensure to them a source of livelihood at least 
as good as they enjoyed on their original lands. 

The conference agreed that the cost of investigations and 
surveys should be shared between the Central and the Provincial 
Governments concerned and that the general supervision should 
be under the central Technical Power Board, and in irrigation 
and navigation matters the Central Waterways, Irrigation and 
Navigation Commission. 

*SCHEDULED CASTES AND CENTRAL SERVICES 

By a Resolution published in the Gazette of India of June 
15, 1946, the Government of India have decided to increase the 
reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes of vacancies filled by 
direct recruitment in the Central Services from 8% per cent, to 
1214 per cent, so as to bring it in accord with the population ratio. 

Rules (1) and (2) in paragraph 4 of the Resolution of August 
11, 1943, are accordingly amended as follows : — 

“(1) 12.5 per cent of all vacancies to be filled by the direct 
recruitment of Indians in the Central Services to which 
recruitment is made on an all-India basis will be reserved 
for Scheduled Castes.” 

“(2) In the case of services to which recruitment is made by 
local areas or circles and not on an all-India basis (e.g., 
Subordinate posts in the Railways, Posts & Telegraphs 
Department, the Customs Services, the Income Tax 
Department, etc.) the over-all reservation of 12.5 per cent, 
of vacancies for Scheduled Castes candidates will be 
obtained by fixing a percentage for each local area or 
circle having regard to the population of the Scheduled 
Castes in the area or circle concerned and the rules for 
recruitment adopted by the Provincial Government of the 
area or circle concerned.” 

• • 


Indian Information, July 15, 1946, p. 34. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


399 


r 


~\ 


The communique issued from 
Viceroy’s House on August 24, 1946, 
stated that His Majesty the King 
has accepted the resignation of the 
members of the Governor General’s 
Executive Council. In the new Ministry 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was not included. 




J 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


400 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013 


401 



Dr. Ambedkar with some members of the Defence Council of India. 


(Courtesy : Bhikkhu Sumedh. Bombay.) 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


402 



The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Labour Member, addressing the 
First Session of the Plenary Labour Conference in Delhi on Monday, 
September 6, 1943. 

(Courtesy : Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Research Institute. Nagpur.) 




z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


403 



The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar talking to Colliery Labour during 
his tour of Coalmine areas on December 9, 1943. 

(Courtesy : Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Research Institute, Nagpur .) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


404 



Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, accompanied by Mr. S. Lall, Joint Secretary, 
Government of India, Department of Labour, inspected Calcutta 
Employment Exchange. He is seen here discussing with Mr. A. 
Hughes, Labour Commissioner of Government of Bengal, on August 
23,1944. 

(Courtesy : Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Research Institute, Nagpur.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


401 


Part II 

Important Correspondence, 
Memoranda, Statements, etc. 
during 1942-46 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 402 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


403 


SECTION I 

MEMORANDUM 


Confidential 
Not for Circulation 


GRIEVANCES 

OF THE 

SCHEDULED CASTES 


By 


THE HON’BLE DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 

M.A., PhD., D.Sc., Barristcr-at-Law 
Member, Governor General’s Executive Council 


MEMORANDUM 
Submitted to 


HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL 


on the 29th October 1942 


22, PRITHVIRAJ ROAD 
NEW DELHI 


[Reprinted from a booklet published by the author ] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 404 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


405 


GRIEVANCES OF THE SCHEDULED CASTES 

INTRODUCTION 

This Memorandum sets out the grievances of the Scheduled 
Castes in British India and suggests the measures that are 
necessary for redressing them. In listing the grievances I have 
taken note of such grievances only as the Central Government 
alone can remedy. 

The grievances listed in this memorandum are divided into 
three categories (1) Political, (2) Educational and (3) Other 
Grievances, and are discussed separately. Part I deals with 
Political grievances, Part II with Educational grievances, and Part 
III with Other grievances. To this I have added Part IV in which 
I have ventured to speak of the duty which every Government 
must assume towards those who are living in a life of perpetual 
distress, in the hope that the Government of India will recognize 
it and do what they are bound to do to the Scheduled Castes. 

I have thought it advisable to give below a table divided into 
Parts. This table, it will be seen serves two purposes. It gives 
at the start the contents of this memorandum, and secondly 
it helps to convey at the outset a general idea of what these 
grievances are. 

Part I. Political Grievances 

1. Inadequate Representation in the Central Legislature. 

2. Inadequate Representation in the Central Executive. 

3. Absence of Representation in the Public Services. 

4. Absence of Representation on the Federal Public Services 
Commission. 

Part II. Educational Grievances 

5. Want of Aid for University and for Advanced Education. 

6. Want of Facilities for Technical Training. 

Part III. Other Grievances 

7. Untouchables and Government Publicity. 

8. Untouchables and Government Contracts. 

Part IV. Duty of Government towards Distressed people. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


406 


PART I 

POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 

I. Inadequate Representation in the Central Legislature 

1. As at present constituted the Central Assembly consists 
of 141 members. Of these 102 are elected and 39 nominated. Of 
the nominated members 19 are non-Officials and 20 are Officials. 
Of this total of 141 there are two who belong to the Scheduled 
Castes. Consider as against this the population of the Scheduled 
Castes. The census in India has become a political affair; and the 
Hindus, Muslims and the Sikhs have been attempting to cook up 
the census so as to show a rise in their numbers. This is done 
mostly at the cost of the untouchables. It is therefore difficult to 
get a correct figure of their population. Whatever estimate the 
census gives, it is bound to be an underestimate. However, taking 
the figure of 40 millions which is the figure given in the census 
of 1940 there can be no doubt that the representation of the 
Scheduled Castes in the central Legislature is ridiculously low. 

2. To make the position clear, I give below two tables which 
have a bearing on this question : 

TABLE No. 1 

Population in British India 


Communities 

Total 

Order of 

Percentage 


of each 

importance 

to total 


community 

in terms of 

population 


in 1941 

population 


1 

2 

3 

4 

Total 

295,808,722 



Hindus 

150,890,146 

1 

50.0 

Muslims 

79,398,503 

2 

23.6 

Scheduled Castes 

39,920,807 

3 

13.5 

Tribal 

16,713,256 

4 

5.7 

Sikhs 

4,165,097 

5 

1.3 

Indian Christians 

3,245,706 

6 

1.0 

Europeans 

122,788 

7 


Anglo-Indians 

113,936 

8 


Parsis 

101,968 

9 


Note . — In this table only the 

population of those 

communities 

whose position is 


relevant to the purpose of this Memorandum is given. 


Communal Composition of the Central Assembly 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


407 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 


407 


be u 

d CD 

rs 


0 


o « 


o 


U0 

00 

CO 



d 

CO 

CO 

d 



CO 





cc 

W) 

.9 j§ 

3 fl 


0 


0 


H o 


o 

Eh 


GO 

T sl H 


°o 

d 


cq 

d 


GO 

CD 




0 

.9 I 

o * 

£ 


0 

Plh 


o 

£ 


o 

(N 


o u3 

£ 


£ 

o 

£ 


0 

PLh 


o 

£ 


IQ 

o 


io 

o 




W 


o 

£ 


£ 

3 

a 

a 

o 

O 


Oi 

uo : 

: oo 


co • 

: t> 

LO 

CO 



CD 

LO 


CO 


£ 

£ 


n£ 


c<3 

Ph 


£ 


43 

O 

£ 

a 

"d 

S3 


3 

.a 

^3 

o 

Ti) 


oj 

o 

0 

'd 

0 

43 

0 

m 


(N 

O 


O 

Eh 


3 

o3 

0 

o3 

> 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


408 


408 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

3. This table thorws a flood of light on the extent of 
representation which the different communities in the Central 
Legislature have at present. Figures in column 5 give the total 
representation each community has, with the percentage ratio 
for some of them. I do not, however, wish to lay stress on them. 
They include figure for Nominated Officials. They are intended 
primarily to represent Government and not the communities to 
whom they belong. Secondly, the communal composition of the 
Nominated Official Block is variable and not fixed. But I do wish 
to invite attention to figures in other columns. I will begin with 
column 6. It gives the total extent of the representation which 
different communities have secured through election as well as 
nomination. More striking are the figures given in column 3. 
It shows that the Hindus have been allowed 54.9% by election. 
In addition they are given 21% out of the quota reserved for 
nomination. The Muslims have got 33.5% by election. This is 
great deal in excess of what they are entitled to on the basis of 
their population. In addition they are allowed the benefit of 37% 
out of the quota reserved for nomination. The same is the case 
with the Sikhs and the Parsis. Both of them have representation 
through election much beyond what their numbers would justify. 
Yet each is allowed to have the benefit of 10.5% out of the quota 
for nomination. As against this, there is the naked fact that the 
Scheduled Castes who number 40 millions and who form the 
third largest community in India have no scat by election, and 
only one by nomination. 

4. Given these facts two comments become quite in order. 
In the first place, the Legislature is quite an unbalanced body. 
It suffers from both the evils from over-representation of some 
communities and under-representation of other communities. 
The evil exists in its most aggravated form. For the over- 
representation is of communities which are strong and powerful, 
and the under-representation is of communities which are weak 
and poor. The second comment relates to the wrong use of the 
power of nomination. The power of nomination was reserved 
under the Constitution to rectify the inequalities of representation. 
To put it in different language, it was intended to give these 
communities, which did not secure enough representation, by 
election, sufficient representation through nomination. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


409 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 409 

There is no principle which seems to govern either the election 
or the nomination in so far as they relate to the composition of 
the central Legislature. If at all there is any principle, it is to 
give Peter more than Paul and then to rob Paul who has almost 
nothing to enrich Peter who has almost everything. 

5. There is no justification for so grave a wrong done to the 
Scheduled Castes in the matter of representation. In a legislature 
in which the Muslims and the Hindus are waging a war against 
each other for rights and privileges and in which both are careful 
not to lose anything to a third party like the Scheduled Castes 
what support can a single representative of the Scheduled Caste 
in a House of 141 get in his right for the rights of the Scheduled 
Castes ? It was the view of the Southborough Committee, on the 
recommendations of which the present structure of the Central 
Legislature is reared, that the nominated officials may be expected 
to bear in mind the interests of the Scheduled Castes. It is a 
matter of some considerable interest that the then Government 
of India refused to accept this view. In their Despatch on the 
Report of the Southborough Committee, the Government of India 
said : — 

“But that arrangement is not, in our opinion, what the 
(Montague-Chelmsford) Report on Reforms aims at. The authors 
staled that the Depressed Classes should also learn the lesson of 
self-protection. It is surely fanciful to hope that this result can 
be expected from including a single member of the community 
in an assembly where there are 60 to 90 Caste Hindus. To make 
good the principles of paras 151, 152 and 155 of the Report we 
must treat the outcastes more generously ” 

Unfortunately no generosity was shown by the Government 
of India to the Scheduled Castes in making its proposal for the 
composition of the Central Legislative Assembly. They gave them 
one scat by nomination, and it has continued to be one since 1921. 

6. The result of this meagre representation has been quite 
deplorable. A single representative of the scheduled castes in 
an Assembly of 141 cannot but feel the utter helplessness of 
his position. He has to contend against a vast volume of anti- 
Scheduled Caste prejudices arising from the Hindu side of 
the House. He cannot depend upon the support either of the 
Muslim block who are lighting their battle to advance their 
interests. Nor can he depend upon the Official Block which 
has been more careful to preserve its good relations with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


410 


410 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the major Hindu and Muslim blocks than to support the just 
interests of the Scheduled Castes. It is not even possible 
for the single and solitary representative of the Scheduled 
Castes in the assembly to ventilate the grievances of the 
Scheduled Castes. I am informed that under the rules made 
by the President of the Legislative Assembly, the President 
gives the first chance to speak to those Hon’ble members 
who belong to a recognised party. I also understand that 
the President does not recognise a party unless it has 
the minimum strength of ten members. This means that 
ordinarily the representative of the Scheduled Castes has no 
chance of speaking in the House unless he chooses to join 
a party. For a representative of the Scheduled Castes to be 
faced with this kind of situation is not a very happy thing. 
To join a party means for him to subordinate the interests 
of the Scheduled Castes to that of a party, the principles 
and interests of which may be quite inconsistent with the 
principles and interests of the Scheduled Castes. On the 
other hand, not to join a party means to lose altogether the 
right to speak. If one may refer to what happened in the 
Assembly session (September 1942) in the debate that took 
place on the present political situation in India, the Hon’ble 
Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj, the representative of the Scheduled 
Castes in the Central Assembly, found it difficult to obtain a 
chance to speak on behalf of the Scheduled Castes, although 
5 or 6 Muslim members could easily speak for the Muslims. 

7. It is, therefore, greatly necessary that the representation 
of the Scheduled Castes in the Assembly should be augmented. 
Of course this can be done only when vacancies occur in 
nominated non-official seals. When they do occur, justice 
requires that such vacancies should go to increase the 
representation of the Scheduled Castes in the Assembly. 

II. Inadequate representation in the Central Executive 

8. The Government of India has been very tardy 
in recognising the right of the Scheduled Castes for 
representation in the Central Executive. This has been a very 
sure point with the Scheduled Castes. For they hold that 
whatever may have been their political status in the past, 
since the Round Table Conference their political status had 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


411 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 411 

become equal to the status of that of the Muslims, and if the 
Muslims have a right to representation in the Central Executive, 
so have the Scheduled Castes. There is no doubt that their 
contention is well founded. At the Round Table Conference it 
was the demand of the Scheduled Castes, and not merely of the 
Muslims, that provision for the adequate representation of the 
Scheduled Castes should be made by law. The Hindu point of view 
was not opposed to this demand. All that the Hindus said was 
that it should be left to convention. Ultimately a compromise was 
arrived at and it was agreed that the Instrument of Instructions 
to the Governors of the Provinces and the Governor- General of 
India should contain a specific clause imposing upon them the 
obligation to endeavour to include representatives of important 
minority communities. Although the communities were not 
specified, there could be no doubt that the phrase “important 
minorities” was intended to include the Scheduled Castes. At 
long last the Government of India has recognised this obligation 
to give representation to the Scheduled Castes in the Cabinet. 

9. It must, however, be said that this delay in the recognition 
of their right has lost much of its virtue by reason of the delay 
and has not removed this grievance. For the Scheduled Castes 
feel that their representation in the cabinet is very inadequate. 
In a Cabinet of 15, there is only 1 Member of the Scheduled 
Castes while the Muslims have 3 Members. The grievances 
arise by reason of the great contrast between the representation 
granted to the various communities and their needs and their 
numbers. If population alone was the criterion there is no doubt 
that the Scheduled Castes are very near to the Muslims in the 
matter of population. It is therefore only fair to say that if the 
Muslims have three, the Scheduled Castes should at least have 
two in a Cabinet of fifteen. As it is, the communal formation 
of the Cabinet seems to be governed by no principle. The Sikhs 
who number only millions and the Untouchables who number 
40 millions are placed on the same footing. 

10. The position of the Scheduled Castes in Indian 
politics needs a great deal of stabilization, and there can be 
no doubt that the only effective remedy of stabilizing their 
position in Indian politics is to give them representation 
in the Cabinet which is demanded by their numbers and 
their needs. I am sure I am not disclosing any secrets 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


412 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


when I say that in the course of the interview that I had with 
Sir Stafford Cripps when he came to India he told me that one 
of the principal objects of His Majesty’s Government was to 
stabilize the position of the Scheduled Castes by their inclusion 
in the Central Executive which was to be formed during the 
interim period, so that the Constituent Assembly which under 
his proposals was to meet to draft the new constitution will find 
their positions established beyond challenge. I request that this 
policy should be given effect to when the next step in the direction 
of the Indianization of the Executive Council takes place. 

III. Absence of representation in the Public Services 

11. No greater injustice has been done to the Scheduled Castes 
than in the matter of their employment in Public Services. Having 
regard to the scope of this Memorandum I can deal only with 
those Services with which the Central Government is particularly 
concerned. They fall into two classes : — 

(a) The I. C. S. 

(b) The Central Services — 

(i) Those recruited on an all-India basis, and 
(ii) those recruited locally. 

12. Any one who examines the communal composition of 
these services can have no manner of doubt that the Scheduled 
Castes have been rigorously excluded from both these Services. 
To give an idea of the rigorous exclusion of the Scheduled Castes 
from these Services, I like to present the following facts. I will 
first lake the position as it stands in the Indian Civil Service. 
The communal composition of the I.C.S. as it stands at present 
(1942) is as follows : — 

Communal Composition of the I.C.S. 


Community 

1. Europeans 

2. Hindus 

3. Muslims 

4. Indian Christians 

5. Anglo-Indians 

6. Parsis 

7. Sikhs 

8. Scheduled Castes 

9. Others 


Number in the I.C.S. 
488 
363 
109 
23 
9 
9 
11 
1 
43 


Total 


1,056 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


413 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 413 

Out of 1,056 men in the I.C.S. there is only 1 from the Scheduled 
Castes. Such is the state of affairs so far as the I.C.S. is concerned. 

In the matter of their recruitment to the central services the 
condition of the Scheduled Castes is equally bad. I do not propose 
to quote any figures. It is quite unnecessary to overburden this 
Memorandum with facts. For there is a clear admission on the 
part of the Home Department of the Government of India relating 
to this question. In one of their Office Memoranda relating to the 
recruitment of the different communities the Home Department 
say : — 

“This Department are much concerned at the almost total lack of 

progress in the recruitment of the members of the Depressed Classes 

as revealed by the information available.” 

The Memorandum from which the above statement is quoted is 
No. 4/5/38 Ests (s) and is dated 1st June 1939 and records a state 
of affairs as it existed on that date. 

13. How is it that other communities have found a place in 
the services controlled by the Government of India ? What are 
the reasons for the exclusion of the Scheduled Castes ? As will be 
seen the reasons are to be found in the difference in the principles 
and methods for securing communal representation which the 
Government of India has adopted towards the Scheduled Castes 
and the other minority communities in India. 

14. The principle of communal representation in the services 
centrally controlled came into operation in 1925 when the 
Government of India accepted a Resolution of Mr. Nair on the 
need of Communal Representation in Public Services moved in the 
Central Assembly on 10th March 1923 in which he complained that 
the Public Service was entirely monopolized by the Hindus, and 
particularly by the Brahmins, and that the other communities had 
found it extremely difficult to secure a footing. In pursuance of this 
Resolution the method adopted by the Government of India was to 
reserve one-third of all permanent vacancies for direct recruitment 
for the redress of communal inequalities. 

15. This method of giving effect to the policy of Communal 
Representation in Public Services did not satisfy the non-Hindu 
communities. The matter was taken up at the Round Table 
Conference and a demand was made for devising a more effective 
method of gaining the object. This demand was accepted by the 
Secretary of State and by the Government of India and given effect to 
in Home Department Resolution No. F. 14-17-8-33 of 4th July 1934. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


414 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

16. It is this resolution which is now in operation and 
constitutes the Magna Charta securing justice to all communities 
in the Public Services of the country. A reference to the provisions 
of this Resolution is very necessary. It will show why the other 
minority communities have been so well represented in the Public 
Services and why the Scheduled Castes have not been represented 
at all. The Resolution has two fundamental provisions and which, 
as compared with the old resolution of 1923, are quite new : — 

(1) It declares what communities are to be treated as minorities 
for the purposes of recruitment to Public Services; 

(2) It defines a fixed proportion of annual vacancies which are 
to be allotted to the communities declared as minorities. 

17. These are the provisions laid down by the Resolution of 
1934 for securing representation to the various communities. 
Coming to particulars the Resolution in the first place defines 
the following communities as minorities : — 

(1) Muslims, (2) Anglo-Indians, (3) Indian Christians, (4) 
Sikhs, (5) Parsis. 

In the second place, the Resolution fixes the following 
proportion of annual vacancies to be filled by members belonging 
to the above mentioned minorities. 

Proportions fixed by the Resolution of 4th July 1934 


SERVICES 


Minorities 

I.C.S. 

Central and 

Subordinate 

Services 

Recruited 

on All-India 

Basis 

Railways 

and 

Customs 

Posts 

and 

Tele- 

graphs 

Appraising 

Department 

and 

Preventive 

Services 

Muslims 

25% 

25% 

25% 

This service is excluded 

Anglo-Indians 


8% 

5% 

from the operation of the 
Resolution, apparantly 

Indian Christians 

*8X% 

6% 

3%% 

to reserve recruitment 

Sikhs 

Parsis 




for Anglo-Indians only 
on the ground that the 
Service re-quires special 
qualifications. 


*Note . — Para 7 (iii) of the said Resolution says — If communities obtain less than their 
reserved percentage and duly qualified candidates are not available, the residue of 
8 7% will be available for Muslims. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


415 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 415 

18. What is the provision which this resolution makes to 
safeguard the position of the Scheduled Castes ? I give below 
the two relevant provisions of the Resolution. In paragraph 3 
the Resolution states that: — 

“No useful purpose will be served by reserving for them 
(Depressed Classes) a definite percentage of vacancies out of the 
number available for Hindus as a whole, but they hope to ensure 
that duly qualified candidates from the Depressed Classes are 
not deprived of fair opportunities of appointment. 

The way in which Government hoped to ensure to the 
Scheduled Castes a fair share of representation in the Public 
Services is specified in para 7(l)(vi) of the Resolution, which 
reads as follows : — 

“In order to secure fair representation for the Depressed 
Classes duly qualified members of these classes may be nominated 
to a Public Service even though recruitment to that service is 
being made by competition”. 

A persual of these proposals brings out two facts : — 

(i) The Resolution does not declare the Scheduled Castes to 
be a minority. 

(ii) The Resolution does not allot to the Scheduled Castes any 
fixed proportion of the annual vacancies. 

It goes without saying that there is a striking contrast 
between the provisions made by the Government of India for 
securing the recruitment of the Scheduled Castes and for the 
other minor communities to the Public Services. This contrast 
can be expressed in one sentence. The recruitment of the other 
communities is owing to the Resolution, not left to be a matter 
of discretion. It has been made a matter of obligation. The 
recruiting authority must fill in vacancy by recruiting a person, 
belonging to the community for which the vacancy is reserved. 
The recruitment of the Scheduled Castes on the other hand has 
been made a mere matter of discretion. The recruiting authority 
may fill an unreserved vacancy by appointing a person from the 
Scheduled Castes. 

19. It is owing to this difference between must and 
may that the Muslims and other communities have 
been so well represented in the Public Services and the 
Scheduled castes so completely excluded. No belter result 
is possible so long as the Government of India leaves 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


416 


416 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the matter of recruitment of the Scheduled Castes in public 
services to the discretion and goodwill of the appointing officers. 
These officers are either Europeans, Hindus or Muslims. The 
European is blissfully ignorant of the Scheduled Castes, and he 
has never made the protection of the interests of the Scheduled 
Castes his special concern. So long as his general authority is 
maintained he is prepared to follow the advice of his Hindu or 
Muslim subordinates. The Muslims are naturally striving to 
strengthen their own position. They are concerned to see that 
as many vacancies as possible should go to the Muslims : at any 
rate all those which are reserved to them. The Hindus who had 
so far the monopoly in the public service and who never know 
how to share the good things of life with others want to keep 
the balance to themselves. With their self-interest combined with 
their age-old prejudices against the Scheduled Castes the Hindus 
will never be fair to them. It is a sheer delusion to leave to the 
discretion of such officers the question of the recruitment of the 
Scheduled Castes and to hope that the Scheduled Castes will as 
a result of it secure a fair share of representation. 

20. The question of entry into the Public Service is an 
important question for all minority communities. But to the 
Scheduled Castes it is a vital question, a question of life and 
death. There are many reasons why this must be so. In the 
first place, it is a question of opening up a career for youngmen 
from the Scheduled Castes. This is an aspect of the question 
which the Scheduled Castes, and even the Government of India, 
cannot ignore. Trade and Industry, as openings for a career, are 
all blocked to youngmen of the Scheduled Castes. It is only in 
Government service that they can find a career. While this is 
an important aspect, it is not the only aspect which makes this 
question so vital. For there is another aspect which is calculated 
to invest it with such importance. That aspect relates to the effect 
which the bestowal of Government patronage has in encouraging 
the spread of education in a community. The case of the Hindu 
community is quite in point. The rapid progress which the Hindu 
community has made is of course very striking. But it is very 
seldom realized that the reason why education has taken such 
deep root in the Hindu society is entirely due to the assurance 
that education opens up a career by entry in Government 
service. Such assurance of career is absolutely necessary 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


417 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 417 

in the case of the Scheduled Castes who are so backward in 
education. There is a third argument far more weighty that the 
two which have been referred to above. It relates to the interest 
of the general population of the Scheduled Caste people as 
distinguished from the interests of the educated classes from the 
Scheduled Castes. This will be clear if it is realised how important 
public administration is from the point of view of public welfare. 
In the first place, power of administration now-a-days includes 
the power to legislate. No Statute in modern days is complete 
and exhaustive. Most allow the administration the statutory 
power to make rules to carry into effect the purposes of the Act. 
Secondly, whether the law is beneficial or not depends upon how 
efficaciously and how justly it is carried out. Good administration 
is therefore far more important than good laws. Good laws may 
prove of no avail if the administration is bad. Administration 
is therefore a vital question for the Scheduled Castes who are 
more interested in good administration than in good laws. Is 
the present administration good administration ? What do the 
Scheduled Castes think of the present day administration? 
There can be no doubt that the view universally held is that 
the whole administration is hostile, unjust, and perverse in its 
attitude towards the Scheduled Castes all over India. Indeed 
much of the suffering and harassment of the Scheduled Caste 
population arises from the fact that the discretion vested in public 
servants is in almost all cases exercised against the interests 
of the Scheduled Castes and with the object of keeping them 
down. This is as it must be given the mentality of the Hindu 
and Muslim officers, towards the Scheduled Castes. This will 
continue to be so as long as the personnel of the administration 
is drawn from classes who have been opposed to the Scheduled 
Castes and who believe in their suppression. There cannot be a 
more powerful argument than that of the advantage and welfare 
of the general population of the Scheduled Castes to show that 
the entry of the Scheduled Castes in the Public Service must be 
regarded as a most vital consideration. 

21. Certain facts are beyond doubt. The source of 
mischief is evident. How vital is the service interest of the 
Scheduled Castes is also clear. How serious is the mischief 
done to this vital interest by the discrimination which 
Government has in its resolution of 4th July, 1934 made 
against the Scheduled Castes as compared with the other 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


418 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

communities nobody can dispute. How disastrous have been the 
consequences to the Scheduled Castes will be apparent from the 
figures given in the following table relating to the communal 
composition to the I.C.S. : — 

TABLE III 

Communal Proportion in the I.C.S. in 1942 


Percentage of Percentage of 

Total of Total of 



Community 

Total 1056 

including 

Europeans 

568 

excluding 

Europeans 

1 . 

Europeans 

488 

42.4 


2. 

Hindus 

363 

34.4 

63.2 

3. 

Muslims 

109 

10.3 

19.2 

4. 

Indian Christians 

23 

2.2 

4.0 

5. 

Anglo-Indians 

9 

.9 

1.5 

6. 

Parsis 

9 

.9 

1.5 

7. 

Sikhs 

11 

1.0 

2.0 

8. 

Scheduled Castes 

1 

Nil 

Nil 

9. 

Others 

43 

3.9 

8.0 


Total ... 

1,056 





TABLE IV 




I.C.S. through Competition and Nomination 


Community 

Through 

Competition 

Through 

t I otal 

Nomination 

1. 

Europeans 

336 

152 

488 

2. 

Hindus 

332 

31 

363 

3. 

Muslims 

35 

74 

109 

4. 

Indian Christians 

19 

4 

23 

5. 

Anglo Indians 

8 

1 

9 

6. 

Parsis 

8 

1 

9 

7. 

Sikhs 

5 

6 

11 

8. 

Scheduled Castes 


1 

1 

9. 

Others 

28 

15 

43 


771 285 1,056 


Total ... 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


419 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 419 


TABLE V 

Population Ratio as Compared with Ratio in the I.C.S. 


Community 

Actual Ratio 
in the I.C.S. 
excluding 
Europeans 

Population 

Ratio 

Excess + 
Defficiency — 
of Service 
Ratio as 
compared with 
Population 
Ratio 

1. 

Hindus 

63.2 

50.0 

+ 13.2 

2. 

Muslims 

19.2 

23.6 

— 4.4 

3. 

Indian Christians 

4.0 

1.0 

+ 3.0 

4. 

Anglo-Indians 

1.5 

.03 

+ 1.47 

5. 

Parsis 

1.5 

0.3 

+ 1.47 

6. 

Sikhs 

2.0 

1.3 

+ 0.7 

7. 

Scheduled Castes 


13.5 

-13.5 

8. 

Others 

8.0 




22. From these tables the following conclusions stand out as 
incontrovertible facts: — 


(1) All communities have made a fair degree of progress towards 
getting their apportioned share of representation in the 
I.C.S. The only exception is the unfortunate community of 
the Scheduled Castes who have made no progress at all. 

(2) Some communities have secured a degree of representation 
in the I.C.S. much in excess of their population ratio. This 
is noticeable in the case of the Hindus. Excluding the 
share of the Europeans which is 50% and which must be 
excluded for comparing the relative position of the Indians 
the Hindus have got 63% of the I.C.S. appointments when 
the ratio of their population to the total population is only 
50%. They are enjoying an excess of 13%. 

(3) Nomination was intended only to correct the inequities of 
competition. Yet some communities have been given the 
benefit of nomination although it has been able to secure 
a very large of the I.C.S. appointments by competition 
and who do not need and cannot claim the benefit of 
nomination. This is undoubtedly the case with the Hindus. 
Between 1920-1942 the Hindus were able to secure 332 out 
of 435 that were filled by Indians by competition, and yet 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


420 


420 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

they were given 31 seats by nomination. The Muslims got 
only 35 appointments to the I.C.S. by competition between 
1920-1942. But they were given 74 by nomination. The Sikhs 
have got only 5 by competition. But they got 6 by nomination. 
The Scheduled Castes who got none by competition get 
only one by nomination. All this shows how the position 
of the Scheduled Castes has remained deplorable and how 
Government which is striving to be considerate to other 
communities by not even trying to be correct towards the 
Scheduled Castes, is responsible for this result. 

23. The condition of the Scheduled Castes is not only deplorable, 
but it is also intolerable. This is the result of the present policy of 
the Government of India under which the quantum of recruitment 
of the Scheduled Castes in the Public Services instead of fixed by 
rule as is done in the case of the other minorities is left to the 
discretion of the appointing authorities. The appointing authorities 
are mostly caste Hindus and it is not possible to expect them 
to give the benefit of this discretion to the Scheduled Castes. I 
have no doubt that the interests of the Scheduled Castes will 
continue to be neglected and sacrificed to serve the interests of 
other communities so long as the present system continues. The 
Government of India should without further delay equalize the 
position of the Scheduled Castes and — 

(1) declare that they are a minority for the purpose of services 
like the other communities. 

(2) fix 1314% as the proportion of annual vacancies in the 
I.C.S. and both in the Central Services that are recruited 
on an all India basis and that are recruited locally as the 
share to which they are entitled and which in equity and 
justice should be reserved for them. Unless this is done the 
Scheduled Castes will never get their due share in Public 
Services. 

24. The difficulty lies in the Scheduled Castes not being 
declared a minority. It is essential that this obstacle in their 
way be removed. The reason is that under the resolution of 
4th July 1934 it is only when a community is declared to be a 
minority that it becomes entitled to the benefit of reservation 
in the Public Services. A community as such does not get any 
such benefit. It is difficult to see what objection there can be 
to a declaration that the Scheduled Castes are a minority. The 
term minority is a political term and whatever may be its de jure 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


421 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 421 

definition its de facto definition can never be in doubt. The 
matter is settled by the terms of Communal Award so that any 
community which is covered by the Communal Award of His 
Majesty’s Government must be held to be a minority. Indeed 
that is the basis on which the Government of India could declare 
that the Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, and Anglo-Indians 
are minorities. If these communities are minorities and they are 
minorities because they are covered by the Communal Award — 
then it is difficult to see how the claim of the Scheduled Castes 
to be declared a Minority be denied. For they too are covered by 
the same Award. Secondly, if Government is bound to declare 
them a minority then it follows as a natural consequence that 
Government is bound to define their share in the services and 
make it available by the same means and methods by which 
the share of other communities has been secured to them. Nor 
can anybody oppose the quantum of share to which they are 
entitled as the legitimate share of the Scheduled Castes. It has 
been shown that their population in British India is 13.6% and 
nothing more than a share of 13.6% in the services is claimed for 
them. This cannot injure the Hindus, for their population is 50% 
and they are geting 63% which is 13% more than is their due. 

25. The opposition to this claim of the Scheduled Castes 
comes from very strange and unexpected quarters. It should 
come from the Hindus. But it cannot. The mutual rights of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Hindus are defined by the 
Poona Pact which was made in 1932. It is an agreement by 
which the Hindus have accepted that the Scheduled Castes 
are a minority and that they are entitled to adequate share 
in the Public services of the Country. It is true that the term 
‘adequate’ was not given a quantitative expression. That is 
because it was done in a hurry to save Mr. Gandhi from the 
hands of death. But there can be no doubt that ‘adequate’ was 
never intended to be anything less than the population ratio. 
The Hindus therefore cannot oppose the claim of the Scheduled 
Castes and, as a matter of fact, they do not. The party opposing 
the claim of the Scheduled Castes is the Government of India 
and nobody else. In the debate on the question that took place 
in the Central Legislative Assembly on March 1942 on a cut 
motion by Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj, M.L.A. the claim of the 
Scheduled Castes for being declared a minority and for defining 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


422 


422 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their share in services which was the subject matter of the Motion 
was supported by the Muslims, by the Europeans, Anglo-Indians 
and Sikhs. Except for one solitary individual, the Hindus did 
not oppose it. It was, however, opposed by the spokesmen of the 
Government of India. This is the most tragic part of the story. 
The Government of India have said that they were trustees for 
the welfare of the Scheduled Castes. As trustees, they should be 
more ready to safeguard the rights of the Scheduled Castes than 
to safeguard the rights of the other minorities. There would have 
been some excuse for the Government of India hesitating to allot 
to the Scheduled Castes their rights in the matter of recruitment 
to the Public Services if there was any obstacle placed in their 
way by the Hindus. But there is no such excuse. Would it be 
wrong if it was said that the enemies of the Scheduled Castes 
are not the Hindus and that their real enemy is the Government 
of India ? 

26. What is the reason which the Government of India gives for 
opposing the claim of the Scheduled Castes ? So far as the speech 
of the Hon’ble the Home Member made on the motion moved by 
the Hon’ble Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj M.L.A., is an indication, the 
reason is that there are not enough educated men among the 
Scheduled Castes. It must be said that this is by no means a 
convincing reason. In the first place, this is the old reason given 
in 1934 in paragraph 3 of the Resolution. It takes no account 
of the progress that has been made during the last 8 years. In 
the second place, the statement was not true even for 1934. For 
1942 it will be gross misstatement. As a matter of fact a census 
of college students of the Scheduled Castes was taken privately 
in about 1939-40, and the total number of graduates among the 
Scheduled Castes were found to number about 400 to 500. In the 
third place, this fact even if it were true cannot be a bar against 
declaring the Scheduled Castes a minority and against fixing 
their proportion. For if the Scheduled Castes candidates with 
minimum qualification fall short in any one year of the annual 
proportion of vacancies reserved for them no body will be hurt 
because the unused vacancies will go to the Hindus. The difficulty 
anticipated by the Home Member cannot be said to arise only in 
the case of the Scheduled Castes. The condition of other minorities 
is not free from giving rise to the same difficulty. In fact when 
the government issued the resolution in 1934 they felt that such 
a difficulty might arise in their case also. But this did not stop 
Government from declaring them to be minorities and fixing their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


423 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 423 

proportion. Government did declare them to be minorities and also 
fixed their proportion, and for the difficulty that duly qualified 
candidates may in any given year be less than the vacancies reserved, 
Government provided by paragraph 7(1) (iii) of the resolution that 
the residue of the vacancies will be available for the Muslims. 

27. Surely the difficulties which can be overcome successfully 
in the case of the other minorities cannot be followed to stand in 
the way of the Scheduled Castes. If Government docs that, it will 
be guilty of unjustly-defeating the just claims of the Scheduled 
Castes. It will be accused of using grounds which are not reasons 
but which are only excuses for sustaining its opposition to the 
claims of the Scheduled Castes. 

28. Besides the two remedies suggested, namely (1) declaring 
them a minority and (2) fixing their proportion in the annual 
vacancies, it will be necessary to sanction other remedies to the 
Scheduled Castes for securing to them their fair share in the 
services. They are : 

(1) Raising the Age bar, 

(2) Reduction in examination fees, and 

(3) Appointment of a Scheduled Caste officer to see that the 
provisions made in the interests of the Scheduled Castes in 
this behalf are carried by all Departments concerned. 

(1) Raising the Age Bar 

29. Under the present rules for the I. C. S. and the Central 
Services the maximum age limit is 24. Generally this maximum 
age limit hits the Scheduled Castes very hard. For owing to their 
extreme poverty it is not possible for the Scheduled Caste boy to 
reach that level of education which will enable him to compete with 
students from higher and well-to-do classes within the age limit. 
The children of the former have to suffer many breaks in their 
educational career and have no facilities at home cither for tuition 
or even for study. The latter have all the facilities for rapid and 
continuous progress. Consequently the children of the Scheduled 
Castes by the time they reach the final stage of their education and 
are in a position to compete they become ineligible on account of 
age for recruitment in the Public Service. It is therefore, necessary 
to raise the age limit by at least 3 years. There is nothing very 
unreasonable in this demand and there will be nothing extraordinary 
if it was conceded by Government of India. In almost all Provincial 
Governments where a proportion in the services has been 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


424 


424 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

reserved this concession has been made and the age limit for the 
Scheduled Castes has been fixed at a pitch higher than what 
is fixed for others. In some Provinces the difference is of 2 and 
in some provinces it is of 3 years. In granting this concession 
the Government of India will be following a well established 
principle. 

(2) Reduction in Examination Fees 

30. The I.C.S. Examination fee is Rs. 100/-, the Examination 
fee for the Indian Audit and Accounts Service is Rs. 82/8/-, and 
for other Ministerial services Examination (Assistant’s Grade) 
the fee is Rs. 30/-. These fees are too heavy for the Scheduled 
Castes. They are really and truly a great handicap. Many a 
Scheduled Caste student after having spent time and energy in 
qualifying for an examination finds it difficult to appear at it 
because the fees for the examination are beyond the means of 
their parents. This handicap needs to be removed. It is urged 
that the Scheduled Caste candidates should not be charged more 
than one-fourth of the fees chargeable for these examinations. 

(3) Scheduled Caste Officer 

31. These two concessions if allowed will go a long way to 
assist the community of Scheduled Castes to compete on more 
equal terms with its competitors. But the assistance rendered 
by these steps will not be adequate. Something further must 
be done. That is, to appoint a Scheduled Caste Officer in the 
Government of India cither in the Home Department or Labour 
Department whose duty it will be to see that effect is given to 
the claims of the Scheduled Castes in the matter of their entry 
in the Public Services. It is understood that such officers were at 
one time appointed by the Government of India in order to see 
that the rules framed by Government in the matter of communal 
representation in services were strictly followed. But even if 
that be not the case the necessity and urgency of appointing a 
Scheduled Castes Officer for protecting the service claims of the 
Scheduled Castes is beyond question. There is a great danger 
of such rules being set at naught as a result of the prejudices 
prevailing against the Scheduled Castes unless there was an 
officer charged with the duty of dealing with such cases. The 
only remedy is to have an independent officer charged with the 
duty to see that the rules are carried out. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


425 


POLITICAL GRIEVANCES 425 

IV. Absence of representation of the Federal Public Service 
Commission 

32. There are four members who at present constitute the 
Federal Public Service Commission. Of these, two are Europeans, 
one is a Hindu and one is a Mohamedan. The Scheduled Castes 
have been left out in framing the composition of the Federal 
Public Service Commission. There is no ground why they should be 
denied representation on the Federal Public Service Commission. 
There are three main sections of the people in India. Of these the 
Scheduled Castes form the third main section. The population of 
this section is measured in millions. Their interest in the service 
question is quite as important as those of the other two main 
sections of the populations. The danger to their interests is no 
less real than to the interests of the other two sections. And the 
necessity of warding off that danger is much greater than it is 
in the case of the other two. Judged by any test it is difficult to 
justify the refusal to give representation to the Scheduled Castes 
from the Federal Public Service Commission. The Federal Public 
Service Commission has definitely been given communal character. 
There can be only two conceivable reasons for doing this. In the 
first place it may be because it is desirable to have representatives 
of large sections of the people on the Commission. The second 
reason one can conceive of for giving communal composition to the 
Commission is to set off the communal bias of one community by 
the communal bias of the other community. Whichever way one 
looks at it, the omission to give representation to the Scheduled 
Castes on the Federal Public Service Commission is sheer 
injustice. The Scheduled Castes cannot have any confidence in 
a Public Service Commission which is infected by the point of 
view of the Hindus and the Muslims who with all their quarrels 
can very easily unite to distribute the loaves and fishes among 
themselves and to keep out the Scheduled Castes from getting 
their due share. It is difficult to prove that the Commission has 
been unjust to the Scheduled Castes though the fact remains that 
not a single Scheduled Caste candidate has so far been certified 
by the Commission to be fit. For no Commission can be convicted 
of partiality. It is open to every Commission to take shelter under 
that most elusive term “unsuitable”. That tern far from giving 
an explanation is intended to cover a multitude of sins. Justice 
requires that the Scheduled Castes should get representation on 
the Federal Public Service Commission which is their due. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


426 


PART II 

EDUCATIONAL GRIEVANCES 

V. Want of Assistance for Advanced Education 

33. Looking at the growth of Advanced Education among the 
Scheduled Caste boys, the following conclusions are deducible : — 

(1) That education in Arts and Law is progressing 
satisfactorily. 

(2) That education in Science and Engineering has made 
no progress. 

(3) That Advanced Education in foreign Universities is a 
very far cry. 

34. This sad situation needs to be properly appreciated. As 
was said in discussing the question of the entry of the Scheduled 
Castes in the public services the welfare of the Scheduled Castes 
depends entirely upon a sympathetic public service and that the 
public service if it is to be sympathetic must be representative 
of the different elements in the national life of the country, and 
particularly of the Scheduled Castes. To this it must be added 
that the representation of the Scheduled Castes if it is confined 
to ministerial posts will be of no consequence no matter how 
numerous are the posts they are permitted to occupy. This may 
be good from the standpoint of providing a career for educated 
young men. It cannot affect the condition of the Scheduled 
Castes. The status and condition of the Scheduled Castes will 
be improved only when the representatives of the Scheduled 
Castes come to occupy executive posts as distinguished from 
ministerial posts. Executive posts are strategic posts, posts 
from which a new direction can be given to the affairs of the 
State. The attainment of executive post it is obvious requires 
a high degree of education. Such posts will not be open except 
to those who have acquired advanced education. 

35. Education in Arts and Law cannot be of much 
value to the Scheduled Castes either to the graduates 
themselves or to the people. It has not been of very high 
value even to Hindus. What will help the Scheduled 
Castes is education of an advanced type in Science and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


427 


EDUCATIONAL GRIEVANCES 


427 


Technology. But it is obvious that education in Science and 
Technology is beyond the means of the Scheduled Castes and 
this is why so many of them send their children to take up 
courses in Arts and Law. Without Government assistance, the 
field of Advanced Education in Science and Technology will 
never become open to the Scheduled Castes, and it is only just 
and proper that the Central Government should come forward 
to aid them in this connection. 

36. This problem will be solved if the following proposals are 
accepted by the Government of India : — 

(1) An annual grant of Rs. 2 lakhs for scholarships for 
Scheduled Caste students taking science and Technology 
courses tenable at the Universities or other Scientific and 
Technical Training Institutions in India. 

(2) An annual grant of one lakh of rupees to be spent on 
scholarships for the education of Scheduled Caste students 
for Science and Technology in foreign Universities in 
England, the Dominions, in Europe and in America. 

37. There is nothing to prevent the Government of India 
from undertaking this responsibility. Education it is true is not 
a Central subject for legislative purposes. Still, section 150 (2) of 
the Government of India Act says that the Central Government 
may make grants for any purpose, notwithstanding that the 
purpose is not one with respect to which the Central Legislature 
may make laws. This power has been used by the Government 
of India to support Educational Institutions. Below is given a list 
of Educational Institutions outside the centrally Administered 
Areas, which receive grants-in-aid from the central revenues. 


Amount per annum 


I. Educational Institutions 

1. Indian Women’s University, Bombay 


Two non-recurring 
grants of Rs. 50,000 
were made to this 
Institution in 1937- 
38 and 1941-42. 


2. Visva-Bharati, Santinikctan 

3. Inter-University Board, India 

4. Inter-Provincial Board for Anglo-Indian and European 


Rs. 

25,000 

1,000 

3,600 


Education 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


428 


428 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Rs. 

II. Scientific Societies 

1. Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, 18,000 

Calcutta. 

2. Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 2,500 

3. Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 37,000 

4. National Institute of Science of India, Calcutta 6,000 

5. Vishvesharanand Vedic Research Institute, Simla 2,500 

6. Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 1,50,000 

7. Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona 4,000 

8. Bose Research Institute, Calcutta 45,000 

III. Miscellaneous 

1. Indian Olympic Association 2,000 

2. Girl Guides Association, India 2,500 

Total of annual Recurring Grants ... 2,99,100 


38. This docs not include the annual subvention which the 
Government of India gives of Rs. 3 lakhs per annum to the 
Muslim University of Aligarh and of Rs. 3 lakhs per annum 
to the Hindu University of Benares. The claim made on behalf 
of the Scheduled Castes for help in the matter of advanced 
education at home and abroad receives great support from 
the financial aid given by Central Government to these two 
Universities. The grant made to the Universities is really grant 
made to the Hindu and Muslim communities for supporting 
higher education. That being so, there is no reason why the 
Central Government should not undertake to make a similar 
grant of 3 lakhs of rupees annually to promote higher education 
among the Scheduled Castes. If the Government are interested 
in raising the status of the Scheduled Castes, which they have 
often proclaimed to be their duty, it is high time that a similar 
provision was made for them in the education budget of the 
Central Government. 

39. The scheme if it is given effect to will revolutionize 
the condition and status of the Scheduled Castes. The 
Scheduled Castes lay great store by it. They would even 
be prepared for the scheme being made a loan system 
rather than a system of grants. The Scheduled Caste 
boys who receive these scholarships shall be glad to take 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


429 


EDUCATIONAL GRIEVANCES 429 

advantage of it even if they are required to refund the sums 
received by them when they are employed or they may be 
made to serve the Government for a term under a lower scale 
of salary. There can be no objection to Government accepting 
these proposals. 

40. For the purpose of assisting Advanced Scientific and 
Technical Education among the Scheduled Caste students I am 
making two other proposals. One is to make : 

(3) Provision for Scheduled Caste students in the School of 
Mines. 

The Government of India has under its control the Indian 
School of Mines which is located at Dhanbad. The school provides 
high grade instructions in Mine Engineering and in Geology. 
The training given in the Indian School of Mines is calculated 
to train men who can serve in the coal mining industry and 
other mineral industries in India. The number of students that 
are at present taking instructions in the Indian School of Mines 
are about 97. The school is open to students from all parts of 
India. From enquiries made it is established that out of the 97 
students there is not a single one from the Scheduled Castes. It 
is very necessary that some special measures should be taken 
by the Government of India to sec that the students belonging 
to the Scheduled castes are in a position to take advantage of 
the Indian School of Mines. To achieve this object it will be 
necessary : 

(a) To reserve a certain number of seats for the Scheduled 
Caste boys having the minimum standard of education 
required for admission. 

(b) The grant of free-ships. 

(c) The grant of scholarships. 

It will not be too much to claim that one-tenth of the total 
number of admissions should be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes. This is a matter which falls within the scope of the Labour 
Department. But it is a question which concerns also the Finance 
Department in as much as the free-ships and scholarships would 
mean the loss of revenue to the State. But the loss on acccount 
of these measures will not be very great. The annual fee on an 
average which a student has to incur in the School of Mines be 
about 60 rupees a month which would mean a monthly expense 
of Rs. 60 per student. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


430 


430 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

41. The other proposal which I wish to make is to give: — 

(4) Representation to the Scheduled Castes on the Central 
Advisory Board of Education. 

42. The constitution of the Board consists of — 

(1) The Honourable Member in charge of the Department 
of Education, Health and Lands (Chairman); 

(2) The Educational Commissioner with the Government 
of India; 

(3) Ten nominees of the Government of India, of whom 
one at least shall be a woman; 

(4) One member of the Council of State elected by the 
Council of State; 

(5) Two members of the Legislative Assembly elected by 
the Legislative Assembly. 

(6) Three members of the Inter-University Board, India, 
nominated by the Inter-University Board of India. 

(7) A representative of each local Government, who shall 
be either the Minister in charge of Education (or 
his deputy) or the Director of Public Instruction (or 
his deputy) or such other person as the Provincial 
Government may nominate in this behalf. 

43. The functions of the Board are : — 

(a) To advise on any educational question which may be 
referred to it by the Government of India or by local 
Government. 

(b) To call for information and advice regarding 
educational developments of special interest and value 
to India; to examine this information and to circulate 
it with recommendations to the Government of India 
and to local Governments. 

44. From the functions of the Board it is quite clear that the 
board can study the educational problem of the Scheduled Castes 
as that of special interest and frame recommendations and advice 
Central and Provincial Governments in that connection. Such a 
thing can be of immense importance in focussing the attention 
of the Governments and the Universities on the spread of higher 
education among the Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


431 


EDUCATIONAL GRIEVANCES 431 

45. It is, however, necessary in the first place to get the Board 
interested in the educational problem of special classes like the 
Scheduled Castes. This can be done only by giving representation 
to members of the Scheduled Castes on the Board. It is therefore 
suggested that two representatives of the Scheduled Castes should 
be nominated on the board. 

VI. Want of Facilities for Technical Training Technical 
Education 

46. From the point of raising the economic condition, technical 
education for the Scheduled Castes is more important than 
literary education. But technical education is also very costly 
and it is not possible for children of the Scheduled Castes to 
take technical education, and without technical education their 
economic condition will not be improved. Owing to the social 
system of the Hindus, the Scheduled Castes occupy economically 
a very low place in the Indian economy. In times of prosperity 
he is last to be employed, and in times of depression he is 
first to be discharged. This, of course, is a result of the social 
prejudices of the Hindus which operate against him. But there is 
also the other difficulty which stands in his way and that is he 
is generally an unskilled labourer with no technical knowledge. 

47. It seems to me that the Government of India can do 
a great deal to improve his lot by enabling him to acquire 
technical skill which he does not now possess and this can be 
easily done by introducing a system of apprenticeship for the 
Scheduled Caste boys in undertakings run or controlled by the 
Government of India, in which the possibilities of giving such 
technical training do exist. 

I am referring only to two : — 

(1) Apprenticeships in Government Printing Presses : 

There are a number of Printing Presses which are maintained 
by the Government of India. There are so many skilled occupations 
which are open to persons trained in a printing press — compositors, 
printers, binders, etc. There is no reason why the Government 
of India should not have a scheme whereby suitable boys from 
the Scheduled Castes should be taken as apprentices to learn 
the various occupations which are related to the printing trade. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


432 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) Aprenticeships in Railway Workshops : 

The Railways in India, most of which are owned by the 
Government of India, also maintain workshops where fitters, 
carpenters and other technicians are employed, and I do not 
know whether the Railway Department have schemes of taking 
apprentices to be trained as technicians to be subsequently 
employed on the Railways. But even if such a scheme was not 
in existence it is necessary to have one for the benefit of the 
Scheduled Castes. 

48. I therefore suggest the scheme of apprenticeship whereby 
annually a good number of boys from the Scheduled Castes 
should be given training in the printing press and the Railway 
Workshops. The cost of it cannot be very great. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


433 


PART III 

OTHER GRIEVANCES 

VII. Neglect in the Matter of Publicity 

47. It is quite well known that the Government of India 
engages itself very largely in giving publicity to the saying 
and doings of different individuals and parties who represent 
the main forces operating in India. As an illustration of this 
I would refer to the Volume called “India and the Aggressor” 
(The Trend of Indian Opinion Between 1935-40) issued by 
the Bureau of Public Information of the Government of India. 
The name of the Volume is very misleading. It has nothing 
to do with the Aggressor. It is a collection of sayings and 
doings of the Political Parties and Politicians in the country 
and presents a full resume of the views of the majority and 
minority in India. 

48. Now the most annoying part of this volume is the 
complete neglect of the sayings and doings of the Scheduled 
Castes. Out of the 940 pages, 158 pages are given to the 
Congress, 85 pages are allotted to the Muslims. The Hindu 
Mahasabha and the Hindu League are given about 10 pages. 
The Liberal Federation has received 16 pages. The Sikhs are 
spread over 6 pages, Indian Christians over 2 pages and the 
Scheduled Castes are disposed of in about 3 pages and what 
is surprising is that in these 3 pages devoted to the Scheduled 
Castes the material which is included is of a trifling character. 
It omits altogether to take notice of some of the most important 
events that have taken place during this period and important 
pronouncements made by leading individuals from the 
Scheduled Castes. I may mention only one such event viz., the 
movement for conversion. Beyond question it was a movement 
which shook the Hindu Society to its very foundations and 
attracted the notice of the whole world. To emphasize the 
trumpery sort of publicity given to the Scheduled Castes in this 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

volume it is enough to say that the St. Mary’s College, Kurseong, 
once undertook to give publicity to the cause of the Scheduled 
Castes and has as a result published material covering the 
same period and which fills a Volume of 507 pages. So vast 
have been the forces and movements affecting and emanating 
from the Scheduled Castes during this period of 1935 — 40. As 
to myself, I must have made many pronouncements touching 
the Scheduled Castes. Not one of them however finds a place 
in this Volume. 

49. It is true that this Volume is intended for official use 
only. But in my opinion this fact does not alter the great value 
which the compilation must necessarily have. It goes without 
saying that it is the mind of the Official which is, to a large 
degree, responsible for determining the direction which the 
affairs of the State will take. It also determines the value 
which he ought to give to issues in which communal interests 
are involved. It also goes without saying that the attitude and 
the mind of the Official is bound to be determined by the kind 
of material which is presented to him and on which he feeds 
in a Volume like this. Further, the degree of publicity given to 
a cause by Government in a Government publication may be 
treated by him as the value which government attaches to it 
and as a direction for him for evaluating the needs and claims 
of different communities. Looked at from this point of view this 
Volume is sure to give to the Officers working in the Central 
Secretariat as well as in the Provincial Governments and even 
to the Secretary of State the impression that the Government 
of India regards the Scheduled Castes as a negligible force 
not worth bothering about. That this is the effect which this 
volume has produced is evident from the speech delivered in 
Parliament by the Secretary of State where the references to 
the Muslims are emphatic and positive while the references to 
the Scheduled Castes are just of a parenthetical character. It 
is a grievous wrong done to the Scheduled Castes whose cause 
has received a setback at a most critical period in their struggle 
by reason of this unbalanced presentation of their case on the 
part of Government. I would press that the Bureau of Public 
Information be asked to prepare a supplement to the Volume 
which it has issued giving full space to movements carried on 
by the Scheduled Castes and the pronouncements their leaders 
have made. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


435 


OTHER GRIEVANCES 435 

50. Of course, Government may say that it is not bound to 
do publicity work for parties and communities, and that the 
parties and communities may do their own publicity. But that 
is not the case here. The Government of India, as I have shown, 
docs engage itself very much in this work of publicity. And when 
a Government does it, it is bound to treat all parties on equal 
footing in the matter of publicity and give a true and correct 
picture of the movements and forces operating in the country. 

VIII. Closed-door in Government Contracts 

51. A Good part of Government needs in Public Works is 
carried out not departmentally but by contracts. This is so in 
normal times. In war times the work done for Government 
by the contract system has expanded several hundred fold. I 
can speak only of the Central Public Works Department. The 
list of approved contractors maintained, by the Central Public 
Works Department is 1,171. Of these, I am told, there is only 
one contractor belonging to the Scheduled Castes. The rest of 
them are Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims. It should be possible 
for Government to arrange things in such a manner as to 
make its contract system allow an open door to members of 
all communities to profit by it. There are many persons of the 
Scheduled Castes who could be trusted to carry out a Government 
contract. Already many members of the scheduled castes are 
working as employees of Hindus, Muslim or Sikh contractors. 
The result is that the Hindu, Muslim or Sikh contractors are 
taking profit while the Scheduled Caste men are working on 
a mere wage. 

52. There is not much difficulty in getting a certain number 
of men from the Scheduled Castes put on the list of approved 
contractors. But what is important is to enable them to get 
a contract. There are two rules in the matter of Government 
contracts : — 

(1) That a contract is to be given generally to a contractor 
whose tender is the lowest; 

(2) That Government is not bound to accept the lowest tender. 

53. It is therefore, a mattter of discretion which is exercised by the 
Officer in charge whether a contract will go to a particular contractor 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


436 


436 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

or not. This discretion is not likely to be exercised in favour 
of a Scheduled Caste contractor. His tender may be the lowest 
but owing to communal prejudice he may not accept it and rely 
on the second rule “ that he is not bound to accept the lowest”. 
If his tender is higher than the lowest, he will not accept it 
although he is free to do so. He will rely on the first of the two 
rules. Either way he will have his justification for rejecting the 
tender of the Scheduled Caste contractors. 

54. There is of course, no remedy against communal bais. 
The only thing that strikes me that we can do is to amend the 
rule by saying that a tender of a Scheduled Caste contractor, if 
it is not higher than the lowest by 5 per cent, shall be deemed 
to be the lowest. This, of course, involves financial loss and the 
Finance Department will have to agree to it. I cannot give any 
idea of the approximate cost of such a concession. I am sure it 
will not be heavy as to break the camel’s back. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


437 


PART IV 

DUTY OF GOVERNMENT TOWARDS 
DISTRESSED PEOPLE 

Some of the proposals submitted in this Memorandum on 
behalf of the Scheduled Castes, particularly those which are put 
forth to remove political grievances, do not involve any financial 
burden on the public treasury. They are really not proposals so 
much as political demands which, by reason of their logic and 
their justice, Government must grant. The difficulty arises only 
with regard to the acceptance of those proposals which involve a 
financial burden upon the revenues of the Central Government. 
Financial burden there is. But, it will not do to reject them merely 
on that account. For there can be no doubt that Government has 
a duty towards the Scheduled Castes, and if they accept their 
duty in this behalf they are bound to discharge it even if it 
involves a certain amount of financial burden on the public purse. 

56. The policy of the British Government towards the Scheduled 
Castes has been one of complete and continuous neglect. It began 
from the very beginning when the British Government realized 
that its duty was not merely to maintain law and order, and 
extended to giving the people education and looking after their 
welfare. This will be clear from the following quotations from 
the report of the Board of Education of the Bombay Presidency 
for the year 1850-51 : — 

Inquiry as to Upper Classes of India 

“ Paragraph 1 6. It being then demonstrated that only a small 
section of the population can be brought under the influence of 
Government education in India, and the Honourable Court having 
in effect decided that this section should consist of the ‘upper 
classes’, it is essential to ascertain who these latter consist of. 

Upper Classes in India 

“Paragraph 1 7. The classes who may be deemed to be influential 
and in so far the upper classes in India, may be ranked as follows : — 

1st. — The landowners and jagirdars, representative of the former 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


438 


438 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

feudatories and persons in authorities under Native 
powers and who may he termed the Soldier class. 

2nd. — Those who have acquired wealth in trade or commerce 
or the commercial class. 

3rd. — The higher employees of Government. 

4th. — Brahmins with whom may be associated, though at 
long interval, those of higher castes of writers who live 
by the pen and as Parbhus and Seenvies in Bombay, 
Kayasthas in Bengal, provided they acquire a position 
either in learning or station. 

Brahmins The Most Influential 

“Paragraph 18. Of these four classes incomparably the most 
influential, the most numerous and on the whole easiest to be 
worked on by the Government, are the latter. It is a well recognised 
fact throughout India that the ancient Jagirdars or soldier class 
are daily deteriorating under our rule. 

* * * nor among 

the commercial classes, with a few exceptions, is their 
much greater opening for the influences of superior 
education.. 

* * * Lastly the 

employees of the State, though they possess a great 
influence over the large numbers who come in contact 
with Government, have no influence, whatever, with the 
still larger numbers who are independent of Government ; 

Poverty of Brahmins 

* Paragraph 19. The above analysis, though it may appear 
lengthy is nevertheless, indispensable, for certain important 
conclusions deducible from it. First, it demonstrates that the 
influential class whom the Government are able to avail themselves 
of in diffusing the seeds of education are the Brahmins and other 
high castes Brahmanis proximi. 

Question as to Educating Low Castes 

“ Paragraph 21. The practical conclusion to be drawn from these 
facts which years of experience have forced upon our notice, is that 
a very wide door should be opened to the children of the poor higher 
castes, who are willing to receive education at our hands. But here, 
again, another embarrassing question arises, which it is right to 
notice. If the children of the poor are admitted freely to Government 


z:\ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 439 

DUTY OF GOVERNMENT TOWARDS DISTRESSED PEOPLE 439 

Institutions what is there to prevent all the despised castes — the 
Dheds,, Mahars, etc., from flocking in numbers to their walls ? 

Social Prejudices of the Hindus 

“ Paragraph 22. There is little doubt that if a class of these 
latter were to be formed in Bombay they might be trained, under 
the guiding influence of such Professors and masters as are 
in the service of the Board, into men of superior intelligence 
to any in the community : and with such qualifications, as 
they would then possess, there would be nothing to prevent 
their aspiring to the highest offices open to Native talent — to 
Judgeships, the Grand Jury, Her Majesty’s Commission of the 
Peace. Many benevolent men think it is the height of illiberality 
and weakness in the British Government to succumb to the 
prejudices which such appointments would excite into disgust 
amongst the Hindu community , and that an open attack should 
be made upon the barriers of caste. 

Wise Observations of the Honourable Mount Stuart 
Elphinstone Cited 

“Paragraph 23. But herewith wise reflections of Mr. 
Elephinstone, the most liberal and large minded administrator 
who has appeared this side of India, point out the true rule of 
action. ‘It is observed,’ he says, ‘that the missionaries find the 
lowest caste the best pupils; but we must be careful how we offer 
any special encouragement to men of that description ; they are 
not only the most despised, but among the least numerous of 
the great divisions of society and it is to be feared that if our 
system of education first took root among them, it would never 
spread further, and we might find ourselves at the head of a 
new class, superior to the rest in useful knowledge, but hated 
and despised by the castes to whom these new attainments 
would always induce us to prefer them. Such a state of things 
would be desirable, if we were contented to rest our power on 
our army or on the attachment of a part of the population 
but is inconsistent with every attempt to found it on a more 
extended basis!” 

* * * 


57. Such is the antagonism towards the Schedule Castes with which 
began Government’s policy of giving education to Indians. This policy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


440 


440 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was firmly applied. There is a case on record of a Mahar 
(Untouchable) boy who in 1856 petitioned to the Government of 
India for being admitted to a Government school in the Dharwar 
District. The following is the text of the resolution issued by the 
Government. 

“ The question discussed in the correspondence is one of very 

great practical difficulty. 

“1. There can be no doubt that the Mahar petitoner has 
abstract justice in his side ; and Government trust 
that the prejudices which at present prevent him from 
availing himself of existing means of education in 
Dharwar may be ere long removed. 

“2. But Government are obliged to keep in mind that to 
interfere prejudices of ages a summary manner, for 
the sake of one or few individuals, would probably 
do a great damage to the cause of education. The 
disadvantage under which the petitoner labours is not 
one which has originated with this Government, and 
it is one which Government cannot summarily remove 
by interferring in his favour as he begs them to do.’’ 

58. In 1882 Government of India appointed the Hunter 
Commission to examine the Educational Policy. This Commission 
made a number of important proposals to spread education 
among Muslims. With regard to the Untouchables it did nothing. 
All that it did was to express an opinion that “Government 
should accept the principle that nobody be refused admission to 
Government College or School merely on the ground of caste,” 
but qualified it by saying that the principle should “be applied 
with due caution!”. 

59. This antagonism when it passed away, its place was taken 
up by negligence and indifference. This negligence and indifference 
made its appearance not merely in the field of education. It also 
made its appearance in other fields, particularly in the Army. 
The whole Army of the East India Company consisted of the 
Depressed Classes. Indeed but for the Depressed Classes Army 
the British would never have been able to conquer India. The 
Untouchables continued to fill the Army till 1892. In 1892 their 
recruitment in the army was stopped all of a sudden and they 
were thrown in the street in utter distress with no education 
and no means to pursue other ways of honourable living. 

60. Who can raise the Scheduled Castes from the distress in which 
they are now grovelling ? It is certain they cannot do it by their own 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


441 


DUTY OF GOVERNMENT TOWARDS DISTRESSED PEOPLE 441 

effort. Their resources are too scanty to afford them the means 
to raise themselves. They cannot depend upon the charity of the 
Hindus. The charity of the Hindus is beyond question communal 
in its scope and its benefits are confined to those who belong to 
the community of the donor. The Hindu donors are either business- 
men or high State officials. The tragedy is that they make their 
money out of the general public. But when it comes to a question 
of doing charity they forget the public and remember their own 
caste and their community. The Scheduled Castes have neither of 
these sources available to them and they are rigorously excluded 
from the charity founded by both. The only source therefore on 
which they can rely is financial aid from Government. I venture to 
say that it is the duty of the Central Government to come to the 
rescue of people who are in distress by no fault of theirs as is the 
case with the Scheduled Castes. The Central Government is bound 
to take steps to assist the Scheduled Castes to concede their just 
claims and to compete on more equal terms with their competitors. 
There is nothing extra-ordinary in asking the Central Government 
to pay special attention to improve the condition of the Scheduled 
Castes. Let those who may think so consider the measures the 
Government of India has adopted for securing the welfare of the 
Anglo-Indian community. I will mention only a few of them. 

(1) Higher Salaries 

There was a time when the Anglo-Indian received a higher 
salary than the Indian. The extent of difference in the salary of 
the Anglo-Indian and the Indian will be obvious from the following 
table which gives figures for salaries on three Railways for a few 
posts selected at random for the sake of illustration — 


Designation 

Anglo-Indians 

Indians 

North Western Railway 

Permanent Way-Inspector 

625-25-675 

475-25-500 


550-25-600 

400-25-450 

Drivers 

260-10-280 

Re. 1 to Rs. 1 / 14/ a day 



Special rate Rs. 2 a day. 

E. I. Railway 

Train Examiners 

300-25-400 

200-20-280 

120-15-180 

G.P.I. Railway 
Head Train Examiners 

275 

125-275 


315 



365 


Washing Chargemen 

145 

115 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


442 


442 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This difference in salary continued upto 1920. Thereafter it 
was abolished. One difference still remains and that is the Anglo- 
Indian gets a basic pay of Rs. 55 per month. He gets this even 
if he is employed as a peon in a State Railway, while an Indian 
chaprasi gets only Rs. 13-15. The cost of this favoured treatment 
to the Anglo-Indians which the Indian Exchequer has to bear 
annually is Rs. 10,000 in the Posts and Telegraph Department, 
Rs. 75,000 to the State Managed Railways and Rs. 75,000 to 
Company Managed Railways, in all Rs. 1,50,000. 

(2) The reduction in the pass marks for the examination in 
the telegraph Department from 50 per cent to 40 per cent 
in each subject and from 66 per cent to 60 per cent in 
the aggregate especially made to enable Anglo-Indians to 
compete successfully. 

61. There are many other recommendations made by the 
Stewart Committee on the Anglo-Indians intended to give them 
special advantages over Indians. But I do not wish to burden this 
memorandum with them. I am only interested in showing the 
marked contrast between the treatment accorded to the Anglo- 
Indians and the Scheduled Castes. The care of the former and 
the neglect of the latter stand out in a marked contrast. What is 
it that can justify this contrast ? In my opinion nothing, and the 
sooner the Central Government proceeds to assist the Scheduled 
Castes the better the Government will rank as a Government 
based on justice. A Government which cheerfully bears the cost 
of Rs. 1,50,000 annually for the uplift of the Anglo-Indians, can, 
if it has the will, spend a few lakhs on the Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


443 


SECTION II 

IMPORTANT CORRESPONDENCE 
RELATING TO TRANSFER OF POWER 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


444 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


445 


1 

*Note by Sir S. Cripps 

L/P & J/ 10/4 :ff 51-2 

INTERVIEW WITH DR. AMBEDKAR AND MR. RAJAH, 
REPRESENTING THE DEPRESSED CLASSES 

30th March 1942 

After telling me about the conditions of the Depressed 
Classes, particularly in Madras and Bombay, they then went 
on to point out that under the system of election they would 
have a very small representation only in the constituent 
assembly, as most of their so-called representatives would 
be Congressmen, and that their position would therefore 
be very weak. They summed up the demands that they 
would make to the constituent assembly and then asked 
me whether we considered that they came within the racial 
and religious minorities, to which I answered yes, and what 
sort of provisions were likely to be made in the Treaty for 
their protection. I stated that these would probably be along 
the lines of the League of Nations minority treaties, and 
if already there were special provisions in the constitution 
these would probably be repeated in the Treaty, and there 
would be some obligation to refer the matter to some outside 
authority in cases of dispute, the Government of the Indian 
Union undertaking to abide by the decision so given, and that 
if they did not do so it would constitute a breach of Treaty, 
whereupon the British Government could take such steps as 
it considered wise in the particular circumstances. I stated 
that though this form of protection might no doubt seem to 
them inadequate, once granted the idea of self-government 
and self-determination for India, there was no other possible 
way by which we could intervene to protect any minority in 
India. 

*The Transfer of Power, Nicholas Mansergh, Editor-in-Chief; published by His 
Majesty’s Stationery Office, London, 1970; Vol. I, No. 442, pp. 552-53. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


446 


446 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

So far as the interim period was concerned, I pointed out that 
the probabilities were that some representative of the Depressed 
Classes would be asked to serve on the Executive Council at the 
Centre, and that one of the first tasks of that Council would no 
doubt be to make some temporary arrangements as regards the 
carrying on of the Provincial Governments. 

Mr. Ambedkar expressed the view that they would demand 
to be treated as one of the major elements and to be taken into 
consultation by the Viceroy in the formation of the new Executive. 
I stated that this was not a matter for me; the Viceroy would 
exercise his own judgement as to whom he should consult in 
this matter. 

Naturally they were not very happy about the whole situation, 
but I did not gather that they would oppose the scheme, since 
there was no other alternative under which they could get any 
greater measure of protection. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


447 


2 

* Dr. Ambedkar and Mr. Rajah to 
Sir S. Cripps@ 

Cmd. 6350 

1 April 1942 

We told you when we met you on the 30th Marchf 
that the proposals of His Majesty’s Government relating to 
Constitutional development of India will not be acceptable to 
the Depresed Classes for the reasons which we placed before 
you at the interview. Since then We have had consultations 
with many of the Depressed Classes’ representatives in the 
various Provincial and Central Legislatures and all of them 
have unanimously endorsed the view we placed before you 
regarding the proposals. 

We are all of us absolutely convinced that the proposals are 
calculated to do the greatest harm to the Depressed Classes 
and are sure to place them under an unmitigated system of 
Hindu rule. Any such result which takes us back to the black 
days of the ancient past will never be tolerated by us, and we 
are all determined to resist any such catastrophe befalling our 
people with all the means at our command. 

We request you to convey to His Majesty’s Government 
our deepest anxiety regarding the future of the Depressed 
Classes and to impress upon them that we must look upon 
it as breach of faith if His Mejesty’s Government should 
decide to force upon the Depressed Classes a Constitution 
to which they have not given their free and voluntary 

* The Transfer of Power, Vol I, No. 487, p. 603. 

@ The text of this letter was transmitted by Lord Linlithgow to Mr. Amery in 

telegram 207-S.C. 

of 18 April. MSS. EUR. F. 125/22. 

+No. 442. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


448 


448 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consent and which does not contain within itself all the provisions 
that are necessary for safeguarding their interests. 

In the end we want to thank you for assuming us that you 
called us in our representative capacity and that His Majesty’s 
Government did not regard the Depressed Classes as a minor 
party — points upon which some doubt had arisen in our mind and 
about which we asked you for a correct definition of our position. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


449 


3 


* Sir R. Lumley (Bombay) to the Marquess of 
Linlithgow (Extract) 


MSS. EUR. F. 125/56 

Confidential 

Govt. House, Bombay, 24 April 1942 

Report No. 104 

1. Reactions to the result of Sir Stafford Cripps’ Mission. As 
is always the case here, it is not easy to assess precisely the 
public reactions to the breakdown of the negotiations conducted 
by Sir Stafford Cripps. I am glad to say, however, that I do not 
notice any deterioration or any bitterness, with the exception 
which I shall mention later. In fact, I am inclined to think 
that, as I hoped would be the case, the proposals, though they 
have failed, have produced a nett gain, particularly in those 
quarters which were formerly our most persistent opponents. 
From an informant whom I have usually found reliable, I 
learn that a very much better feeling exists amongst those 
who professed to have doubts about our ultimate intentions. 
The Draft Declaration has satisfied a great many of them on 
that point. I also hear that local informed Congress opinion 
was quite prepared to accept the provision of non-accession, 
and considered it to be the only method so far put forward, 
with any prospects of success, for obtaining Muslim agreement 
to discussions about a future constitution. This view is said 
to find a good deal of support amongst local Congress people, 
although it has not been declared openly, and all nationalist 
newspapers condemn the proposals mainly on the ground that 
they would vivisect India. 

There have been no public declarations by Muslims here, but most 
Muslim newspapers appear to be well satisfied with the result of the 


*The Transfer of Power, Vol. I, No. 684, pp. 846-47. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


450 


450 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

negotiations on the ground, first, that they have not been let 
down, as they feared, and secondly, that the negotiations cannot 
have failed to have opened the eyes of the British Government 
to the fact that it is Congress intransigence which is the real 
obstacle. Parsees, I am told, are generally relieved that, for a 
time at any rate, Congress will not regain power. 

The exception to which I have referred is Ambedkar. He 
came to see me to discuss the establishment of the National 
War Front, and although he has, with no enthusiasm, agreed 
to give it some support, he took the opportunity to let off to 
me some very bitter steam about the Draft Declaration. He 
said that he had been as good as told that Congress and the 
Muslim League were the only bodies which counted, and that 
if they agreed to the proposals, it would not matter what he or 
the Depressed Classes thought about them. He professed to be 
bitterly disillusioned and to feel humiliated. He declared that the 
proposals went back on the August Declaration, and that, with 
the example of the Irish Treaty before him, the suggestion that 
minorities could be safeguarded by means of a treaty was a very 
poor joke. How, he asked, could he and his friends be expected 
to continue their support of Government if they were to be let 
down in this way ? He had thought of resigning from the National 
Defence Council but had decided to carry on for the time being, 
but he could not be expected to show any enthusiasm in support 
of Government. I reasoned with him as best I could, but I fear 
made little impression upon him. This mood of disgruntlement 
has been noticeable in Ambedkar for a long time — certainly since 
he was not taken in to the expansion of your Executive Council, 
as he had hoped. He will, I expect, succeed in obtaining some 
support for his views amongst his followers in this Province, 
for he is the only individual amongst them who is capable of 
thinking for them. Nevertheless, I feel pretty sure that this 
disgruntlement is largely a personal matter. As you know, his 
own financial position has been worrying him for some time. I 
have reason to believe that he owes money to certain people who 
have helped him in the past, and that he is unable to pay any 
of it back, and is even rather rude if they mention the subject. 
As you know, too, he has been, for some time, anxious to obtain 
a position in the High Court or elsewhere, in which he could 
have a chance of providing for his own future. He has given 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


451 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 451 

me, for some time, the impression of a man who is no longer 
really interested in the work he is doing for his own followers, 
and is anxious to reach a different sphere. He is inclined, 
unfortunately, to attribute the difficulties of his own position to 
influences at work against him because he is a member of the 
Depressed Classes, and from that it is an easy step to the belief 
that we do not concern ourselves about him unduly because we do 
not think it worth-while to secure the support of the Depressed 
Classes. I would very much like to see something done for him, 
and I hope that, if a further expansion of your Council is now 
possible, he will be included, — not on personal grounds alone, 
but so that we may retain the interest of the Depressed Classes. 
He has been unhelpful about recruitment of Mahars, and does 
not put his weight behind it overmuch, in spite of the fact that 
he has long clamoured for Mahars being taken into combatant 
units. Nevertheless, the recruitment of Mahars continues, but 
not as well as it would do if he were really keen to help. 

Apart from the bitterness displayed by Ambedkar, I think 
that the failure of Cripps’ negotiations has left us in no worse 
position, and the nett result is probably some gain. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


452 


4 

* Cripps Proposals 

Text of Constitutional Proposals 
MADE BY 

The Right Honourable Sir Stafford Cripps 

His Majesty’s Government, having considered the anxieties 
expressed in this country and India, as to the fulfilment of 
promises made in regard to the future of India, have decided to 
lay down in precise and clear terms the steps which there-upon 
shall be taken for earliest possible realisation of Self-Government 
in India. The object is the creation of a new Indian Union which 
shall constitute a Dominion associated with the United Kingdom 
and other Dominions by common allegiance to the Crown but 
equal to them in every respect, in no way subordinate in any 
aspect of its domestic and external affairs. 

His Majesty’s Government therefore make the following 
declaration: — 

(a) Immediately upon cessation of hostilities steps shall be 
taken to set up in India in the manner described hereafter 
an elected body charged with the task of framing new 
constitution for India. 

(b) Provision shall be made as set out below for participation 
of Indian States in the constitution making body. 

(c) His Majesty’s Government undertake to accept and 
implement forthwith the constitution so framed subject 
only to : — 

(1) Right of any province in British India that is not 
prepared to accept the new constitution to retain its 
present constitutional position, provision being made 
for its subsequent accession, if it so decides with such 
non-acceeding provinces. Should they so desire, His 
Majesty’s Government will be prepared to agree upon 

* Report of Depressed Class Conferences, Nagpur Session, held on July 18, 19 and 
20, 1942, pp. 98-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


453 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 453 

the new constitution giving them the same full status 
as Indian Union and arrived at by procedure analogous 
to that here laid down. 

(2) Signing of treaty which shall be negotiated between 
His Majesty’s Government and the constitution- 
making body. This treaty will cover all necessary 
matters arising out of complete transfer of 
responsibility from British to Indian hands; it will 
make provision in acordance with the undertakings 
given by His Majesty’s Government for protection of 
racial and religious minorities: But will not impose 
any restriction on power of Indian union to decide 
in future its relationship to other member states of 
British Comonwealth. Whether or not an Indian State 
elects to adhere to the constitution it will be necessary 
to negotiate revision of its treaty arrangements so far 
as they may be required in the new situation. 

(d) Constitution making body shall be composed as follows 
unless leaders of Indian opinion in principal communities 
agree upon some other form before the end of hostilities. 
Immediately upon the result being known of provincial 
elections which will be necessary at the end of the 
hostilities, entire membership of lower houses of provincial 
legislatures shall as single electoral college proceed to 
the election of constitution making body by system of 
proportional representation. This new body shall be in 
number about one-tenth of the number of electoral colleges. 
Indian States shall be invited to appoint representatives 
in the same proportion to their total population as in the 
case of representatives of British India as a whole and 
with same powers as the British Indian members. 

(e) During critical period which now faces India and until the 
new constitution can be framed, His Majesty’s Government 
must inevitably bear responsibility for and retain control 
and direction of Defence of India as part of their world 
war effort, but the task to organise the full military, 
moral and material resources of India must be the 
responsibility of the Government of India with co-operation 
of peoples of India. His Majesty’s Government desire 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


454 


454 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and invite immediate and effective participation of leaders 
of principal sections of Indian people in counsel of their 
country, of Commonwealth and of united nations. Thus 
they will be enabled to give their active and constructive 
help in discharge of the task which is vital and essential 
for the future freedom of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


455 


5 


* Statement of Dr. Ambedkar on the Cripps 

Proposals 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : M.L.A., Leader of the Depressed 
Classes in a Statement to the Press, said : — 

“The War cabinet’s proposals show a sudden volte face on 
the part of His Majesty’s Government. The putting forth of 
these proposals, which were denounced by them as an invasion 
of minority rights, is an indication of their complete surrender 
of right to win might. This is Munich mentality, the essence 
of which is to save oneself by sacrificing others, and it is this 
mentality which is writ large on these proposals. It is reported 
that the American and English people are annoyed at Indians 
not welcoming the proposals, of His Majesty’s Government 
relating to the constitutional advancement of India and thereby 
allowing the mission of Sir Stafford Cripps to fail. One can 
forgive the Americans for their attitude, but surely the English 
people and Sir Stafford Cripps ought to know better. It does 
not seem to have been sufficiently realised that the proposals 
of His Majesty’s Government now put forth as the best are 
the very proposals which have been rejected and condemned 
by His Majesty’s Government as the worst only a few months 
previously. Those who realise this cannot but help saying that 
this is the ugliest part of the whole business of constitutional 
advance, which His Majesty’s Government is now rushing to 
undertake. The proposals fall into three parts : — 

(1) There is to be a Constitutent Assembly with a 
right to frame the constitution for India. This 
Assembly is to have the fullest power to frame 
such constitution as the majority in the Assembly 
may choose to decide. 

*Report of the Depressed Class Conferences, held on July 18, 19 and 20, 1942, 
Nagpur Session, pp. 100-06. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


456 


456 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) The new constitution is not to include all the present 
Provinces of India but only such Provinces as may be 
willing to be bound by it. For this the Provinces have 
been given a right to decide whether they shall join 
the new constitution or stay out of it. This is left to 
be done by a plebiscite in which a bare majority is 
declared enough to decide the issue. 

(3) The Constituted Assembly shall be required to enter 
into a treaty with the British Government. The treaty 
is to contain provisions for the safety and security of 
racial and religious minorities. After such a treaty 
is signed the British Government is to withdraw 
its sovereignty and the constitution framed by the 
Constituent Assembly is to come into operation. 

Such in brief outline is the scheme of His Majesty’s 
Government. The proposal regarding Constituent Assembly is 
not a new proposal. It was put forth by the Congress when 
the war broke out and what is important is that this proposal 
of the Congress was rejected by His Majesty’s Government. 
This is what Mr. Amery said in the House of Commons on 
August 14,1940, regarding Constituent Assembly : — 

“Congress leaders have built up a remarkable 

organisation the most efficient political machine in India 

If only they had succeeded, if the Congress could, in fact 
speak, as it professes to speak, for all the main elements in 
India’s national life, then however advanced their demands 
our problem would have been in many respects far easier than 
it is today. It is true that they are numerically the largest 
single party in British India, but their claim in virtue of the 
fact to speak for India is utterly denied by very important 
elements in India’s complex national life. These others assert 
their right to be regarded not as mere numerical minorities 
but as separate constituent factors in any future Indian policy. 

The foremost among these elements stands the great Muslim 
community. They will have nothing to do with a constitution 
framed by a Constituent Assembly elected by a majority vote 
in geographical constituencies. They claim the right in any 
constitutional discussions to be regarded as an entity and are 
determined only to accept a constitution whose actual structure 
will secure their position as an entity against the operations 
of a mere numerical majority. The same applies to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


457 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 457 

great body of what are known as the Scheduled Castes who 
feel that in spite of Mr. Gandhi’s earnest endeavours on their 
behalf, that, as a community, they stand outside the main 
body of the Hindu community which is represented by the 
Congress.” This statement was made by Mr. Amery when he 
was elucidating the announcement made by the Viceroy on 8th 
August 1940 in which the following pledge was given to the 
minorities, on behalf of His Majesty’s Government. The Viceroy 
Said : “There are two main points which have emerged. On 
these two points His Majesty’s Government now desire me to 
make their position clear. The first is as to the position of the 

minorities in relation to any future constitutional scheme It 

goes without saying that they (H. M. Government) could not 
contemplate the transfer of their present responsibilities for the 
peace and welfare of India to any system of Government whose 
authority is directly denied by large and powerful elements in 
India’s national life. Nor could they be parties to the coercion of 
such elements into submission to such a Government,” Again on 
the 23rd April 1941, Mr. Amery referred to the demand of the 
constitutent assembly and expressed himself in the following 
terms: “India’s future constitution should be devised by Indians 
for themselves and not by the British Government. India’s 
future constitution should be essentially an Indian constitution, 
framed in accordance with the Indian conception of Indian 
conditions and Indian needs. The only essential condition is 
that the constitution itself and the body which is to frame it 
must be the outcome of agreement between principal elements 
in India’s national life.” 

Such were the views expressed and pledges given by His 
Majesty’s Government regarding Constituent Assembly, which 
is now conceded. Regarding the demand for Pakistan it was 
a demand put forward by the Muslim League. This demand 
was also rejected by His Majesty’s Government. This is what 
Mr. Amery said in regard to it in the House of Commons 
on August 1, 1940. 

“This reaction against the dangers of what is called 
the Congress Raj or Hindu Raj has gone so far as to 
lead to a growing demand from Muslim quarters for a 
complete breaking up of India into separate Hindu and 
Muslim dominions. I need say nothing to-day of the 
manifold and to my mind, insuperable objections to such 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


458 


458 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a scheme, at any rate in its extreme form. I would only note 
that it merely shifts the problem of permanent minorities to 
some-what smaller areas, without solving it.” 

Again on April 23, 1941 he referred to it in his speech in the 
House of Commons and spoke about it in the following terms : — 

“I am not concerned here to discuss the immense practical 
difficulties in the way of this so called Pakistan project nor need 
I go back to the dismal record of India’s history in the 18th 
century or to the disastrous experience of the Balkan countries 
before our eyes today in order to point out the terrible dangers 
inherent in any break up of the essential unity of India, at any 
rate in its relation to the outside world. After all, there is no 
British achievement in India of which we have reason to be 
proud than the unity we have given her.” 

Such were the views of His Majesty’s Government only a year 
ago regarding Constituent Assembly and Pakistan. 

It is quite obvious that the proposal for a Constituent 
Assembly is intended to win over the Congress, while the proposal 
for Pakistan is designed to win over the Muslim League. How 
do the proposals deal with the Depressed Classes ? To put it 
shortly, they are bound hand and foot and handed over to the 
Caste Hindus. They offer them nothing, stone instead of bread. 
For the Constituent Assembly is nothing short of a betrayal of 
the Depressed Classes. There can be no doubt as to what the 
position of the Depressed Classes will be in the Constituent 
Assembly nor can there be any doubt regarding the political 
programme of the Constituent Assembly. In the Constituent 
Assembly there may be no representatives of the Depressed 
Classes at all because no communal quotas are fixed by these 
proposals. If they are there they cannot have a free, independent 
and decisive vote. In the first place the representatives of the 
Depressed Classes will be in a hopeless minority. In the second 
place all decisions of the Constitutent Assembly are not required 
to be by a unanimous vote. A majority vote is enough to decide 
any question no matter what its constitutional importance is. 
It is clear that under this sytem the voice of the Depressed 
Classes in the Constituent Assembly cannot count. In the third 
place the present system of proportional representation by which 
the members to the Constituent Assembly are to be elected 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


459 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 459 

under the terms contained in His Majesty’s proposals cannot but 
result in the caste Hindus having virtually the right to nominate 
the representatives of the Depressed Classes to the Constitutent 
Assembly. Such representatives of the Depressed Classes will be 
the tools of the caste Hindus. In the fourth place the Constituent 
Assembly will be filled with the Congressites who will form the 
dominant majority party able to carry out its own programme. 
There is no doubt that Mr. Gandhi, whatever may be said about 
his endeavours in the matter of the social uplift of the Depressed 
Classes is totally opposed to giving political recognition to the 
Depressed Classes in the constitution as a separate and distinct 
element in the national life of India. That being the case the 
programme of the majority party in the Constituent Assembly 
will be to wipe out the political safeguards already granted to the 
Depressed Classes in the present constitution. 

Anyone who realises what is implied in the Constitutuent 
Assembly will admit that His Majesty’s Government by their 
proposals have literally thrown the Depressed Classes to the wolves. 
It may be said that while there is the Constituent Assembly which 
may deny constitutional safeguards to the Depressed Classes, His 
Majesty’s Government have been careful to include in their proposals 
in the provisions for a treaty with the Constituent Assembly 
the object of which is to secure the interests of the Depressed 
Classes. This proposal of a treaty is evidently borrowed from the 
plan adopted by His Majesty’s Government for the settlement of 
the Irish dispute. The proposal regarding the treaty does not say 
what are the safeguards His Majesty’s Government will decide to 
include in the treaty. This is an important point because there may 
be a difference of opinion between His Majesty’s Government and 
the Depressed Classes on the nature, number and method of the 
political safeguards that may be necessary to protect the interests 
of the Depressed Classes under the new constitution. 

The second and equally important question about the 
treaty is what is going to be the sanction behind the treaty. 
Will the treaty be a part of the constitution framed by 
the Constituent Assembly, so that any provision in the 
constitution which is repugnant with the treaty will be null 
and void. Or, will the treaty be just a treaty between the two 
Governments — the Indian National Government and His Majesty’s 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


460 


460 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government, as any trade treaty. If the treaty is to be of the former 
kind it will be the law of the land and will have legal sanction of 
the Indian Government behind it. If, on the other hand, the treaty 
is to be of the latter kind it is obvious it will not be the law of the 
land and will have no legal sanction behind it. Its sanction will be 
a political sanction. Now a treaty cannot override the constitution 
framed by the national Government for the obvious reason that such 
a thing, as was found in the case of Irish Free State, is incompatible 
with Dominion Status. The only sanction behind such a treaty will 
be a political sanction. It is obvious that the use of such sanction 
must depend upon the colour of the Government and the state of 
public opinion. 

Given this fact the questions that arise are two : — (1) What 
are the means which His Majesty’s Government will have at its 
disposal to enforce the treaty obligations. (2) Secondly, will His 
Majesty’s Government be prepared to use these means to coerce the 
Indian National Government to abide by the terms of the treaty. 
With regard to the first question it is obvious that the means for 
enforcing the treaty are two-fold, use of force and trade war. As 
to the military force, the Indian army will not be available. It will 
be entirely transferred to the control of the new Indian National 
Government. His Majesty’s Government will have therefore lost this 
means of enforcing the treaty. It is impossible to believe that His 
Majesty’s Government will send its own army to compel the National 
Government to obey the treaty. A trade war is not possible. It is a 
suicidal policy and the experience of the Irish war with the Irish 
Free State for the recovery of land annuities shows that a nation 
of shop-keepers will not sanction it even though it may be for their 
interest and honour. 

The treaty therefore is going to be an empty formula if not a 
cruel joke upon the Depressed Classes. His Majesty’s Government 
has sent out these proposals to be welcomed by Indians. But neither 
His Majesty’s Government nor Sir Stafford Cripps have offered any 
explanation as to why they are offering to Indians the very proposals 
which His Majesty’s Government have been condemning in scathing 
terms only a few months ago. A year ago His Majesty’s Government 
said that they would not grant Constituent Assembly because that 
would be a coercion of the minorities. His Majesty’s Government 
is now prepared to grant Constituent Assembly and to coerce the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


461 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 461 

minorities. A year ago His Majesty’s Government said that they 
will not allow Pakistan because that is Balkanization of India. 
Today they are prepared to allow the partition of India. How the 
Government of a Great Empire lose all sense of principle ? The 
only explanation is that His Majesty’s Government has, as a result 
of the course of the war, become panic-striken. The proposals 
are the result of loss of nerve. How great is the panic that has 
overtaken His Majesty’s Government can be easily seen if one 
compared the demands made by the Congress and the Muslim 
League and the concessions made to them by these proposals. 
The Congress, while it demanded that the constitution should 
be framed by a Constituent Assembly, did not demand that the 
question of safeguards for the minorities should be decided by 
the Constituent Assembly by a mere majority vote. On the other 
hand when the Viceroy announced that the British Government 
will not be a party to the coercion of the minorities involved in 
the demand by the Congress, the Working Committee of the 
Congress at its meeting at Wardha held on August 22, 1940 
passed the following resolution : — 

“The committee regrets that although the Congress has never 
thought in terms of coercing any minority, much less of asking 
the British Government to do so, the demand for a settlement 
of a constitution though through a Constituent Assembly of duly 
elected representatives has been misrepresented as coercion and 
the issue of minorities has been made into an insuperable barrier 
to Indians progress.” The Working Committee added : — “The 
Congress had proposed that minority rights should be amply 
protected by agreement with the elected representatives of the 
minorities concerned.” 

This shows that even the Congress did not demand that the 
decision of minority rights should be included in the purview 
of the Constituent Assembly. His Majesty’s Government has 
not only given the Congress what it did not ask for but has 
given them the additional right to decide this minority rights 
issue by a bare majority vote. With regard to the question of 
Pakistan, the same attitude is noticeable. The Muslim League 
did not demand that Pakistan must be conceded immediately. 
All that the Muslim League had asked for was that at the 
next revision of the constitution the Musalmans should not 
be prevented from raising the question of Pakistan. The 
present proposals have gone a step beyond and distinctly 
given to the Muslim League the right to create Pakistan. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


462 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These are constitutional proposals. They are intended to lead 
India to wage a total war in which Hindus, Musalmans, 
Depressed Classes and Sikhs are called upon wholeheartedly 
to participate. Yet Sir Stafford Cripps, either with the consent 
or without the consent of His Majesty’s Government has been 
making discrimination between major parties and minor parties. 
The major parties are those whose consent is necessary. Minor 
parties are those with whom consultation is believed to be enough. 
This is a new distinction. Certainly it was never made in the 
prior pronouncements either of His Majesty’s Government or of 
the Viceroy. The pronouncement spoke of the “consent of the 
principal elements in the national life of India.” 

So far as the Depressed Classes are concerned I am not aware 
of any pronouncement in which the Depressed Classes were placed 
on a lower plane than the one given to the Mussalmans. I quote 
the following from the speech of Viceroy made in Bombay on 
January 10, 1941 from which it will be seen that the Depressed 
Classes were bracketed with the Mussalmans. 

“There are insistent claims of the minorities. I need refer only 
to two of them; the great Muslim minority and the Scheduled 
Classes; there are the guarantees that have been given to the 
minorities in the past, the fact that their position must be 
safeguarded and that those guarantees must be honoured.” 

This invidious distinction now sought to be made is a breach of 
faith with those minorities whose position has been lowered by this 
discrimination. From a constitutional point of view it is an obnoxious 
distinction. From the point of view of total war it is bound to cause 
more disaffection and disloyalty in the country. It is for the British to 
consider whether in this attempt to win the friendship of those who 
have probably already decided to choose other friends they should 
lose those who are their real friends. The proposals show a sudden 
volte face on the part of His Majesty’s Government. The putting forth 
of those proposals which were denounced by them as an invasion 
of minorities’ rights is an indication of their complete surrender of 
right to might. This is Munich Mentality, the essense of which is to 
save oneself by sacrificing others. It is this mentality, which is writ 
large on those proposals. My advice to the British Government is 
that they should withdraw these proposals. If they cannot fight for 
right and justice and their plighted word they should better make 
peace. They can thereby at least save their honour.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


463 


6 

* The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 

Telegram, MSS. EUR. F. 125/23 
Most Immediate 1 July 1942 

Private And Personal 

No. 1968-S. Your private and personal telegram No. 799@ of 
July 1st. I would prefer (a) to issue announcement in paragraph 
4 as a separate announcement, and to accompany it with ( b ) a 
communique in the following terms : — 

Begins. His Majesty the King has been pleased to approve the 
appointment of Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
Sir E. C. Benthall, Sir Jogendra Singh, Sir J. P. Srivastava and 
Sir Mohammad Usman to the Executive Council of the Governor- 
General of India. 

The following appointments to portfolios have been made by 
the Governor- General : — 

As Member in charge of “Information” Sir C. P. Ramaswami 
Aiyar in succession to the late Right Hon’ble Sir Akbar Hydari. 

As Member in charge of “Civil Defence” Sir J. P. Srivastava 
in succession to the late Dr. Raghavendra Rao. 

As Member for “War Transport” and for “Posts and Ai r” 
respectively consequent on the appointment of Sir Andrew Clow, 
late Member in charge of “Communications”, to be Governor of 
Assam, Sir E. C. Benthall and Sir Hohammad Usman. 

As Member for “Defence” Sir Firoz Khan Noon. 

* The Transfer of Power, Vol. II, No. 211, pp. 300-01. 

@ No. 206 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


464 


464 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To succeed Sir Ramaswami Mudaliar as Commerce Member 
on his appointment as a Representative of India at the War 
Cabinet, Mr. N. R. Sarker. 

As Member in charge of the Department of Education, Health 
and Lands in succession to Mr. Sarker, Sir Jogendra Singh. 

As Member in charge of the Department of Labour in 
succession to Sir Firoz Khan Noon, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. 

The Portfolio of His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief will 
in future be designated the “War” portfolio. 

The new Defence Member will be responsible for the work 
at present discharged by the Defence Co-ordination Department, 
together with such other matters relating to the defence of India 
as are not included in the portfolios of “War” and “Civil Defence”. 


Ends. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


465 


7 

War Cabinet Paper W.P. (42) 283 

L/P & J/8/510: ff 407-16 

REPORT ON MISSION TO INDIA 
* MEMORANDUM BY THE LORD PRIVY SEAL 

6 July 1942 

I think it is desirable for purposes of official record and for 
the assistance of any similar Mission to India in future that I 
should provide a detailed account of the discussions which I had 
with Indian leaders during my recent visit to India. 

•k k k 

**(f) The Depressed Classes 

I received Dr. Ambedkar and Mr. Rajah as representatives 
of the Depressed Classes on the 30th March. They pointed 
out that, under the present system of election of Depressed 
Class representatives to Provincial Legislatures imposed by 
the Poona pact,@ the Depressed Classes would get very small 
representation in the Constituent Assembly, as most of their 
so-called representatives would be Congressmen. They asked 
me whether we considered the Depressed Classes to be one 
of the racial and religious minorities, and I replied that we 
did. They then asked what kind of provisions were likely to 


*The Transfer of Power, Vol. H, No. 227. pp. 336-37. 

**The Transfer of Power, Vol. II, No. 227, p. 336-37. Portion concerning Dr. Ambedkar 
alone is reproduced. — Ed. 

@ The Poona Pact between Hindu and Depressed Class leaders modified the 
Communal Award of 4 August 1932 (see note II). Its principal provisions were as 
follows : 148 instead of 71 seats were to be reserved for the Depressed Classes but 
their representatives were to be elected jointly by Caste Hindu as well as Depressed 
Class voters; however, the joint electorate’s choice was to be confined to a panel 
of four candidates selected in a primary election in which only Depressed Class 
voters could take part. The Pact was reached under pressure from Gandhi (then 
in gaol at Poona) who regarded the Depressed Classes as members of the Hindu 
community and opposed separate electorates for them. He threatened a fast (begun 
on 20 September) ‘unto death’ unless the Communal Award was altered to meet his 
objections. The Pact was agreed on 24 September and the acquiescence of II.M.G. 
was announced on 26 September 1932. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


466 


466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be made in the Treaty for their protection. I said that these would 
be on the lines of the League of Nations minority treaties, and 
that, if there were special provisions in the Constitution, these 
would probably be repeated in the Treaty, and that there would 
be some obligation to refer the matter to some outside authority 
in the event of a dispute, the Government of the Indian Union 
undertaking to abide by the decision so given. If the Indian 
Government failed to do so this would constitute a breach of 
treaty, and the British Government could take such steps as 
it considered wise in the particular circumstances. I said that, 
though this form of protection might seem to them inadequate, 
it was the only possible one, once granted the principle of self- 
determination for India. 

On the following day Dr. Ambedkar and Mr. Rajah wrote to 
me saying that the proposals were unacceptable to the Depressed 
Classes, as they would place them under an unmitigated system 
of Hindu rule, and would be resisted by them by all the means 
at their disposal. They requested me to convey their anxieties 
to His Majesty’s Government, and to impress upon them that 
the Depressed Classes would regard it as a breach of faith if a 
Constitution were forced upon them by His Majesty’s Government 
which had not received their free and voluntary consent, and did 
not contain within itself the provisions necessary for safeguarding 
their interests. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


467 


8 


* The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 


Telegram, MSS. EUR. F. 125/23 
immediate new Delhi, 23rd July 1942, 5-35 p.m. 

Received: 23 July, 5-30 p.m. 

No. 2169-S. Following from Lumley, dated July 22nd : — 

Begins. Ambedkar made a strong speech last night declaring 
civil disobedience at this time “treachery to India” and “ playing 
the enemy’s game” and urging all Indians as a patriotic duty “to 
resist with all the power and resources at their command any 
attempt on the part of Congress to launch civil disobedience”. 

2. He also announced that before he left for Delhi he would 
issue a statement explaining the line of policy which the 
Independent Labour Party and other allied organizations must 
follow. He asked his audience (of his followers) to study that 
statement and implicitly carry out its instructions. Ends. 

• • 


*The Transfer of Power, Vol. II, No. 310, pp. 436. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


468 


9 

*The Marquess of Linlithgow to Mr. Amery 

Telegram, MSS EUR F 125/23 

immediate 24 October 1942 

No. 47-Q.C. My telegram No. 46-Q.C. 

(a) Following is telegram received from Members of Council. — 

Begins. We have read with considerable surprise the 
statement® said to have been made by the Secretary of State 
in House of Commons that “the present European members 
were being retained merely because of difficulty in finding 
suitable Indians for posts”. If the Secretary of State has been 
correctly reported we beg to dissociate ourselves wholly with 
the position taken up by him. In our considered opinion there 
is no difficulty whatsoever in finding suitable Indians for any 
positions in Government of India and we have to remind the 
Secretary of State that if Congress and the Muslim League 
had accepted the Cripps’ proposals there would have been at 
the Centre today a wholly Indian Government with very wide 
powers. We have to add that statement in question is entirely 
at variance with facts and constitutes an affront to Indians and 
we have to request Your Excellency to communicate these our 
views to the Secretary of State. We also desire in this place 
to call attention to the Secretary of State’s declaration that 
he was not prepared in the present circumstances to permit 
interviews with Congress leaders and to enquire where the 
members of the Government of India come in on this policy and 
whether they have any say in it. In this connection Lord Simon’s 
statement in which he describes members of the Government as 

*The Transfer of Power, Vol. Ill, No. 116, p. 153. 

@ For texts of statements by Mr. Amery and Lord Simon referred to in this telegram, 
see No. 119. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


469 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 469 

Advisers seems significant.* We would not have troubled Your 
Excellency with this communication while you are on tour but 
we feel very strongly our position has been rendered extremely 
difficult by declaration of this character. Ends. 

Above telegram is from Mody, Sultan Ahmed, Ancy, Sarker, 
Ambedkar, Srivastava, Jogendra Singh. 

• • 


*‘Significant’ deciphered as ‘to (? derive) Special Significance’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


470 


10 

* Dr. Ambedkar to the Marquess of 
Linlithgow 

MSS. EUR. F. 125/124 

new delhi, 29 October 1942 

My dear Lord Linlithgow, 

In the course of my second weekly interview with you I 
told you that the position of the Scheduled Castes was very 
unsatisfactory and that the Central Government had not done 
what I thought it was bound to do for their treatment. On that 
you very kindly asked me to prepare a Memorandum for your 
consideration contianing the grievances of the Scheduled Castes 
and the remedies for removing them. All this of course must be 
within your recollection. Indeed it is you who reminded me several 
times since then if the Memorandum was ready. Unfortunately 
owing to the heavy pressure of work which fell on me since 
I took charge, I could not give to the work of preparing the 
Memorandum the priority which I should have liked to give to 
it. I am, however, happy that at last I have been able to submit 
it for your consideration. 

2. The ©Memorandum unfortunately has become a very lengthy 
document. I had a choice between making the Memorandum a 
short one containing bare recital of the grievances and the 
remedies to remove the same or to make it an exhaustive one 
containing not only the grievances and the remedies but also the 
reasoning in support of the remedies suggested. I have chosen 
the latter alternative. In doing so I have had to bear in mind 
the fact that the grievances set out in the Memorandum and 
the remedies suggested for their removal will go to different 
Departments for their opinion, and unless the Memorandum 
contained the reasons, the remedies can have very little chance 

*The Transfer of Power, Vol. Ill, No. 125, pp. 165-68. 

@ The Memorandum has been included in section I of Part II of this volume. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


471 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 471 

of being accepted. 

3. For Convenience I am setting out below in bare outline 
the grievances and the remedies which are included in the 
accompanying Memorandum : — 

I. Political Grievances — 


Pages 


1 . 

More representation in the Central Legislature 

5-9 

2. 

More representation in the Central Executive 

9-10 

3. 

Assurance of fair representation in the Public Services — 



(i) 

By declaring the Scheduled Castes as a minority and by 
reserving 13 54 per cent, of the annual vacancies for them. 

10-21 


(ii) 

Raising the age bar 

21 


(iii) 

Reduction in Examination Fees 

21 


(iv) 

Appointment of Scheduled Caste officer to protect Service 
rights of the Scheduled Castes. 

21-22 

4. 

Representation on the Federal Public Service Commission 

22 

II. 

Educational Grievances — 



1 . 

An annual recurring grant of Rs. 2 lakhs for scholarships to 
Scheduled Caste students studying for Science, Engineering 
and Technology at the different Universities. 

23-25 


2. 

An annual grant of Rs. 1 lakh for education in Science, 
Technology and Engineering in foreign countries to students 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes. 

23-25 


3. 

Scholarships and free-ships for Scheduled Caste boys at the 
Indian School of Mines conducted by the Central Government. 

25-26 


4. 

Appointment of two representatives of the Scheduled Castes 
on the Central Board of Education established by the 
Government of India. 

26-27 


5. 

Facilities for technical training by reserving — 

(a) apprenticeships in Government Printing Presses, and 

27 



(6) apprenticeships in Government Railway workshops 

27-28 

III. 

Other Grievances — 



1 . 

Provision for adequate publicity of the social and political 
grievances of the Scheduled Castes. 

29-30 


2. 

Special provision for securing for members of the Scheduled 
Castes a fooling in the Government Contracts system in the 
Public Works Department. 

30-31 

4. I 

give this Summary because I quite realize 

that it 

will 

not be possible for you to find the time necessary to go 

through the whole of it. I wish you could find lime to read the 
whole of the Memorandum. But if you cannot read the whole, 
I would request you at least to read Part IV (pages 32-36) of 


this Memorandum. In that Part of the Memorandum I have 
instituted a comparison between the condition of the Scheduled 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


472 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Castes and the Anglo-Indians and the efforts made for the 
bettermen of the latter. I request you to read it because I feel 

sure that by its perusal you will see how just and modest are 
the demands I have made and what the Government of India 
has done for the elevation of a class not more unfortunate than 
the Scheduled Castes. 

5. I need not say that I hope the grievances of the Scheduled 
Castes will be remedied before you go. Believe me, I have read 
with genuine sorrow that you will be quitting your office in 
April next. I have no idea who is going to be your successor and 
what attitude he will adopt towards the Scheduled Castes. In 
you I have learnt to place great confidence as the benefactor of 
the Scheduled Castes. You have done the greatest deed towards 
them by giving them a place in your Executive Council. It is 
a most revolutionary act for which there can be no parallel in 
India’s history. I have no doubt and no member of the Scheduled 
Castes has any doubt that if you knew the grievances of the 
Scheduled Castes you would never hesitate to set them right. 
It is from this point of view that I say that I am happy to have 
to seek justice for my people from one who knows that justice 
is due to them. I know you have the will to do it and that you 
will not like to leave it to your successor to do what you wish 
to do, and what you can do. I need hardly say that for this act 
of justice myself and the 50 millions of the Scheduled Castes 
will ever remain grateful to you.* 

Yours Sincerely, 
B. R. AMBEDKAR 

• • 


* Dr. Ambedkar submitted a further memorandum to Lord Linlithgow under cover of 
a letter dated 8 January 1943, in which he slated that this memorandum presented 
the case against the Constituent Assembly from the standpoint of the Depressed 
Classes and set out the questions on which the Depressed Classes had desired him 
to obtain an assurance from the Secretary of State. MSS. EUR. F 125/125. See No. 
336, para. 9. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


473 


11 


* Precis of Discussion in the Viceroy’s 
Executive Council 

Enclosure to No. 298 

December 1942 

The Viceroy explained at the outset that the discussion 
was necessarily on an informal basis and without prejudice to 
existing constitutional arrangements, and then examined briefly 
and objectively the three directions in which he understood in 
advance to be desired — 

(a) The complete Indianisation of his Council; 

( b ) The elimination or reduction of the powers of control and 
interference of the Secretary of State; and 

(c) Mitigation of the purely official nature of the administration 
in the Section 93 Provinces. The general discussion was 
then opened. 

k k k 

Dr. Ambedkar (Member for Labour) was opposed to any change 
unless it was in accordance with the Declaration of August 1940* 
(providing for consultation with important minorities). Subject 
to that, he was in favour of change, since what was needed was 
a strong Government, i.e. one with public opinion behind it. In 
the Provinces, ministerial government was best, even if merely 
a minority ministry. An Executive Council would be better than 
advisers. As for the Centre, Indianisation by itself would not 
placate Congress and might merely irritate them; and were 
Non-Congress elements worth placating ? Before Indianisation 
took place the communal composition of the Council must be 
settled, and that by Indians themselves. Congress had shirked 
this problem; they had not the will to solve it. His suggestion 


*Transfer of Power, Vol. Ill, (End. to No. 298), p. 426. ( Extracts concerning 
Dr. Ambedkar alone are reproduced. Rest of the discussion is omitted. — Ed.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


474 


474 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was to take the Cripps proposals as a basis and try for a 
national Government composed of Congress, the Moslem League, 
Depressed Classes, Sikhs and Christians. The Indian members of 
Council ought to sit down and prepare a scheme for communal 
representation. Though he preferred an autocratic Viceroy to a 
distant Secretary of State, he would not press for interference 
with the Secretary of State’s powers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


475 


12 


* Field Marshal Viscount Wavell to Mr. Amery 


Telegram, LIP & J/8/522 : F 198 

Immediate 

New Delhi, 7 June 1945, 7-55 p.m. 

Received: 7 June, 10 p.m. 

970-S. Superintendent series. Ambedkar Srivastava and Khare 
have this morning submitted joint note@ protesting against 
proposed equality for caste Hindus and Moslems and asserting 
that the proposals approved by His Majesty’s Government are 
unfair both to Hindus and to the Scheduled Castes. They consider 
that caste Hindus should have a majority over Moslems and that 
Scheduled Castes should have more than one member. They ask 
that their views be communicated to His Majesty’s Government. 

2. The short answer is that the proposals approved by His 
Majesty’s Government are for an interim arrangement only and 
that the main object at present is to get the parties to work 
together. I see no reason to modify views already expressed in 
my official telegrams. 

• • 


*The Transfer of Power, Vol. V, No. 482, p. 1094. 

@ This note is printed in Wavel Papers, Political Series, April 1944-July 1945, 
Pt. I, pp. 209-10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


476 


13 

* Dr. Ambedkar to Field Marshal 
Viscount Wavell 

Wavell Papers, Political Series, April 1944- July 1945 
Pt. I, pp. 207-9 

New Delhi, 7 June 1945 

Dear Lord Wavell, 

I am grateful to you for asking me in my capacity as the 
leader of the Scheduled Castes to be a member of the Conference 
which you propose to call in furtherance of your proposal for the 
Indianisation of the Executive Council. I told you, for reasons 
which I need not repeat here, that I am unable to accept your 
offer. Thereupon you desired me to name a substitute. Though 
I have expressed my disapproval with your proposals, I do not 
wish to deny you such help as you may derive from the presence 
of a Scheduled Caste representative in your Conference. I am, 
therefore, prepared to suggest a substitute. Judging on the 
suitability of various names that occur to me, I cannot think 
of any other name than that of Rao Bahadur N. Siva Raj., 
b.a., b.l. He is the President of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation and is also a member of the Central Legislative 
Assembly and of the National Defence Council. If you like you 
may invite him to the conference as a representative of the 
Scheduled Castes. 

2. There is one other matter to which I feel I must 
draw your attention right now. It relates to the extreme 
inadequacy of the representation given to the Scheduled 
Castes in His Majesty’s Government’s proposals for the 
reconstitution of the Executive Council. Five scats to 90 
millions of Muslims, one scat to 50 millions of Untouchables 
and 1 scat to 6 millions of Sikhs is a strange and sinister 
kind of political arithmetic which is revolting to my ideas of 


*The Transfer of Power, Vol. V, No. 483, p. 1094-97. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


477 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 477 

justice and commonsense. I cannot be a party to it. Measured by 
their needs, the Untouchables should get as much representation 
as the Muslims, if not more. Leaving needs aside and taking only 
numbers the Untouchables should get at least three. Instead, 
they are offered just one in a Council of fifteen. This is an 
intolerable position. 

This is a matter to which I drew your attention at the 
meeting of the Executive Council held on the 5th June when 
you explained His Majesty’s Government’s proposals to the 
Council. At the meeting of the 6th morning you replied to the 
criticisms offered by Members of Council the previous evening 
on the merits of the proposals. I naturally expected that you 
would also deal with the point I had raised. But to my great 
surprise you completely ignored it and made no reference to it 
whatever. It could not be that I was not emphatic enough. For 
I was more than emphatic. The conclusion I draw from your 
omission to refer to it is that either you did not think the matter 
to be of sufficient importance to deserve your notice or that you 
thought that I had no intention beyond lodging a protest. It is 
to remove this impression and to tell you in quite unmistakable 
terms that I propose to take definite action should His Majesty’s 
Government fail to redress the wrong that I feel the necessity 
of writing this letter. 

I would not have felt as hurt as I do if such a proposal had 
come from the Congress or the Hindu Mahasabha. But it is a 
decision by His Majesty’s Government. Even the general Hindu 
opinion is in favour of increased representation to the Scheduled 
Castes both in the Legislature and in the Executive. To take the 
proposals of the Sapru Committee as an indication of general 
Hindu opinion, the proposal of His Majesty’s Government must be 
admitted to be retrograde. For, this is what the Sapru Committee 
has said : — 

“the representation given to the Sikhs and Scheduled Castes 
in the Government of India Act is manifestly inadequate and 
unjust and should be substantially* raised. The quantum of 
increased representation to be given to them should be left to 
the Constitution-making Body. 

“Subject to the provisions of clause (b) the executive of the 
Union shall be a composite cabinet in the sense that the following 
communities shall be represented on it, viz . — 

(i) Hindus, other than Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


478 


478 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) Muslims, 

(iii) Scheduled Castes, 

(iv) Sikhs. 

(v) Indian Christians, 

(vi) Anglo-Indians. 

“(b) The representation of these communities in the executive 
shall be, as far as possible, a reflection of their strength 
in the Legislature.” 

I may add that two of my Hindu colleagues in the Executive 
Council have in the memorandum they have presented to you 
this morning* expressed that the representation given to the 
Scheduled Castes in His Majesty’s Government’s proposals is 
inadequate and unfair. What shocks me [is] that His Majesty’s 
Government with all their profession of being trustees for the 
Scheduled Castes and contrary to their repeated declarations 
should have treated their wards in such an ill-liberal, unfair and 
unjust manner and far worse than enlightened Hindu opinion 
would have done. I feel it, therefore, my bounden and sacred 
duty to oppose the proposal by every means at my command. The 
proposal means a deathknell to the Untouchables and will have 
the effect of liquidating their efforts over the last 50 years for 
their emancipation. If His Majesty’s Government notwithstanding 
its many pronouncements wish to hand over the fate of the 
Untouchables to the tender mercies of Hindu-Muslim combine, 
His Majesty’s Government may well do it. But I cannot be a 
party to the suppression of my people. The conclusion to which 
I have come is to ask His Majesty’s Government to redress the 
wrong and to give to the Untouchables at least 3 seats in the new 
Executive Council. If His Majesty’s Government is not prepare[d] 
to grant this, then His Majesty’s Government should know 
that I cannot be a member of the newly-constituted Executive 
Council, even if I was offered a place in it. The Untouchables 
have been looking forward to a full recognition of their political 
rights for some time past. I have no doubt that they will be 
stunned by the decision of His Majesty’s Government. And I 
would not be surprised if the whole of the Scheduled Castes 
decided as a matter of protest not to have anything to do with 
the new Government. I am sure their disillusionment will 

*See No. 482. (Transfer of Power). 


z:\ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 479 

THE TRANSFER OF POWER 479 

bring about a parting of the ways. This is what I anticipate will 
be the result of His Majesty’s Government’s proposals, if they 
are not revised. So far as I myself am concerned, my decision is 
made. I may be told that this is not the final shape of things. 
This is only an iterim arrangement. I have been long enough in 
politics to know concessions and adjustments more [once] made 
grows into vested rights and how wrong settlements once agreed 
upon become precedents for future settlement. I cannot therefore 
allow grass to grow under my feet. If I have capacity to judge 
aright, I visualize that the distribution of seats though it begins 
as a temporary arrangement will end by becoming permanent. 
Rather than be left to regret towards the end, I feel I must lodge 
my protest against it at the very beginning. 

It may well be that His Majesty’s Government may not mind 
my eclipse and even the eclipse of the Scheduled Castes from the 
future Government of India : nor regret the consequent parting of 
the ways between the British Government in this country and the 
Scheduled Castes. But I believe it is only fair that His Majesty’s 
Government should know what I have to say about the subject. 
I have therefore to request you to communicate to His Majesty’s 
Government my proposal for increase in the representation of 
the Scheduled Castes in the executive Council and the course 
of action I propose to take if the proposal is rejected by them. 

I am, 


Yours sincerely, 
B. R. AMBEDKAR 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


480 


14 

* Field Marshal Viscount Wavell to 
Lord Pethick-Lawrence 

L/PO/ 10/22 


PRIVATE AND SECRET 

No. 45 The Viceroy’s House, New Delhi, 

5 December 1945 

•k "k "k 

14. Ambedkar has recently submitted to Council his proposals 
for Labour Legislation for the Budget Session of 1946. One was 
a bill to amend the Factories Act, to reduce hours of work from 
56 hours to 50 hours per week. This will have to be reconsidered 
by Council when the comments from Provincial Governments 
have been received. A second proposal is to introduce a bill to fix 
minimum wages. All Provincial Governments are being consulted 
on this, but the bill is undoubtedly too ambitious in trying to 
fix minimum wages for too many industries. The schedule even 
includes Agriculture, though the administrative machinery to 
enforce minimum wages in all the 6,50,000 villages of India 
cannot possibly be provided. There was, however, a good deal of 
sympathy in Council for the proposal to introduce a bill governing 
at any rate those industries where sweated labour is believed 
to be employed. Provincial Governments are being consulted. 
Council accepted a non-controversial bill to amend the Workman’s 
Compensation Act, and another called the Employment (Standing 
Orders) Bill designed to secure that workers in large industrial 
establishments know what their conditions of service are. Finally 
Council approved a proposal to introduce a bill to amend the 
Trades Union Act and refer it to a Select Committee. The bill 
makes recognition of Trade Unions compulsory on employers. 


*The Transfer of Powers, Vol. VI, No. 268, p. 605. Only para 14 concerning 
Dr. Ambedkar is reproduced. Other paras are omitted. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


481 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 481 

15. At a later meeting Ambedkar introduced rather 
prematurely a unified scheme of insurance and social security 
for industrial workers. I fully sympathise with Ambedkar’s desire 
to get a move on with such schemes, but in this one he had not 
secured the necessary measure of inter- departmental agreement, 
and it was not clear that all Provinces would be able to make 
administrative arrangements for implementing the medical part of 
the scheme. We hope, however, to get the remaining preliminary 
work done in time to introduce a bill in the Budget Session and 
make a motion to circulate it to elicit public opinion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


482 


15 

* Note of Meeting between Cabinet 
delegation, Field Marshal Viscount Wavell 
and Dr. B. R. Ambedkar on Friday, 

5th April 1946 at 12 noon 

[L/P&J/5/337 : PP. 83-5] 

Secret 

Dr. Ambedkar said that he had little to add to the 
memorandum, f of which copies had been supplied to the 
Delegation, giving the text of the resolution passed by the Working 
Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation at its 
meeting on April 2nd. Paragraph 5 of this memorandum contained 
a list of safeguards which were largely designed to secure to 
the Scheduled Castes adequate representation in Government 
and the Pubic Services. The Federation would never accept any 
constitution in which these were not included. 

On the question of Pakistan Dr. Ambedkar doubted whether 
Muslims as a whole would really be benefited by the new State. 
So many of them would have to remain in Hindustan and would 
be unwilling or unable to migrate. 

He wondered whether Pakistan was a permanent or a passing 
mood on the part of the Muslims. Quite probably it would pass. 
But it was impossible to wait and see and the Muslim demand 
had grown so strong that it had become necessary to meet it 
somehow. In his book on the subject^ he had proposed that this 
dilemma should be resolved by an adaptation of the solution 
which Mr. Asquith had propounded in 1920 for the Irish problem. 
Mr. Asquith had suggested that Ulster should be separated from 
the rest of Ireland for six years ; but that a council consisting of 
representatives of both parts of the country should be established 
to deal with matters of common concern during this period. At the 
end of the six years Ulster would have had to choose whether to 
remain separate or to re-unite with Southern Ireland. Similarly, 

* The Transfer of Power, Vol. VII, No. 58, pp. 144-47. 
t L/P&J/10/50. 

JB. R. Ambedkar, Pakistan or the Partition of India (Thacker & Co., Bombay, 1946). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


483 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 483 

Dr. Ambedkar had proposed that Pakistan should be given 
independence for ten years, at the end of which it would be 
known whether it was an economic proposition. He admitted 
that if the people of Pakistan then wished to join up with 
Hindustan they would be in a weak position to negotiate and all 
the bargaining counters would be on the other side. During the 
ten-year period there might be a common council, but it would 
be purely consultative and would have no executive power. Any 
All- India Central Government to which the Muslims could, in 
their present mood, be brought to agree would be so weak as 
to be useless. There were many other fissiparous tendencies 
besides the Muslim demand for Pakistan, and the only Central 
Government worth having would be a strong one which could 
hold, the country together. 

In reply to an enquiry on the method of representation of the 
Scheduled Castes in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Ambedkar 
said that he did not want a Constituent Assembly at all. It 
would be dominated by the caste Hindus, and the Scheduled 
Caste members would be no more than a small minority which 
would always be outvoted even if a three-quarters or a two-thirds 
majority were required for the Assembly’s decisions. All the 
assurances of protection which His Majesty’s Government had 
given to the minorities would go by the board. Moreover there 
would be an immense amount of corruption in the Assembly — 
members would be bought over to vote against the interests of 
their communities. 

His own proposal was that the tasks envisaged for the 
Constituent Assembly should be divided into two glasses, viz : — 

(a) Constitutional questions properly so-called, e.g. the 
relations between the Legislature and the Executive and 
their respective composition and functions. There was no 
great controversy about these matters which did not excite 
the emotions. To deal with them was beyond the mental 
capacity of the type of man whom Provincial Assemblies 
might be expected to send up, and was a job for experts. 

(b) Communal questions. 

Questions under the first of these headings should be referred to a 
commission presided over by an eminent constitutional lawyer from 
Great Britain or the U.S.A. The other members should be two Indian 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


484 


484 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

experts and one representative each of the Hindu and Muslim 
communities. The terms of reference of the Commission should 
be the Government of India Act of 1935 and they should be 
required to recommend what changes should be made in the 
Act as it stood. 

Questions under (b) should be referred to a conference of the 
leaders of the different communities. If the conference failed to 
arrive at an agreed solution, His Majesty’s Government would 
have to make an award. This would no doubt be accepted if it 
were reasonable. 

Dr. Ambedkar then described the position of the Scheduled 
Castes today. It was estimated that they numbered sixty million, 
though this figure was probably inaccurate, firstly, because there 
were no reliable statistics for the States and, secondly, because 
the census had become mixed up with politics. All these people 
were subject to very serious disabilities. In the villages they were 
without land and were virtually the slaves of the Caste Hindus. 
As an instance of the power of the latter, he said that when 
some Untouchables had escaped from their villages to take up 
well-paid work under the Military authorities, the Caste Hindus 
had managed to force them back to work for them. Owing to 
the preponderance of Caste Hindus in the Subordinate Police 
and Revenue Services the Government was already, from the 
point of view of the Untouchables, not a British but a Hindu 
one. An example had been the recent arrest of 100 of their boys 
in Bombay for throwing stones at Mr. Gandhi, when the police 
had also taken the opportunity to do considerable damage in the 
Scheduled Caste area of the city. 

Politically, although the Scheduled Castes like the other 
communities, had been granted separate electorates in 1932, 
they had virtually been deprived of them by the Poona Pact.* 
Instead, they had got the system of double elections which meant 
that in the second election, in which all the Hindus voted, the 
Caste Hindus could nullify the result of the first election in 
which Untouchables were the only voters. He referred to the 
figures appended to the Working Committee’s resolution of April 
2nd which showed, firstly, that in many cases the Congress 
Scheduled Caste candidates, though outvoted by the Federation 
candidates in the primary elections, had beaten them in the final 
elections : and, secondly, how small was the number of Scheduled 


'See No. 45, note 3. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


485 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 485 

Caste voters in comparison with the total of general voters. Even 
so, Congress had resorted to loot and arson to ensure the success 
of their candidates ; he produced a volume of photographs to 
show what they had done. 

The Central Legislature had been in existence since 1919, 
yet no questions were ever asked, resolutions moved or anything 
else done with the object of helping the Scheduled Castes. 

In the Indian States the position of the Scheduled Castes 
was especially bad. There were even certain foods which they 
were not allowed to eat. In the representative institutions which 
were now being established in certain States no community 
had been given separate representation except the Muslims. 
The Political Department should have taken greater interest 
in these constitutional experiments, and should have seen to it 
that the Scheduled Castes were given separate electorates. The 
Delegation should see the President of the All-India Scheduled 
Castes States Conference. 

The Scheduled Castes had been the earliest source of man- 
power for the East India Company’s army, and so it was with 
their help that the British had conquered India. They had been 
the friends of the British ever since. Yet the British had never 
consciously and deliberately helped them, though since 1892 they 
had given enormous help to the Muslims. 

He thought that if India became independent it would be one 
of the greatest disasters that could happen. Before they left, the 
British must ensure that the new constitution guaranteed to the 
Scheduled Castes the elementary human rights of life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness, and that it restored their separate 
electorates and gave them the other safeguards which they 
demanded. At present disillusionment was driving his followers 
towards terrorism and communism. He was on trial with them 
for the efficacy of constitutional methods. 

Lord Pethick-Lawrence said that up to now Indian politics 
had been dominated by two issues, the question of winning 
independence from British rule and the Hindu-Muslim problem. 
Once these were out of the way party divisions would probably 
be on economic issues. Surely the Scheduled Castes would have 
a better chance of getting their rights by allaying themselves 
with the left wing than by relying on the British who were 
about to hand over power. In reply Dr. Ambedkar reiterated 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05A.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-16-11-2013 


486 


486 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that so long as there were joint electorates, Scheduled Caste 
voters would be so few that Hindu candidates could safely ignore 
their wishes. Caste Hindus would never support Scheduled Caste 
candidates. Admittedly under the present system they had to 
vote for Untouchables in the final elections ; but their object in 
doing so was never to favour their own candidate but merely to 
outvote the candidate put up by his own Federation. Separate 
electorates were fundamental, since without them the Scheduled 
Castes would never have their own representatives. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 1-10-2013 


487 



*Bhimrao R. Ambedkar, 

M. A. Ph. D., D. Sc, Banister-at-Law, 


22, Prithviraj Road, New Delhi 
Dated, 3rd May 1946 


Member, Governor General’s 
Executive Council. 

Dear Lord Wavell, 

The omission on the part of the Cabinet Mission to invite a 
representative of the Scheduled Castes to their Conference in 
Simla has given rise to many misgivings in the minds of the 
Scheduled Castes as to how the Cabinet Mission proposes to 
dispose of their demand for constitutional safeguards. As the 
situation is critical, I like to acquaint you with the reactions of 
the Scheduled Castes in this connection. 

The omission to invite a representative of the Scheduled 
Castes to the Simla Conference is capable of many explanations. 
One explanation that appears to me to be plausible is that the 
demands of the Scheduled Castes are such that they do not 
require the consent of other parties in as much as they do not 
trench upon their legitimate rights. This is certainly so at least 
with regard to three of their demands, namely, (1) separate 
electorates, (2) proper representation in the Central Executive, and 
(3) undertaking from parties to accept certain general principles 
in regard to the safeguarding of the interest of the Scheduled 
Castes in the future constitution as a condition precedent for 
an interim Government. 

That the demands of the Scheduled Castes do not require 
the consent of other parties is a view which I had urged very 
strongly upon the Mission in the course of my interview on the 
5th of April 1946. 


Source : Privately printed leaflet by Dr. Ambedkar. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


488 


488 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The demand for Separate Electorates by a Majority Community 
as is the case of Muslims in the Punjab, N.W.F. Province, Sind 
and Bengal, stands on a different footing from the demand for 
Separate Electorates by a Minority Community such as the 
Scheduled Castes. A demand for Separate Electorates by a 
Majority Community must require the consent of the Minority 
Community. But the demand for Separate Electorates by a 
Minority Community can never be made dependent upon the 
wishes of the Majority Community. The Electorate is primarily 
a Mechanism devised for protecting a Minority against the 
Majority. That being so, whether the Electorate should be joint 
or separate must be left entirely to Minority to determine on 
the ground that the Minority knows what is best in its own 
interest. The Majority can have no say in the matter and must 
really accept the decision of the Minority. Following this up, the 
Hindus can have very little to say as to whether the Scheduled 
Castes should or should not have Separate Electorates. 

The demand of the Scheduled Castes for Separate Electorates 
does not adversely affect any other community, not even the 
Hindus. That is why this demand is accepted by all other 
Communities. The contention of the Hindus that the Scheduled 
Castes are Hindus and therefore cannot have a Separate 
Electorates is simply purile and misses the essential point that 
Separate Electorates is really a mechanism for the protection of 
the minorities and has nothing to do with religion. If any evidence 
of this is necessary, one could refer to the case of Europeans, 
Anglo-Indians and Indian Christians who are all one by religion 
yet each have a Separate Electorate. 

If the Cabinet Mission took these facts and arguments into 
consideration there would be nothing unnatural if it accepted 
the contention of the Scheduled Castes that the consent of the 
Hindus is not necessary and that it was entirely a matter for 
the Cabinet Mission to decide, particularly when it has been 
proved that Joint Electorates have made representation of the 
Scheduled Castes a farce. 

The second demand of the Scheduled Castes that 
their representation in the Interim Government should 
be 50% of the representation granted to the Muslims is 
also a demand for which the consent of the Hindus is not 
necessary before it could be conceded. It is for the Mission 
to decide what representation the Scheduled Castes should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


489 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 489 

have in the Central Executive having regard to their numbers 
and the weight of the disabilities they are suffering from and the 
lee-way they have to make to bring themselves in line with other 
advanced communities. You will remember that this question was 
raised by me at the time of the last Simla conference and you 
were prepared to give two seats to the Scheduled Castes which 
was just a little less than 50 per cent, offered to the Muslims. 

There is nothing new in the third demand. It is merely a 
reiteration of your own view which you expressed to Mr. Gandhi 
in your letter of 15th August 1944. In para 5 of that letter you 
said : — 

“It is clear in these circumstances that no purpose will be 
served by discussion on the basis which you suggest. If, however, 
the leaders of the Hindus, the Muslims and the important 
minorities were willing to co-operate in a transitional Government 
established and working within the present constitution, I believe 
good progress might be made. For such a transitional Government 
to succeed, there must, before it is formed, be agreement in principle 
between Hindus and Muslims and all important elements as to 
the method by which the new constitution should be framed.” 

This principle which you enunciated must be presumed to 
have been made on behalf of His Majesty’s Government and 
as such it must be binding on the Cabinet Mission. Consent 
of parties would seem to be quite unnecessary for the Mission 
to give effect to this principle, which is all that the Scheduled 
Castes have demanded. 

If I may say so, these contentions have sufficient force to lead 
to the conclusion that Mission docs not think that the consent of 
the Hindus is necessary before it can pronounce upon the demands 
of the Scheduled Castes and that this is why the Scheduled 
Castes have not been invited to send their representatives to 
the Simla Conference. 

But unfortunately this is not the only explanation that comes 
to one’s mind. There is another explanation which is possible. It 
is that the Cabinet Mission regards an agreement between the 
Congress and the Muslim League enough to give them a clear line 
to proceed with the formation of the interim Constitution as well as 
for determining the machinery for shaping the future constitution of 
India without waiting to consider the case of the Scheduled Castes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


490 


490 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Scheduled Castes are filled with anxiety as they do not 
know definitely what the plan of the Mission is. If the Mission 
has adopted the second plan, which may well be the fact, 
then I feel that I shall be failing in my duty if I did not lodge 
my protest against this betrayal of the Scheduled Castes and 
inform the Mission that they will be wholly responsible for the 
consequences that might ensue. 

This letter is written by me in my capacity as a representative 
of the Scheduled Castes. It is addressed to you in your capacity 
as a Member of the Cabinet Mission. I shall be grateful if you 
will be so good as to circulate it to your colleagues. 

I am, 

Yours sincerely, 
B. R. Ambedkar. 

His Excellency Field Marshal 

The Right Hon’ble Viscount Wavell of 

Cyrenaica and Winchester, SIMLA. 

G.C.B., G.M.S.I., G.M.I.E., C.M.G., M.C., 

Viceroy & Governor General of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


491 


17 

* Members of the Executive Council to 
Field Marshal Viscount Wavell 

[L/P&J/5/337 : p. 248 ] 

Top Secret New Delhi, 8th May 1946 

Dear Lord Wavell, 

We, the undersigned members of the Executive Council of 
the Governor General of India, present today in New Delhi, 
believing that it would facilitate the arrangements which your 
Excellency and the Cabinet Mission have in view, hereby place 
our respective portfolios at the disposal of His Majesty and Your 
Excellency. 

Yours sincerely, 

A. Ramaswami Mudaliar, 

E.C, Benthall, 

Md. Usman, 

B. R. Ambedkar, 

J. P. Srivastava, 

M. Azizul Haque, 

N. B. Khare, 
Asoka K. Roy, 

A. Rowlands, 

J. A. Thorne, 

A. Hydari. 

[Addendum in oringinal:] (The three absent members — 
Field Marshal Sir Claude Auchinleck, Sir Arthur Waugh and 
Sir Jogendra Singh submitted their resignations separately. The 
War Member was in the United Kingdom, the Industries and 
Supply Member was on deputation in the United States and 
Education, Health and Agriculture Member was on tour.) 

• • 


The Transfer of Power, Vol. VII, No. 218, pp. 460-61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


492 


18 

Dr. Ambedkar to Rt. Hon’ble Mr. A. V. 
Alexander, Member, Cabinet Mission 

* Bhimrao R. Ambedkar, 22, Prithviraj Road, New Delhi. 

M. A., Ph. D., D. Sc, Barrister-at-Law, Dated, 14th May 1946 

Member, Governor General’s 
Executive Council. 

*Dear Mr. Alexander, 

It is a pity that your efforts to bring about a settlement 
between the Congress and the League should have failed. I know 
you deserve every sympathy and every gratitude. At the same 
time, I cannot help saying that the Mission’s effort to settle 
reminds me of an old Baniya who being without a son to inherit 
his wealth married a young girl with the hope of begetting a 
heir. The bride conceived but the bridegroom was striken with a 
fell-disease. He, however, refused to die without having a look at 
the baby and would not wait for delivery which was far off. He 
was so impatient that he called the doctor, asked him to open 
the stomach of his wife and let him see whether it was a boy or 
a girl. The result of the operation was that both the baby and 
the mother died. If I may say so, the Mission wanted to do very 
much what the Baniya did. You may not be aware but there 
are many who, like me, feel that the Mission was engaged in 
bringing about a forced delivery earlier than the natural period 
of gestation. 

2. To my mind, it is only right to say that the Hindus 
and the Muslims are today mentally incompetent to decide 
upon the destiny of this country. Both Hindus and Muslims 
are just crowds. It must be within your experience that a 
crowd is less moved by material profit than by a passion 
collectively shared. It is easier to persuade a mass of 


Source : Privately printed leaflet by Dr. Ambedkar. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


493 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 493 

men to sacrifice itself collectively than to act upon a cool 
assessment of advantages. A crowd easily loses all sense of 
profit and loss. It is moved by motives which may be high or 
low, genial or barbarous, compassionate or cruel, but is always 
above or below reason. The common sense of each is lost in the 
emotion of all. It is easier to persuade a crowd to commit suicide 
than to accept a legacy. It is not for me to advise you how you 
should proceed. The Mission has found greater wisdom and higher 
inspiration in the Bhangi Basti and in 10 Aurangazeb Road. I 
would be the last person to say anything in depreciation of such 
wisdom and inspiration. But I do think that if the Mission were 
not to exhibit the pathetic spectacle of an old man in a hurry, a 
phrase used by Chamberlain to describe Gladstone engaged in 
his campaign for Irish Home Rule and allow that in diplomacy 
is called ‘Cooling period’ they will find that they have an easier 
situation to deal with. 

3. That is a matter for the Mission, for the major parties 
and those who have put their faith in the major parties. I am 
concerned in knowing how you propose to deal with the problem of 
the Untouchables and their demand for constitutional safeguards. 
In the official statement issued by the Mission on the last day 
of the Simla talks, it is said that the Mission will announce 
the next step it proposes to take within a few days after they 
return to Delhi. Obviously, the eyes of all the Scheduled Castes 
are turned towards this announcement. What the Mission will 
do will ultimately decide their fate. The decision of the Mission 
will either open to the Untouchables the path of life, liberty 
and pursuit of happiness or it will drive a nail in their coffin. 
The question being one of life and death it would not be wrong 
if I were to engage your attention for a few minutes with the 
problem of the Untouchables. 

4. The problem of the Untouchables is a formidable one 
for the Untouchables to face. But fortunately it is simple to 
understand if only the following facts are borne in mind. The 
Untouchables are surrounded by a vast mass of Hindu population 
which is hostile to them and which is not ashamed of committing 
any inequity or atrocity against them. For a redress of these 
wrongs which are matters of daily occurence, the Untouchables 
have to call in the aid of the administration. What is the 
character and composition of this administration ? To be brief, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


494 


494 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the administration in India is completely in the hands of the 
Hindus. It is their monopoly. From top to bottom it is controlled 
by them. There is no Department which is not dominated by 
them. They dominate the Police, the Magistracy and the Revenue 
Services, indeed any and every branch of the administration. The 
next point to remember is that the Hindus in the administration 
are not merely non-social, they are positively anti-social and 
inimical to the Untouchables. Their one aim is to discriminate 
against the Untouchables and to deny and deprive them not only 
of the benefits of law, but also of the protection of the law against 
tyranny and oppression. The result is that the Untouchables 
are placed between the Hindu population and the Hindu-ridden 
administration, the one committing wrongs against them and the 
other protecting the wrong-door instead of the victims. 

5. Against this back-ground, what can Swaraj of the Congress 
variety mean to the Untouchables ? It only means one thing, 
namely, that while today it is only the administration that 
is in the hands of the Hindus, under Swaraj the Legislature 
and Executive will also be filled with Hindus. It goes without 
saying that Swaraj would aggravate the sufferings of the 
Untouchables. For, in addition to their having to face an 
hostile administration, the Untouchables will have to face an 
hostile or indifferent Legislature, a callous Executive and an 
administration uncontrolled and unbridled in venom and in 
harshness in its inequitious attitude towards the Untouchables. 
To put it differently, under Swaraj of the Congress variety, the 
Untouchables will have no way of escape from the destiny of 
degradation which the Hindus and Hinduism have fixed for them. 

6. I hope this will give you some idea as to why the 
Untouchables have been insisting that the only way by which the 
Untouchables can prevent this Swaraj from becoming a calamity 
to them is to have their representatives in the Legislature so 
that they may keep on protesting against wrongs and injustices 
done to them by the Hindus, to have their representatives in 
the Executive so that they may make plans for their betterment 
and to have representatives in the services so that the 
administration may not be wholly hostile to them. If you accept 
the justice of the demand of the Untouchables for constitutional 
safeguards, you will have no difficulty in understanding why the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


495 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 495 

Untouchables want separate electorates. The Untouchables will 
be a minority in the Legislature. They are destined to remain 
a minority. They cannot overcome the majority which being 
communal in its making is, so to say, fixed and pre-ordained. 
All they can do is to place themselves in a position to be able to 
determine the terms on which they will be prepared to work with 
the majority and not be compelled to accept the terms prescribed 
by the majority, and secondly, if the majority refuses to work 
with them and declines to redress their wrongs, they would at 
least be free to utter their protest against the majority on the 
floor of the Legislature. How are the Untouchables to maintain 
their freedom to protest ? Only if their representatives in the 
Legislatures do not owe their election to the votes of the majority. 
This is the basis of their demand for separate electorates. 

7. No safeguards are going to be of any value to the 
Untouchable sunless the Untouchables get a separate electorate. 
Separate electorate is the crux of the matter. I have before me a 
copy of the representation submitted to the Cabinet Mission by 
three Congress Harijans who were interviewed by the Mission on 
the 9th April 1946. They were no better than the three tailors 
of Tooly Street who had the audacity to present an address 
to the Parliament saying : “We the people of England”. Apart 
from this, it is instructive to note that there is no difference 
between the demands put forth by me on behalf of the Scheduled 
Castes Federation and the demands put forth by these Congress 
Harijans. The only difference that exists relates to the question of 
electorates. I do not know how you interpret the demands of the 
Congress Harijans. They are not really demands. They represent 
what the Congress is prepared to give to the Untouchables by way 
of political safeguards. This is not merely my understanding. It 
is my knowledge. For I have been informed by persons who know 
the mind of the Congress that if I was prepared to accept joint 
electorates, the Congress on its part would be quite prepared to 
concede all other demands of mine. You must be wondering why 
should the Congress be prepared to concede all the demands of 
the Scheduled Castes and object only to one namely, separate 
electorates. There will be no wonder if you know what game 
the Congress is playing. It is a very deep game. Realising that 
there is no escape from giving the Untouchables some safeguards, 
the Congress wants to find out some way by which it can 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


496 


496 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

make them of no effect. It is in the system of joint 
electorates that the Congress sees an instrument of making 
the safeguards of no effect. That is why the Congress is 
insisting upon joint electorates. For joint electorates means 
giving the Untouchables office without power. What the 
Untouchables want is office with power. This, they can only 
get through separate electorates and that is why they are 
insisting upon it. 

8. I believe the case in favour of separate electorates for 
the Scheduled Castes is a cast-iron case. Every other party 
except the Congress accepts it. The arguments in favour of 
separate electorates have been set out by me in my letter 
of 3rd May 1946 addressed to Lord Wavell which he must 
have shown to you and it is therefore unnecessary to repeat 
them here. The question is : what the Mission is going to do 
with this demand of the Scheduled Castes. Are they going 
to make the Untouchables free from political yoke of the 
Hindus ? Or, are they going to throw them to the wolves by 
favouring the system of joint electorates in order to make 
friends with the Congress and the Hindu majority whom it 
represents ? The Scheduled Castes are entitled to ask His 
Majesty’s Government that before the British abdicate, His 
Majesty’s Government shall make sure that Swaraj does not 
become a strangle-hold for the Untouchables. 

9. Allow me to say that the British have a moral 
responsibility towards the Scheduled Castes. They may have 
moral responsibilities towards all minorities. But it can never 
transcend the moral responsibility which rests on them in 
respect of the Untouchables. It is a pity how few Britishers 
are aware of it and how fewer are prepared to discharge 
it. British Rule in India owes its very existence to the help 
rendered by the Untouchables. Many Britishers think that 
India was conquered by the Clives, Hastings, Cootes and so 
on. Nothing can be a greater mistake. India was conquered 
by an army of Indians and the Indians who formed the 
army were all Untouchables. British Rule in India would 
have been impossible if the Untouchables had not helped 
the British to conquer India. Take the Battle of Plassey 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


497 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 497 

which laid the beginning of British Rule or the battle of Kirkee 
which completed the conquest of India. In both these fateful battles 
the soldiers who fought for the British were all Untouchables. 

10. What have the British done to these Untouchables 
who fought for them ? It is a shameful story. The first thing 
they did was to stop their recruitment in the army. A more 
unkind, more ungrateful and more cruel act can hardly be 
found in history. In shutting out the Untouchables from 
the Army the British took no note that the Untouchables 
had helped them to establish their rule and had defended it 
when it was menaced by a powerful combination of native 
forces in the Mutiny of 1857. Without any consideration 
as to its effects upon the Untouchables the British by one 
stroke of the pen deprived them of their source of livelihood 
and let them fall to their original depth of degradation. Did 
the British help them in any way to overcome their social 
disabilities ? The answer again must be in the negative. 
The schools, wells and public places were closed to the 
Untouchables. It was the duty of the British to see the 
Untouchables, as citizens, were entitled to be admitted to 
all institutions maintained out of public funds. But the 
British did nothing of the kind and what is worst, they 
justified their inaction by saying that untouchability was 
not their creation. It may be that untouchability was not 
the creation of the British. But as Government of the day, 
surely the removal of untouchability was their responsibility. 
No Government with any sense of the functions and duties 
of a Government could have avoided it What did the British 
Government do ? They refused to touch any question which 
involved any kind of reform of Hindu society. So far as social 
reform was concerned, the Untouchables found themselves 
under a Government distinguished in no vital respect from 
those native Governments under which they had toiled and 
suffered, lived and died, through all their weary and forgotten 
history. From a political standpoint, the change was nominal. 
The despotism of the Hindus continued as ever before. Far 
from being curbed by the British High Command, it was 
pampered. From a social point of view, the British accepted 
the arrangements as they found them and preserved them 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


498 


498 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

faithfully in the manner of the Chinese tailor who, when given 
an old coat as a pattern, produced with pride an exact replica, 
rents and patches and all. And what is the result ? The result 
is that though 200 years have elapsed since the establishment 
of the British Rule in India the Untouchables have remained 
Untouchables, their wrongs remained unredressed and their 
progress hampered at every stage. Indeed if the British 
Rule has achieved anything in India it is to strengthen and 
reinvigorate Brahmanism which is the inveterate enemy of 
the Untouchables and which is the parent of all the ills from 
which the Untouchables have been suffering for ages. 

11. You have come here to announce that the British are 
abdicating. It cannot be wrong for an Untouchable to ask “to 
whom are you leaving this legacy of authority and power ?” 
To the protagonist of Brahmanism, which means to the 
tyrants and oppressors of the Untouchables. Such a method 
of liquidating the British Empire in India need not raise any 
qualms of conscience among members of other parties. But 
what about the British Labour Party ? The Labour Party 
claims to stand for the unprivileged and the down-trodden. If 
it is true to its salt, I have no doubt that it will stand by the 
sixty millions of the Untouchables of India and do everything 
necessary to safeguard their position and not allow power to 
pass into the hands of those who by their religion and their 
philosophy of life are unfit to govern and are in fact the 
enemies of the Untouchables. It will be no more than bare act 
of atonement on the part of the British for the neglect of the 
Scheduled Castes whose trustees they always claimed to be. 

12. What has led me to unburden myself at such length 
is the anxiety caused by the apparent silence of the Mission 
over the question of constitutional safeguards raised by 
the Untouchables. This anxiety has been deepened by 
the attitude taken by the Mission towards the pledges 
given to the Untouchables and to the minorities by His 
Majesty’s Government. The attitude of the Mission in 
regard to these pledges reminds one of Lord Palmerston 
who said, “We have no permanent enemies; we have no 
permanent friends; we have only permanent interest.” 
You can well imagine what a terrifying prospect it would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


499 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 499 

present to the Untouchables if the impression was created that 
the Mission was adopting this Palmerston maxim as its guide. 
You came from the under-privileged classes of Great Britain and 
I have full faith that you will do your best to prevent a possible 
betrayal of the 60 millions of India’s under-privileged. That is 
why I have thought of placing their case before you. If you will 
allow me to say, the Untouchables have got a feeling that they 
have no greater friend in the Mission than yourself. 

I am, 

Yours sincerely, 
B. R. Ambedkar. 

The Rt. Hon’ble Mr. A. V. Alexander, 

C.H.M.P., Member, Cabinet Mission, 

Viceroy’s House, 

New Delhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


500 


19 

Dr. Ambedkar to Lord Pethick-Lawrence 

[L /P&J/ 10/ 43 :f/ 196-8} 

22, Prithviraj Road, New Delhi, 
22 May 1946 

*Dear Lord Pethick-Lawrence, 

In reading the statement issued by the Cabinet Mission I 
have found that on certain points there is much ambiguity. 
They are set out below: — 

(1) Whether the term “minorities” in paragraph 20 of the 
statement includes the Scheduled Castes ? 

(2) Paragraph 20 lays down that the Advisory Committee on 
the rights of citizens, minorities and tribal and excluded areas 
should contain full representation of the interests affected. Who 
is to see whether the Advisory Committee does in fact contain 
full representation of the interests affected ? 

(3) Whether, in order to see that there is full representation 
of the interests affected, H.M.G. propose to reserve to themselves 
the right to add to the Committee by nomination of persons 
from outside the Constituent Assembly representing such 
interests ? The necessity for nomination from outside seems 
to be essential, for otherwise there is no other method for 
securing representation of tribal and excluded areas from within 
the Constituent Assembly. If the necessity for nomination is 
admitted, will the principle of nomination of members of the 
Scheduled Castes from outside the Constituent Assembly be 
extended to secure full representation of the Scheduled Castes 
on the Advisory Committee ? 

(4) In paragraph 22 of the statement there is a 
provision for a treaty between the Union Constituent 
Assembly and the United Kingdom providing for certain 
matters arising out of the transfer of power. Will 


The Transfer of Power, Vol. VII, No. 359, pp. 661-62. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


501 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 501 

this proposed treaty include a provision for the protection of 
the minorities as was stipulated in the Cripps proposals ? If the 
Treaty is not to have such a provision, how does H.M.G. propose 
to make the decisions of the Advisory Committee binding on the 
Constituent Assembly ? 

(5) The statement includes Europeans under the category of 
“General”. From this it may be presumed that the Europeans 
will have the right to vote for the election of representatives to 
the Constituent Assembly. Are the Europeans entitled to put 
up Europeans as candidates for the election of the Constituent 
Assembly ? This is not made clear in the Statement. 

These are questions which require clarification. I shall feel 
grateful if you will be so good as to favour me with your answers 
to them. I am leaving Delhi tonight for Bombay. Any reply that 
you may like to make to the questions set out above may kindly 
be sent to my address in Bombay, which is given below. 

(Address: Saloon No. 27, Central Station, 

B. B. & C. I. Railway, Bombay). 

Yours sincerely, 
B. R. Ambedkar 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


502 


20 


* Lord Pethik-Lawrence to Dr. Ambedkar 

[L/P&J/5/337 : pp. 371-2] 

28 May 1946 

Thank you for your letter of the 22nd May® in which you ask 
for elucidation of certain points in the recent Statement 

You will appreciate that the object of the Delegation is to set 
up machinery whereby Indians can frame their own constitution 
for an independent India. The object of our Statement is to 
provide a basis on which the parties can come together for that 
purpose and we hope that it will be accepted and worked by 
all concerned. We have limited our Statement to the minimum 
which seemed to us necessary for that purpose. Other matters 
which arise will fall to be decided by the Constituent Assembly. 

It is certainly our intention that the term “minorities” in 
paragraph 20 of the Statement includes the Scheduled Castes. 
On the other hand, it will be for the Constituent Assembly itself 
to set up the Advisory Committee and we assume that it will 
desire that it should be fully representative. 

It is not our intention to interfere with the Constituent 
Assembly. The personnel of the Advisory Committee is not 
however limited by our Statement to persons who are members 
of the Constituent Assembly. 

I think your other questions arc largely covered by the further 
Statementf which was issued by the delegation on Saturday 
evening and of which I enclose a copy. 

Mr. Alexander has asked me to acknowledge and thank you 
for your letter # which you sent him recently. He is away from 
Delhi for a few days on a visit to Ceylon and will reply to you 
on his return. 

• • 

* The Transfer of Power, Vol. VII, No. 399, p. 723. 

®No. 359. fNo. 376. # Not traced in India Office Records. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


503 


21 


* Rao Bahadur Sivaraj to Field Marshal 
Viscount Wavell 


L/P&J/5/337 : pp. 410-13 

5 June 1946 

No. 592/73/43 

A meeting of the Working Committee of the All-India 
Scheduled Castes Federation was held in Bombay on 4th June 
1946 under my Chairmanship to consider the situation arising 
out of the proposals made by the Cabinet Mission regarding the 
future constitution of India. The Working Committee has passed 
a Resolution which they have asked me to send to the Members 
of the Cabinet Mission for their consideration. In pursuance 
thereof, I am enclosing herewith a copy of that Resolution. I 
shall be grateful to know from the Cabinet Mission if they have 
anything to say in regard to the demands contained in paragraph 
6 of the Resolution. 

Enclosure to No. 454 

The All-India Scheduled Castes Federation 

RESOLUTION PASSED AT THE MEETING OF THE WORKING 
COMMITTEE HELD AT BOMBAY ON 4TH JUNE 1946 

The Working Committee of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation has taken into consideration (1) the first statement 
issued by the Cabinet Mission on the Constitution of India; 
(2) the Press interviews given by the Members of the Mission 
in amplification of their statement; (3) the second statement 
made by the Cabinet Mission and (4) the correspondence 
between the Cabinet Mission and the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar. There are many points arising from the statement 
of the Cabinet Mission on which the Working Committee 


The Transfer of Power, Vol. VII, No. 454, pp. 808-12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


504 


504 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

would like to state its views. For the present, the Working 
Committee prefers to deal with the plan of the Cabinet Mission 
for framing the future Constitution of India in so far as it affects 
the Scheduled Castes. 

2. The working Committee has noticed with profound 
indignation that the Cabinet Mission has not mentioned the 
Scheduled Castes even once in the course of their statement 
of 5,000 words. It is difficult to understand the working of the 
mind of the Cabinet Mission. The Mission could not have been 
unaware of the existence of the Untouchables, their disabilities, 
the tyrannies and oppressions practised upon them day to day 
by the Caste Hindus all throughout India. The Cabinet Mission 
could not have been unaware of the pronouncements made by 
His Majesty’s Government that the Untouchables were separate 
from the Caste Hindus and constituted a distinct element in the 
national life of India. The Cabinet Mission could not have been 
unaware of the pledges given by His Majesty’s Government that 
no Constitution which had not the consent of the Scheduled 
Castes would be imposed upon them. The Cabinet Mission could 
not have been unaware of the fact that at the Simla Conference 
convened by Lord Wavell only a year ago, the Scheduled Castes 
were given separate representation from the Caste Hindus. Having 
regard to these circumstances, the Working Committee feels no 
hesitation in saying that in ignoring the Scheduled Castes in the 
manner in which it has done, the Cabinet Mission has brought 
the name of the British nation into disgrace and disrepute. 

3. The Working Committee has noticed the statement made 
by the Cabinet Mission in the course of the Press interviews 
that they have made double provision for the representation of 
the Scheduled Castes in the Constituent Assembly and in the 
Advisory Committee. The Working Committee feels bound to say 
that these provisions are absolutely illusory and unworthy of 
serious consideration. In the plan set out by them the Mission 
have not reserved any seat for the Scheduled castes in the election 
by the Provincial Legislatures to the Constituent Assembly as 
they have done for the Sikhs and the Muslims. There is no 
obligation on the Provincial Legislature to elect a specified number 
of Scheduled Caste members to the Constituent Assembly. It is 
quite possible that the Constituent Assembly may not have in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


505 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 505 

it any representative of the Scheduled Castes. And even if a few 
representatives of the Scheduled Castes should find place in the 
Constituent Assembly, they being elected by Hindu votes, they 
can never represent the true interests of the Scheduled Castes. 
As to the Advisory Committee it cannot be substantially different 
from the Constituent Assembly. It will only be a reflection of 
the Constituent Assembly. 

4. The Working Committee finds it extremely difficult to 
understand how the cabinet Mission could have come to believe 
that they had made enough and good provision for giving effective 
voice to the Scheduled Castes in the Constituent Assembly 
and the Advisory Committee. Abundant and incontrovertible 
evidence was presented to the Mission to show that the real 
representatives of the Scheduled Castes arc those who were 
elected in the primary elections for which the Scheduled 
Castes have separate electorates, that the present Scheduled 
Caste members of the Provincial Legislatures who fought the 
primary elections were at the bottom of the poll and that on 
account of the vicious system of joint electorates the men who 
were at the bottom in the primary elections came to the top in 
the final elections only because of the Caste Hindu votes and 
that therefore the Scheduled Caste members of the Provincial 
Legislatures in no way represent the Scheduled Castes but they 
are tools of the Caste Hindus. Far from making double provision 
for representing the Scheduled Castes in the Constituent 
Assembly and the Advisory Committee, the Mission has without 
compunction ignored this unimpeachable evidence and without 
any justification committed the gravest act of treachery in 
leaving the Scheduled Castes to the mercy of the Hindus. The 
Working Committee desires to inform the Mission that the 
Scheduled Castes are not impressed either by their logic or by 
their sense of moral responsibility. 

5. While the whole plan of the Cabinet Mission is 
mischievous inasmuch as it proposes to solve the minority 
problem by allowing freedom to the Muslim majority to 
dispose of the non-Muslim minorities in the Muslim zone and 
the Hindu majority to dispose of the non-Hindu minorities 
including the Scheduled Castes in the Hindu zone, the 
Working Committee finds that the Cabinet Mission in framing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


506 


506 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

its plan has shown greater concern for the protection of the 
Muslim community than for safeguarding the interests of the 
Scheduled Castes. In paragraph 15 of their plan the Cabinet 
Mission have prescribed what matters are to be beyond the 
reach of the Constituent Assembly. The object behind this 
provision in paragraph 15 is to prevent the domination of the 
Muslim community by the Hindu community. The fear which 
the Scheduled Castes have of the Hindu majority is far greater 
and far more real than the Muslim community has or can 
have. The Scheduled Castes have been urging that the only 
effective protection they can have is representation through 
separate electorates and the provision for separate settlements. 
The Cabinet Mission were aware of these demands and all the 
evidence in support of them. Following the principle adopted 
by the Cabinet Mission to guarantee freedom to the Muslim 
community from the domination of the Hindu majority in the 
manner referred to above, it was possible for the Cabinet to 
lay down in the same paragraph 15 a further limitation on the 
powers of the Constituent Assembly by prescribing that the 
Scheduled Castes should have the right to be represented in 
the Legislatures through separate electorates, and to have a 
statutory provision for separate settlements as means of escape 
from the domination of the Hindu majority. 

6. The Working Committee has noted that the Cabinet 
Mission has, in its second statement,* provided that the 
ratification of the treaty between the United Kingdom and the 
Indian Constituent Assembly will be subject to proper safeguards 
being made for the protection of the minorities including the 
Scheduled Castes. The Cabinet Mission in its hurry to placate 
the Congress Party had not dared to include this provision in 
clause 22 of its first statement although it had formed part of 
the Cripps proposals of 1942. While the Working Committee 
is glad that the Mission has retrieved its position and saved 
the honour of the British people in whose name pledges were 
given to the Scheduled Castes, the Working Committee demands 
that the plan of the Cabinet Mission should be amended in 
the following respects : 

(1) The following clauses should be added as clauses (7) and (8) 


No. 376. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


507 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 507 

to paragraph 15 of the statement: 

“(7) The Scheduled Castes should have the right to be 
represented in the Legislatures through separate electorates. 

(8) That the Constitution shall contain a provision making 
it obligatory on the Government to undertake the formation of 
separate settlements for the Scheduled Castes.” 

(2) Paragraph 20 of the first statement should be so amended 
as to make those members of the Scheduled Castes who topped 
the polls in the last primary elections, members of the Advisory 
Committee and be allowed to elect five other representatives of 
the Scheduled Castes to the Advisory Committee. 

7. The Working Committee desires to inform His Majesty’s 
Government and the British Labour Party that they should prove 
their sincerity towards the Scheduled Castes by proceeding at 
once to rectify the wrong done to them by the Cabinet Mission. 
Failing this, there will be no alternative for the Scheduled 
Castes but to resort to direct action. If circumstances require, 
the Working Committee, in order to save the Scheduled Castes 
from this impending catastrophy, will not hesitate to ask the 
Scheduled Castes to resort to direct action. 

8. The Working Committee is aware of the panic caused 
among the Scheduled Castes by the Plan put forth by the Cabinet 
Mission. The Working Committee desires to tell the Scheduled 
Castes to maintain the courage and heroism they have shown 
in fighting the last elections against the Congress single-handed 
and without resources in spite of the acts of violence, coercion 
and arson practised by the Congress and when every other Party 
had shut its shop, and assures them that there is no reason 
to be panicky and given courage and solidarity, their cause 
which is the case of justice and humanity is bound to triumph 
notwithstanding the machinations of their enemies. 

9. The Working Committee hereby authorizes the President to 
constitute a Council of Action charged with the duty of examining 
the lines of direct action and to determine the one most effective 
and fix the time for launching the same. 

10. The Working Committee has noticed : 

(1) the campaign of tyranny and oppression which is being carried 
on by Caste Hindus against the Scheduled Castes in villages 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


508 


508 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and towns throughout the length and breadth of India 
for no other reason except that they fought the elections 
against the Congress, and which has caused many deaths 
and injuries ; 

(2) the shameful part which the Hindu police have been 
playing in siding with the Caste Hindus in belabouring 
and arresting innocent men and women from among the 
Scheduled Castes ; 

(3) the unlawful part which the rationing officers are playing 
as partisans of the Congress in refusing to the Scheduled 
Castes supply of rations; 

(4) the conspiracy of silence observed by the newspapers who 
have never cared to condemn these outrages on innocent 
men and women; 

(5) the utter indifference shown by the Provincial Government 
in protecting the lives and properties of the Scheduled 
Castes. 

The Working Committee cannot help feeling that this conduct 
of the majority community proves beyond the shadow of a doubt 
how unworthy the Hindu community is to be entrusted with 
power and that if the majority community does not improve 
its morality, the Scheduled Castes would be forced to protect 
themselves by every means open to them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


509 


22 


* Mr. Attlee to Dr. Ambedkar 

Paris, 1st August 1946 

My dear Ambedkar, 

I have carefully considered your letter of July 1st and the 
papers enclosed.® 

I am afraid that I cannot accept the view that the Cabinet 
Mission and the Viceroy were unjust to the Scheduled Castes. 
The reason why they have revised the policy followed at the 
Simla Conference of 1945 is, as you suggest, the result of the 
elections to the Provincial Legislatures, which were held last 
spring. The Mission made a careful study of the voting figures 
and I have examined them myself. We appreciate that there 
are grounds for the view that the present electoral system does 
not do justice to those Scheduled Caste candidates who are 
opposed to Congress. On the other hand, I do not find that the 

* Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, No. 105, pp. 170-72. 

@ On 1st July Dr. Ambedkar sent Mr. Attlee a lengthy letter with which he enclosed 
copies of recent correspondence, a memorandum, a speech and some other items. 
Dr. Ambedkar’s letter was in continuation of a telegram he had sent Mr. Attlee on 17th 
June and covered similar ground. The telegram read : 

‘At time of last year’s Simla Conference, Viceroy on my protest and with consent 
of Home Government promised increase Scheduled Castes’ representation in Interim 
Government to two seats in Council of 14. I had demanded three. Compromise I 
accepted two. New Proposals Interim Government announced yesterday give Scheduled 
Castes only one seat. This gross breach of solemn promise given after due deliberation. 
One seat most unfair. Mission is treating sixty million Untouchables as being equal 
to four millions Sikhs, three million Christians in matter of representation. Scheduled 
Caste nominee does not represent Scheduled Castes, is elected entirely by Hindu 
votes and is creature of Congress. Representation to Scheduled Castes Congressman 
is no representation to Scheduled Castes. It is representation to Congress. Cabinet 
Mission heaping upon Scheduled Castes one wrong after another, bent on sacrificing 
them with view appease Congress and destroying their independent position in 
public life country. Please intervene and redress wrong by directing Mission to give 
Scheduled Castes two seats to be filled by nominees of Federation which Mission 
knows alone represents Scheduled Castes. Scheduled Castes insist on two seats or 
none. To avoid misunderstanding of my motive I like to state that I have no desire 
to be in Interim Government and will stand out Am fighting for rights of Scheduled 
Castes. Hope there is some sense of justice left in British Government — Ambedkar’. 
[L/P&J/10/50 : ff 81-3 and Attlee Papers, University College, Oxford.] 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


510 


510 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

figures substantiate what you say about the achievements of 
candidates belonging to your Federation at the primary elections.* 
While I do not propose to go into the matter in detail here the 
facts are that primary elections were held in only 43 of the 151 
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes. Of these 43 primary 
elections, the Scheduled Castes Federation contested 22 and 
topped the poll in only 13. 

In your letter you make three specific requests.@ As regards 
the first, His Majesty’s Government are anxious that the 
Constituent Assembly should have the fullest possible freedom 
of action consistent with the terms of the Cabinet Mission’s 
Statements of May 16th and May 25th. We ourselves of course 
consider the Scheduled Castes to be an important minority which 
should be represented on the Minority Advisory Committee. But 
the declaration for which you ask could not be confined to the 
Scheduled Castes and would have to be a statement of all the 
elements who we consider should be included as Minorities in the 
Advisory Committee. Even though it would be only an expression 
of opinion on the part of His Majesty’s Government, it would 
inevitably be interpreted as an attempt to interfere with the 
Assembly’s freedom and as such would be likely to cause serious 
resentment. In these circumstances I cannot believe that such a 
declaration would be of value to the cause of the Scheduled Castes. 

Turning to your second request, I do not find that my speech in 
the House of Commons on March 15th last contained the words which 
you attribute to me.f What I said was “We are very mindful of the 

* In his Idler of 1st July Dr. Ambedkar wrote that : ‘That results of the Primary 
Elections — wherever they took place in India — proved that the candidates put up 
by the Federation came to the top and those put up by the Congress went down to 
the bottom.’ L/P&J/10/50 : f 81. 

@ These were : 

(1) To state openly that His Majesty’s Government holds that the Scheduled 
Castes are a minority within the meaning of paragraph 20 of the Cabinet 
Mission’s Statement. 

(2) That His Majesty’s Government will see that satisfactory safeguards which 
will enable them to live free from the fear of the Majority are provided for the 
Scheduled Castes before it agree to sign the Treaty for cessation of sovereignty. 

(3) That in the Interim Government the Scheduled Castes should have at least two 
representatives which should be the nominees of the Scheduled Castes Federation. 

Ibid., : f 82. 

f Dr. Ambedkar had noted that the Cabinet Mission had already made the point 
that there must be adequate provision for the protection of the minorities. His second 
request would be met if there were added to this statement the words : ‘safeguards 
which will enable the Scheduled Castes to live free from the fear of the Majority.’ 
These were words, Dr. Ambedkar claimed, which Mr. Attlee himself had used in 
his speech on 15th March. Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


511 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 511 

rights of minorities and minorities should be able to live free 
from fear.” This remains the view of His Majesty’s Government, 
which found expression in paragraph 4 of the Cabinet Mission’s 
Statement of May 25th. I do not consider that His Majesty’s 
Government would be wise to make at this stage any further 
pronouncement elaborating what was said in that paragraph. 

Your final request is that in the Interim Government the 
Scheduled Castes should have at least 2 representatives who 
should be nominees of the Scheduled Castes Federation. I regret 
that I cannot hold out any hope of this being possible. 

I was very glad to see that you had been elected to the 
Constituent Assembly. 

C. R. A. 

• • 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


512 


512 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


23 


* Dr. Ambedkar to Mr. Attlee 

[L/P&J/ 10/50 :f 55] 

“Rajgraha” 
Dadar, Bombay 14 
12th August 1946 

My dear Attlee, 

Thank you for your letter of the 1st August 1946.1 did not 
expect you to find time to reply to my letter of the 1st July 
1946.1 am therefore grateful to you for your having found time 
to let me know your views about the points that I had raised 
in my letter. 

2. I am afraid I cannot accept your justification for the 
revision of the policy followed by His Majesty’s Government 
in the Simla Conference of 1945 nor of the Mission’s method 
of treating the Scheduled Castes. I cannot help saying that 
Mr. Alexander’s statement in the House of Commons that the 
majority of the Scheduled Castes are with the Congress is an 
atrocious statement and has no foundation in truth. This is not 
only my view but the view of every Englishman in India. If you 
only consult Sir Edward Benthall who is now in England, I am 
sure he will support me. 

3. With regard to the analysis you have given of the result 
of the achievements of the Federation in the Primary Election, 
all I can say is that you have misunderstood the situation and 
I am afraid no outsider who does not know the significance of 
the facts or the method of the election will be able to understand 
what they mean without proper explanation. The main ground 
of my charge against the Mission is that when the other side 
of the picture were (was) presented by the Congress, it was 
their bounden duty to have called me and to have asked for 
an explanation. This, the Mission did not do, which they 
* The Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, No. 142, pp. 221-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


513 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 513 

were in justice bound to do. If I had failed to give them satisfactory 
explanation then they would have been justified in the conclusion 
to which they came. That the Mission was grossly misinformed is 
proved by my election to the Constituent Assembly from Bengal. 
The Cabinet Mission stated in the House of Commons that my 
influence was confined to Bombay and C.P. How is it then that 
I was elected from Bengal ? In connection with my election, I 
would like to impress upon you three facts: One is that I did not 
merely scrape through but I came at the top of the poll beating 
even Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose, the topmost Bengalee leader of 
the Congress Party. Secondly, I am in no way connected by 
communal ties with the Scheduled Castes community of Bengal. 
They are of different caste to which I belong. In fact the people 
of my caste do not exist in Bengal at all and yet the Bengalee 
Scheduled Castes supported me, so strongly that I was able to 
come first. Thirdly, though the Scheduled Castes in Bengal had 
been returned on the Congress ticket yet they broke the rule 
of their Party not to vote for anybody except for Congressmen 
and voted for me. Does this prove that I have no following in 
Bengal ? I am sure if the Cabinet Mission are honest in their 
conclusion, they ought to revise the erroneous opinion which 
they have expressed in the House of Commons and revise the 
view and give proper recognition to the Federation. 

4. With regard to the status of the Scheduled Castes in the 
Minority Advisory Committee, I am glad to have an assurance 
that the British Cabinet considers the Scheduled Castes to be 
an important minority. I am afraid that I must again repeat 
that unless and until the Cabinet Mission were to make a public 
declaration, this view will not help the Scheduled Castes. I say this 
because, as you will see, (in) the last letter which Maulana Abul 
Kalam Azad wrote to the Viceroy on behalf of the Congress before 
the negotiations broke down, he emphatically challenged the view 
that the Scheduled Castes were a minority. The Scheduled Castes 
fear that if this view is not corrected by the British Cabinet in 
time, the Scheduled Castes’ case may not be considered in the 
Advisory Committee which is bound to be packed by Congressmen. 
The danger of their being relegated to the position of a social 
group within the Hindus as distinguished from a minority, 
appears to be most certain in view of the recent pronouncement of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


514 


514 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Gandhi who evidently thinks that he can now do anything 
he likes with the Scheduled Castes in view of the fact that the 
British Government have refused to lend them their support. 

5. In these circumstances, I would press upon you to reconsider 
the matter and make a declaration that the Scheduled Castes 
are an important minority to avert a possible danger to their 
future position in the new Constitution. 

6. I am sorry to read that you cannot hold out any hope of the 
Schdduled Castes getting two seats in the Interim Government. 
I do not see any justification for this denial. Both on the ground 
of their numbers and also as compared to the assurance given at 
the time of the last Simla Conference of 1945, they are entitled 
to better treatment than is proposed to be given to the Sikhs 
and other smaller minorities. I should think that the claim made 
by me was more than justified. 

With kind regards, 

Yours sincerely, 


B. R. AMBEDKAR. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


515 


24 


* Lord Pethick-Lawrence to Mr. Attlee 

L/P&J/ 10/50 : ff 38-40 

India Office, 3 September 1946 
Secretary of State’s Minute : Serial No. 48/46 

Prime Minister, 

You asked for my views on Ambedkar’s letter to you of the 
12th August. @ 

2. As regards his second paragraph you will find an analysis of 
the election results for the Depressed Classes in the memorandum 
which my Private Secretary sent to yours on the 26th Julyf with 
the draft reply to Ambedkar’s previous letter. Shortly, the facts 
are that in the primary elections which were contested, Congress 
polled more votes than Ambedkar’s Organisation, while a still 
larger proportion were polled by Independent candidates who 
may or may not be supporters of Ambedkar. But apart from 
this, two-thirds of the seats were won by Congress unopposed. 
The figures are, of course, not conclusive but it is not justifiable 
to say that the First Lord’s statement in the Commons has “no 
foundation in truth,” though I think it was rather too positive. 

3. As regards paragraph 3 of Ambedkar’s letter, it was 
not stated in the House of Commons that his influence was 
confined to Bombay and Central Provinces. He is referring to 
the President of the Board of Trade’s speech, in which the actual 
words used were “Dr. Ambedkar’s Organization is somewhat more 
local in its character (than the Congress Organization) being 
mainly centred in Bombay and the Central Provinces”. I have 
made enquiries as to what happened in the Bengal Election to 
the Constituent Assembly which is, of course, by proportional 
representation. Ambedkar got five first preference votes. 

* The Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, No. 250, pp. 411-12. 

@ No. 142. 

t L/P& J/10/50 :ff 63-9 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


516 


516 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sarat Chandra Bose also received five first preference votes. 
The quota for election in Bengal was four votes. Naturally the 
Congress would organize their voters to secure as nearly as 
possible four first preferences for each of their candidates. The 
phrase “top of the poll” has really no meaning in a proportional 
election. No-one denies that Ambedkar has influence among 
some of the depressed classes in Bengal. There are twenty 
five Scheduled Caste members of the Bengal Assembly, four of 
whom were returned as Independents and one as an Ambedkar 
candidate. I do not know whether all the Independents voted 
for Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly election or whether 
he got some Anglo-Indian votes. 

4. With regard to Ambedkar’s paragraph 4. I am convinced 
that we cannot make a public declaration that we regard the 
Scheduled Castes as a minority who should be represented in 
the Minority Advisory Committee. It is correct, of course, that 
Congress do not regard them as a minority for the purpose of 
separate political representation, whereas we have always done 
so. But we are not in a position to secure that Ambedkar’s 
organization is represented on the Minorities Advisory Committee. 

5. I do not think it is really essential to send a reply to 
Ambedkar but should it seem to you more courteous to do so I 
attach a short draft.* In case you wish to see them, I attach also 
extracts@ from the speeches by the First Lord and the President 
of the Board of Trade in the Commons’ Debate. My own speech 
contained a passage similar to the latter but rather shorter. 

PETHICK- LAWRENCE. 

• • 


* Not printed. Mr. Attlee does not appear to have sent a reply to Dr. Ambedkar. 
@ Not printed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


517 


25 


* Lord Pethick-Lawrence to Mr. Attlee 

L/P &J / 10/ 50 :ff 28-32 

India Office, 9th September 1946 
Secretary of State’s Minute : Serial No. 51/46 
Prime Minister. 

Your personal minute No. M. 296/46 of September 4th, @ 
regarding the representation of the Scheduled Castes on the 
Advisory Committee of the Constituent Assembly. 

2. It certainly was the Mission’s intention that the Advisory 
Committee should contain representation of the Scheduled Castes 
and I informed Ambedkar of this by a letter # I wrote to him in 
India. In the third paragraph of your reply to him of 1st Augustf 
you explained to Dr. Ambedkar that, while H.M.G. themselves 
consider the Scheduled Castes an important minority which 
should be represented on the Minority Advisory Committee, they 
could not accede to his request for a public declaration to this 
effect, since any such declaration 

(a) would also have to specify all the other elements which 
H.M.G. consider should be included as minorities in the Advisory 
Committee; and 

(b) would be liable to be interpreted as an attempt to interfere 
with the Constituent Assembly’s freedom of action. 

3. The position, however, is that we have left the composition 
of the Advisory Committee to be decided by the Constituent 
Assembly and we cannot now prescribe it ourselves. I do not 
think we can be accused of misleading the House as the position 
was clearly stated in the President of the Board of Trade’s speech 
on 18th July of which the relevant passage was attached to my 
Minute to you of 3rd September.* 

* Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, No. 288, pp. 466-68. 

@ No. 253. (Refers to S. No. in The Transfer of Power. — Ed.). 

# No. 399, Vol. VII. (See P. 502.— Ed.), 
t No. 105, Vol. VIII. (See P. 509.— Ed.). 

$ No. 250. (See P. 515.— Ed.). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


518 


518 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

4. The controversy on the question whether the Scheduled 
Castes constitute a minority for the purpose of separate political 
representation or whether they should be classed with the Hindus 
has of course a long history. Gandhi has spent a large part 
of his life in propagating the latter view. But when I said, in 
paragraph 4 of my minute of September 3rd, that Congress did 
not regard the Scheduled Castes as a minority for the purpose 
of separate political representation, I had particularly in mind 
the passage in Azad’s letter to the Viceroy of June 25th* (some- 
weeks after our Statement of May 16th) to which Dr. Ambedkar 
has referred in both his letters@ to you. In this Azad said that 
Congress “repudiated the view that the Scheduled Castes are a 
minority and considered them as integral parts of Hindu society” 
(second paragraph on page 23 of Cmd. 6861). This statement had 
reference to the Viceroy’s assurance to Mr. Jinnah# that he would 
consult the main parties before filling any vacancy among the 
seats in the Interim Government allotted to representatives of 
minorities. It was not altogether unnatural that Congress should 
regard the Scheduled Castes as their own responsibility and 
object to the Muslim League having a say in the appointment 
of a Scheduled Caste representative. 

5. There is no positive reason to think that Congress will 
not wish to include in the Advisory Committee Scheduled Caste 
representatives in adequate numbers. They will be concerned to 
escape criticism both in India and abroad; and they are most 
anxious to win over to their own ranks, or at least to conciliate, 
as large a proportion as possible of the Scheduled Castes, if 
only to prevent them from allying themselves with the Muslim 
League. The Committee is to deal with the rights of citizens as 
well as with those of minorities, so that inclusion of Scheduled 
Caste representatives need not prejudice the question whether 
they arc or are not a minority. On the other hand, there is 
no guarantee that Dr. Ambedkar or any other member of the 
Scheduled Castes who opposes Congress will secure a place on 
the Committee. 

6. I still feel that we should not volunteer a pronouncement in 
response to Dr. Ambedkar’s request for a public declaration that the 
Scheduled Castes are a minority within the meaning of paragraph 20 of 

* Vo. VII, No. 603. (Transfer of Power). 

@ See footnotes to No. 105 and No. 142. (Transfer of Power). 

# Vo. VII, No. 573. (Transfer of Power). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


519 


THE TRANSFER OF POWER 519 

the Mission’s Statement of May 16th. To do so would almost 
certainly arouse a controversy with Gandhi which might result 
in Congress opposing their inclusion as a demonstration. Even if 
we did not say that the Scheduled Castes are a minority but only 
that they should be included on the Committee, our statement 
would arouse requests for a similar statement in favour of the 
Anglo-Indians and others, and would be interpreted as interference 
with the Constituent Assembly, which is what we are most 
anxious to avoid. There is no possibility that such a declaration 
would influence Congress to give the Scheduled Castes better 
treatment in the Advisory Committee than they would otherwise 
do, nor would it help Dr. Ambedkar, since it would refer simply 
to the Scheduled Castes, making no distinction between those 
who favour Congress and those who do not.* 

PETHICK- LAWRENCE 

• • 


* Mr. Attlee noted on this Minute : ‘No further action.’ Atlee Papers, University 
College, Oxford. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


520 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


521 


SECTION III 

STATEMENTS 


1 

A Critique of the Proposals of 
the Cabinet Mission for 
Indian Constitutional Changes 
in so far as they affect 
the Scheduled Castes 
(Untouchables) 
by 

B.R. AMBEDKAR 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


522 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


523 


* Does the Indian National Congress 
Represent the Scheduled Castes 
(Untouchables) of India ? 

The Cabinet Mission sent out to India by the Labour 
Government early this year to resolve the political deadlock 
in India set out a Scheme for the framing of the constitution 
by a Constituent Assembly. This Constituent Assembly is to 
be composed of representatives chosen by the members of the 
Provincial Legislatures by a single transferable vote. For the 
purposes of the composition of the Constituent Assembly the 
Cabinet Mission’s Scheme has divided the members of the 
provincial legislatures into three categories (1) Muslems, (2) Sikhs 
and (3) General, each with a fixed quota of seats. Each category 
has a separate electorate whereby the Muslem representatives 
of the Constituent Assembly will be elected by the Muslem 
members of the Provincial Legislature, the Sikhs by the Sikh 
members and the General by all the rest. The ‘general’ includes 
(1) Hindus, (2) Scheduled Castes, (3) Indian Christians, and (4) 
Anglo-Indians. 

2. The Scheduled Castes of India were greatly surprised to 
find that they were lumped together with the Hindus. It has 
been declared time and again by His Majesty’s Government that 
His Majesty’s Government recognizes that the Scheduled Castes 
are separate element in the national life of India and that His 
Majesty’s Government will not impose any constitution to which 
the Scheduled Castes are not a willing party. The question is 
asked why the Cabinet Mission recognized the Muslems and the 
Sikhs as separate elements and why they refused to give the 
Scheduled Castes the same status ? 

In the debate that took place in Parliament on the 18th 
of July, on the proposals of the Cabinet Mission, Sir Stafford 
Cripps, Mr. Alexander and Lord Pethick-Lawrence tried to defend 
themselves against this criticism, Their argument was two-fold : — 

(1) That in the elections to the Provincial Legislature which took 


Source : Printed booklet. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


524 


524 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

place in February last the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes were captured by the Congress and that this shows 
that the Scheduled Castes were with the Congress and 
trusted their destiny to the Congress i.e. the Hindus and 
that there was no ground for separating them. 

(2) That there is to be an Advisory Committee on the minorities 
in which the Scheduled Castes will be represented and will 
have a voice in the framing of the safeguards necessary 
for them. 

The second defence is worse than useless. The reasons are 
obvious. The status and powers of the Advisory Committee 
are not defined. The quantum of representation of the 
Scheduled Castes is not prescribed. The decisions of the 
Advisory Committee are left to be carried by a bare majority. 
Lastly the Advisory Committee cannot be anything else 
than a mere reflection of the Constituent Assembly. The 
representatives of the Scheduled Castes in the Constituent 
Assembly all belong to the Congress Party and they do not 
represent the Scheduled Castes. They are therefore subject 
to the Mandate of the Congress Party. Those of them who 
will be put in the Advisory Committee will be subject to the 
same Party Mandate. They cannot put forth the real point 
of view of the Scheduled Castes either in the Constituent 
Assembly or on the Advisory Committee. 

The principal line of defence used by the members of the 
Cabinet Mission in justification of their failure to give the 
Scheduled Castes separate and independent representation 
is that the Congress won the Scheduled Caste seats in the 
last election. Even this line of defence cannot stand. It is 
true that in the final election the Congress did capture the 
Scheduled Caste seats. But the reply is that this election 
results should not have been taken as the test for various 
reasons. 

Firstly the parties such as the Scheduled Castes who had 
co-operated with the British Government were at a discount 
with the people on that very account. 

Secondly the trial of the Indian National Army men which 
synchronized with the election placed the Congress at an advantage 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 525 

CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 525 


and other parties at a disadvantage. If the Indian National Army 
trial had not been staged at the time of the election the Congress 
would have lost completely, so low was its stock. 

Apart from these two reasons why the election results should 
not have been as a test, there is a special reason why it should 
not have been taken to determine whether the Congress did or 
did not represent the Scheduled Castes. That reason is that the 
final elevation for the Scheduled Castes seats is by a system of 
joint electorate in which the Hindus also vote. The Hindus vote 
being preponderent it is easy for the Congress to elect a candidate 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes standing for the Scheduled 
Caste seats entirely by Hindu votes. That the Scheduled Castes 
representatives in the Provincial Legislatures who stood on the 
Congress ticket were elected solely by Hindu votes and not by the 
votes of the Scheduled Castes is a fact which even the Cabinet 
Mission will not be able to deny. 

The real test by which to determine whether the Congress 
represents the Scheduled Castes is to examine the results of the 
Primary Elections which preceded the Final Elections, for in the 
Primary Election the Scheduled Castes have a separate electorate 
in which the Hindus have no right to vote. The Primary Election 
therefore reflects the real sentiments of the Scheduled Castes. 
What does the result of the Primary Election show ? Does it show 
that the Scheduled Castes are with the Congress ? 

The Scheduled Castes have been allotted 151 seats in the 
Provincial Legislatures. They are distributed among the different 
Provinces except Sindh and the North-west Frontier Province. 

Primary Election is not obligatory. It becomes obligatory only 
if there are more than four candidates contesting for a seat. 

In the last Primary Election which preceded the Final Election, 
Primary Election became obligatory in 40 constituencies out of 
151. They were distributed as follows : — 


Madras ... ... 10 

Bombay ... ... 3 

Bengal ... ... 12 

United Provinces ... 3 

Central Provinces ... 5 

Punjab 


7 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


526 


526 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There were no Primary Elections in the Provinces of Bihar 
and Orissa. 

The results of the Primary Elections in the 40 constituencies 
are tabulated in the Appendix which accompanies this note. 
The results prove: — 

(I) That out of 283 candidates the Congress put up only 46 
candidates on its ticket (See Table I) and out of 168 
successful candidates had only 38 to its credit ( See Table V). 

(II) The object of a Party in entering into a Primary Election 
is to drive out all rival parties from the Final Election 
by putting up at least four candidates on its party ticket. 
Whether a party can put up four candidates on its ticket 
depends upon how much confidence it has in the voters to 
vote for its party ticket. The Congress has not ventured 
to put up more than one candidate in each constituency. 
This shows that the Congress had no confidence that 
the Scheduled Caste voters would vote for the Congress 
ticket. If there is any party which has ventured to put 
up four candidates for each seat it has contested, it is 
the Scheduled Castes Federation. (See Table II, Parts I, 
V, Columns 3 and 4). 

(III) Measured in terms of votes cast in favour of the Congress 
it is proved beyond dispute that the Congress obtained 
only 28 per cent of the total votes polled in the Primary 
Election (See Table IV). 

(IV) If there was not the temptation to get oneself elected in 
the final election with the help of the Hindu votes the 
Independents would all be members of the Scheduled 
Castes Federation. On that assumption the Scheduled 
Castes Federation is the only party which represents the 
Scheduled Castes and the 72 per cent voting in favour of 
the Non-Congress Parties should be set out to its credit 
(See Table IV). 

The members of the Cabinet Mission argued that 
Dr. Ambedkar’s following was confined to the Scheduled Castes 
in the Bombay Presidency and the Central Provinces only. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


527 


CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 527 

There is no foundation for this statement. The Scheduled 
Castes Federation is functioning in other Provinces as well and 
it has won notable electoral success as great as in Bombay and 
the Central Provinces. In making this statement the Mission 
has failed to take account of the signal victory Dr. Ambedkar 
secured in the election to the Constituent Assembly. He 
stood as a candidate from the Bengal Provincial Legislature 
Assembly. He secured 7 first preference votes and topped the 
poll so far as the general seats were concerned beating even 
Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose, the Leader of the Congress party. If 
Dr. Ambedkar has no influence outside Bombay and Central 
Provinces how did he get elected from Bengal ? It must be 
further remembered that there are 30 seats for the Scheduled 
Castes in the Bengal Provincial Assembly. Out of the 30 as 
many as 28 were elected on the Congress ticket. Of the two 
who belonged to his party one fell ill on the day of election. 
This means that 6 Scheduled Caste members elected on the 
Congress ticket broke the Congress Mandate and voted for 
Dr. Ambedkar. This shows that even these Scheduled Caste 
members who belong to the Congress regard him as the 
leader of the Scheduled Castes. This is complete disproof of 
the statement made by the Mission. 

The Congress has been so much encouraged by the 
surrender of the Mission that a letter addressed to the 
Mission the Congress has gone to the length of denying 
that the Scheduled Castes are a minority. This means that 
the Congress is not prepared to give the Scheduled Castes 
the same safeguards as they would to other minorities. The 
Mission has not repudiated this suggestion of the Congress. 
Herein lurks a great danger and it is necessary to pin down 
the Mission in the course of the debate and compel them to 
say if they do or do not regard the Scheduled Castes as a 
minority. 

The Cabinet Mission have said in their proposals that 
before sovereignty is transferred Parliament will have 
to satisfy itself that the safeguards for Minorities are 
adequate. The Mission has nowhere defined the machinery 
for examining the safeguards. Whether there would be 
a Joint Committee of the two Houses of Parliament to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


528 


528 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

examine the minority safeguards has not been made clear. The 
Mission has not even stated that His Majesty’s Government will 
exercise its independent judgment in coming to its conclusion 
on the adequacy of the safeguards. It is necessary to have these 
matters defined because this provision was an afterthought with 
the Mission and did not form part of its original proposals which 
gives the impression that this was intended merely to act as a 
sop to the minorities. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 529 

CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 529 


Analysis of the Results 
of 

Primary Elections 

Held in December, 1945 
(Preliminary to the General Election in India Held in 
February 1946) for Choosing Candidates from 
the Scheduled Castes (Untouchables) for 
the Seats Reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
in the Provincial Legislatures of India 


Note. — The Tables in this Analysis are prepared from official figures. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


530 


530 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


S 3 

£ 

0 

43 

03 

03 

0 
-P 

01 

c5 

O 

T3 

O 

3 

O 

43 

o 

m 

H 

3 

T3 

O 

> 

H 

0 

01 
01 
H 


os a> 


HP 

U1 

> 

H 

4 

u 

a 

> 

1 

o 

o 

ffl 


S 3 

< 

M 

0 

• pH 
> 

H 

'■p 

O 


o 

o 

P 

0 


H 

05 


P 

Ph 

o 

43 

-p 

0 

-p 

01 

o 

-p 

S 3 

0 

o 

43 

0 

3 

S3 

01 

o 

'-p 

P 

05 

Oh 


0) 

u CO 0 rj 

0) 0) _0 'tS 

^2 CO 

a =2 . dd a) 

! i - ; i 

c a ft .3 > 

rd o! 3 

5 0 


— p- 
° <+p 0 

H o a 


o 

>> 


° a 


0 

(H 


>3 

rO 


a 

0 


3 

a 


0 

03 

"3 

£ 

0 

o 


0 

a 

0 

z 

0 

43 

EH 


rO 

.0 

*5* 

3 

PH 


U .3 

g > 


^ g 

0 d 

•- -3 

3 Sp 
Ph 


03 

0 

0 

CQ 


>» 

o3 

4> 

a 

o 

CP 


"0 

03 

s 




0 

o 

O CO 

5 § 


o3 0 0 


a 

0 r 0 

£ s 

s=J 03 

o 


03 0 


0 

a 

o3 

£ 


CD 


be 

0 

o 

O 


o 

t> 


PH 


o3 

o 


0 

T3 

0 

0 

CO 


0 

0 

be 

o3 

0 

0 

o3 


o3 

X 


CD 

t> 


-0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

T3 

£ 


o3 

03 

"0 

0 

0 

o 


0 

Ph 

6 

X 


0 

43 

42 
0 
CO 

0 

43 
0 


0 

T3 

0 


0 

0 

a 

a 

o 

O 


CO 

X 

<N 


Radical Democratic Party ... none none 1 none none none 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


531 


CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 531 

TABLE II 

Parties which contested the Primary Election 
for seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
shown constituency-wise 

PART I— MADRAS 


Parties which fought the election and the 

Total of number of candidates put up by each 

Constituency m - , 



which Primary 
Election was 
contested 

who took 
part in the 
contest 

Congress 

Scheduled 

Castes 

Federation 

Commu- 

nists 

No-Party 

Candidates 

(Indepen- 

dents) 

1. 

Amlapuram 

7 

1 

4 

2 

none 

2. 

Coconada 

5 

1 

4 

none 

none 

3. 

Bandar 

5 

1 

1 

3 

none 

4. 

Cuddappa 

5 

1 

4 

none 

none 

5. 

Penukonda 

5 

1 

4 

none 

none 

6. 

Tirnvannamali 

6 

1 

5 

none 

none 

7. 

Tindivanam 

6 

1 

5 

none 

none 

8. 

Mannergudi 

5 

1 

none 

i 

3 

9. 

Pollachi 

7 

1 

4 

none 

2 

10. 

. Nammakal 

5 

1 

4 

none 

none 


Total ... 

56 

10 

35 

6 

5 


PART II— BOMBAY 


Constituency in 
which Primary 
Election was 
contested 


Total of 
Candidates 
who took 
part in the 
contest 


Parties which fought the election and 
the number of candidates put up by 
each 


Scheduled 
Congress Castes 

Federation 


No-Party 

Candidates 

(Indepen- 

dents) 


Bombay City (North) 7 1 


1 


5 


Bombay City (Byculla & Parel) 6 1 


1 


4 


East Khandesh (East) 


5 14 


none 


Total ... 


18 3 6 9 


PART III BENGAL 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


532 


532 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


>> 

rP 


03 

"2 

3 

p 

o3 

o 


0 

rP 

a 

£ 

a> 

A 

T3 

p 

o3 

P 

Q 


rP 

be 

3 

„o 


P3 

£ 


o3 

CH 


P o3 ;>> 


T3 

o3 

Ph 


03 


o 

O 


CO 

K. CO 

L? 0> P 
tn -e © 

03 "P 

Cl ^ P 
. Oi 

p 3 a 

o h a> 
!7" "d 

^ O g 


d o3 ^ 
T3 -d 
cc-5 

3 S m 


Add 

o o o 

P P P 


P P 

o o 

P P 


"0 

<X> 


a) 


o3 


3 - 

^3 co 
® c3 0 
rP Q "P 
O w 0) 

CQ fe 


bO 

P 

O 

O 


-S * A 

^ 03 O -m 

« 3 3 c 

O 13 n ' H 

H £ j2 -£ 

a * g. 


O 

O 


K*> ^ 

o P 
P 2 


P >> 
o Sh 

O p 


o 

EH 


be 

P 


Te 

o 

o 

ffi 


P3 

o3 

£ 

o 

2 

"5 

o3 

Jcssore 

o3 

Jh 

3 

rH 

P 

Ph 

P 

03 

Cm 

be 

o 

CO 

p 

ctf 

a 

H 

P 

Ph 

3 

'2 

03 

P 

bo 

fH 

<X> 

rP 

oj 

ffi 

£ 


s 

PQ 

s 

Ph 

CQ 

(N 

CO 


LO 

CP 

t> 

oo 

03 

10. 


,P 

o3 


Ph 

Ph 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


533 


CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 533 

TABLE II 

PART TV UNITED PROVINCES 


Constituency in 
which Primary 
Election was 
contested 

Total of 
Candidates 
who took 
part in the 
contest 

Parties which fought the election and the 
number of candidates put up by each 

Congress 

Scheduled 

Castes 

Federation 

Harijan 

League 

Hindu 

Maha 

Sabha 

No-Party 

Candidate: 

(Indepen- 

dents) 

Agra City 

11 

1 

5 

1 

1 

3 

Allahabad City 

6 

1 

4 

none 

none 

3 

Almora 

8 

3 

none 

none 

none 

3 

Total 

25 

11 

9 

i 

i 

3 


PART V CENTRAL PROVINCES 


Constituency in 
which Primary 
Election was 
contested 

Total of 
Candidates 
who took 
part in the 
contest 

Parties which fought the election and the 
number of candidates put up by each 

Congress 

Scheduled 

Castes 

Federation 

Harijan 

League 

No-Party 

Candidate: 

(Indepen- 

dents) 

Nagpur-cum Sakoli 

5 

1 

2 

1 

1 

Hinganghat 

6 

1 

2 

1 

2 

Bhandara 

5 

1 

3 

1 

none 

Yeotmal 

6 

1 

2 

none 

3 

Chikliali 

6 

1 

3 

none 

2 

Total 

28 

5 

12 

3 

8 


PART VI PUNJAB 


Constituency in 
which Primary 
Election was 
contested 

Total of 
Candidates 
who took 
part in the 
contest 

Parties which fought the election and the 
number of candidates put up by each 

Congress 

Unionists 

No-Party 

Candidate: 

(Indepen- 

dents) 

Gurgaon 

10 


1 

9 

Kurnal 

10 

1 


9 

Ambala 

8 



8 

Hoshiyarpur 

9 

1 

1 

7 

Jullunder 

6 

1 

1 

4 

Ludhiyana 

10 

1 


9 

Lyalpur 

6 



6 

Total 

59 

4 

3 

52 


Showing Province-wise the Votes obtained by different Parties which contested the Primary Elections 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


534 


534 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


a 

Ph 




O 

> 


rO 

’3“ 

3 


o * 


'■a 

o 

'3 

£ 


aS 

bJD 

a 

<D 

PQ 


aS 

rO 

a 

o 

PQ 


T5 

a 


d 

d 


cS 

be 


be 

be 

a 


co 

t> 


CO 

to 


co 

as 

(N 

oo" 



t> co 

o d 

1-1 CO 


c3 

be 


be 

be 

a 


i—l to 

co oo 

1-t CO 

i-T oo" 


LO 

io 


CO LO 00 

ih o oo 

CO i— l 


(N 

LO 

co" 


CO 

CO 

d 


o 

co 


a 

be 

<x> 

H 

be 

be 

as 


as 

be 

CD 

H 

be 

be 

c3 


c3 

be 

CD 

H 

be 

be 

as 


as 

be 

<x> 

So 

be 

as 


1—1 

CO 

CO 


(N 



o 

as 


o 



1—1 

o 


l> 

CO 

LO 

’3 

’3 

TP 

co" 

1—1 



t> 

<N 





00 

oi 

CO 

d 

i—i 

■"st 1 




LO 

00 

as 

as 




as 


(N 

co 

( , 

o 

, 

^f 

OD 

co" 

i—i 

i—i 

00 

co" 

'3 

CO 

l> 

’5 

o" 

LO 

(N 

co 




i—i 



o 





rH 

t> 

i—i 





CO 

as 

co 

tf 





CO 

i—i 





CO 

oo" 

(N 

00 

‘3 

’3 

’3 

’3 

LO" 

co" 





CO 

co 

LO 




LO 

CO 

CO 

^F 




(N 

00 

as 

1,648 




TF 

CO 

°0 

as 

T— H 

o" 

nil 

nil 

nil 

i—l 

00 

o" 

<N 

CO 





(N 


as 

oo 

i> 

as 


as 

t> 

of 


CO 

co 

t> 

CO 


as 

o 

co" 

co 



Distribution of Total Votes polled in Primary Elections all through India and their distribution between 

Congress and Non-Congress Parties 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 535 

CRITIQUE OF THE PROPOSALS 535 


03 

.03 

'-4-3 

5 

cd 

Radical 

Demo- 

cratic 

Party 

136 

Ph 

cc 

CO 

Q3 

5h 

be 

P 

Unio- 

nists 

13,521 

O 

P 

o 

£ 

C4H 

o 

Commu- 

nists 

30,863 

p 

o 

3 4 5 


> 

'S ^3 -5 

r— 1 


O 

PM 


o 




cd -0 
co 

m 


03 <2 

Ph o 
£ ® 


03 

A 

T3 

03 

co 

03 

+H 

cd 

?H 

03 

P 

o 

to 

05 

to 

CD 

U) 

3 

T3 

cd 

O 

T3 

0 

Ph 

-tH> 

cd 

i— i 

05 


o 

o 

CD 


cO 

Ph 


be 

P 

o 

O 


o 

Ph 


o 

Eh 


P 03 
cd 3 
:p> be 
cd 
cd 


be 

P 

o 

O 


oo 

<N 


<N 

CO 

05 

co" 

o 


CO 

co 


05 

co" 

o 


5 .S 

Ph "O 

o P 

Ph I— I 

co -e H 

03 P p 

■g 8 £ 

£> be ^ 

_h 3 rj 

2 2- s 

o 

Eh ^ 


ai P 
d Q 


CO 

to 


Number of Candidates who became successful in Primary Elections in different Provinces classified 

according to their Party Affiliations 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


536 


536 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


537 


2 


* The Cabinet Mission and 
the Untouchables 

How the Cabinet Mission have Ignored the Untouchables ? 

The Cabinet Mission in their Statement of 10th May set out 
their Interim and Long-term proposals for the solution of the 
political deadlock in India. The most galling and astounding feature 
of their proposals is their refusal to recognise the Untouchables 
as a separate and distinct element in the national life of India. 
The Mission has so completely ignored the Untouchables that 
not even once have they mentioned them in their long statement. 
To what extent the Cabinet Mission has gone in ignoring the 
Untouchables will be apparant from the following: — 

(i) The Untouchables have not been given the right to 
nominate their representatives in the Central Executive 
as has been done in the case of the Sikhs and the 
Muslims. In the present Interim Government they have 
got two representatives of the Scheduled Castes neither 
of them owe any allegiance or obligation to the Scheduled 
Castes. One is nominated by the Congress and the other 
is nominated by the Muslim League. 

(ii) In the Interim Government, the Untouchables have not 
been given a fixed quota of representation as was done 
in the case of the Muslims. At the Simla Conference of 
1945 it was agreed that Scheduled Castes should have 
at least two members in a Cabinet of 14. The reason for 
a change of front between 1945 and 1946 is not known. 

(iii) They have not been given the right to separate 
representation in the Constituent Assembly. 


Source : Printed Leaflet. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


538 


538 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ii 

How the Cabinet Mission’s decision constitutes a departure 
from established policy of H.M.G. 

2. The decision of the Cabinet Mission has not only done a grave 
wrong to the Untouchables but it has registered a serious departure 
from the principles which have guided H.M.G. in its policy regarding 
Indian politics and regarding the position of the Untouchables. 

(i) Before 1920, the Constitutional changes in the Government 
of India were made by the British Government on their own 
authority and in accordance with their own wishes. It was 
for the first time, that in 1920 that the British Government 
decided to frame the Constitution of India in consultation 
with Indians. Accordingly, a Round Table Conference was 
called to which Indians were invited. Among the Indians, 
there were representatives of the Untouchables who were 
invited separately and independently of the Congress or of 
any other political party. 

(ii) Mr. Gandhi, the Congress representative, at the Round 
Table Conference fought against the recognition of the 
Untouchables as a separate element in the national life 
of India and contended that they were part of the Hindus 
and were therefore not entitled to separate representation. 
The British Government overruled Mr. Gandhi and by their 
Award recognised that the Untouchables were a separate and 
distinct clement in the national life of India and were therefore 
entitled to the same safeguards as the other minorities of 
India such as the Muslims, Indian Christians etc. 

(iii) The British Government adhered to this principle in the 
Simla Conference which was held in June 1945. Among the 
Indians invited to that Conference there was a representative 
of the Untouchables who again was invited separately and 
independently of the Congress or any other political party. 

(iv) It may be said that in the Constituent Assembly which 
formed part of the Cripps proposals of 1942, there was no 
provision for separate representation of the Untouchables 
and that therefore, the present proposals of the Cabinet 
Mission cannot be said to mark a departure. The answer 
is that they do. In the Cripps Proposals of 1942, it is 
not that the Untouchables alone were not given separate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


539 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 539 

representation. The fact is that no minority community 
was given separate representation in the Constituent 
Assembly. But in the Constitution of the Constituent 
Assembly of the Cabinet Mission, the Muslims and the 
Sikhs have been given separate recognition and separate 
representation which is denied to the Untouchables. It 
is this discrimination which constitutes the wrong of 
which the Untouchables are complaining. 

3. The inequity of the proposals of the Cabinet Mission thus 
lies in the fact that it departs from the policy of recognising 
the Untouchables as a separate element in the national life of 
India and discriminates them by not recognising them while 
recognizing the Muslims and Sikhs. 

How the Cabinet Mission’s decision abrogates the 
pledges given by H.M.G. to the Untouchables ? 

4. The non-recognition of the Untouchables as a separate 
clement by the Cabinet Mission is contrary to the pledges 
given to them by and on behalf of the British Government. 
The following are some of the pledges worth mentioning. 

(i) 

“ Nor must we forget the essential necessity in the interests 
of Indian unity, of the inclusion of the Indian States in any 
Constitutional Schemes. 

I need refer only two of them — the great Muslim minority 
and the Scheduled Castes — There are the guarantees that 
have been given to the minorities in the past; the fact that 
their position must be safeguarded, and that those guarantees 
must be honoured.” 

— Extract from the speech made by Lord Linlithgow, at the 
Orient Club, Bombay on January 10, 1940. 

(ii) 

“These are two main points which have emerged. 

On these two points, His Majesty’s Government now 
desire me to make their position clear. The first is as to 
the position of the minorities in relation to any future 

Constitutional Scheme It goes without saying that they 

(H. M. Government) could not contemplate the transfer 
of their present responsibilities for the peace and welfare 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


540 


540 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of India to any system of Government whose authority is directly 
denied by large and powerful elements in India’s national life. 

Nor could they be parties to the cocrsion of such elements into 
submission to such a Government.” 

— Extract from the Statement by Lord Linlithgow on 

8th August 1940. 

“ Congress leaders have built up a remarkable 

organization, the most efficient political machine in India if 

only they had succeeded. If the Congress could in fact speak, as 
it professes to speak, for all the main elements in India’s national 
life, then however advanced their demands, our problem would 
have been in many respect far easier than it is today. It is true 
that they are numerically the largest single party in British 
India, but their claim in virtue of that fact to speak for India 
is utterly denied by very important elements in India’s complex 
national life. These others assert their right to be regarded not 
as mere numerical minorities but as separate constituent factors 
in any future Indian policy. The foremost among these elements 
stands the great Muslim community. They will have nothing to 
do with a Constitution framed by a Constituent Assembly elected 
by a majority vote in geographical constituencies. They claim 
the right in any constitutional discussions to be regarded as an 
entity against the operations of a mere numerical majority. The 
same applies to the great body what are known as the Scheduled 
Castes who feel, in spite of Mr. Gandhi’s earnest endeavours 
on their behalf, that as a community, they stand outside the 
main body of the Hindu community which is represented by 
the Congress.” 


— Extract from the speech by the Rt. Hon’ble 
Mr. L. S. Amery, Secretary of State for India, 
in the House of Commons on August 14, 1940. 

(iv) 

“ Without recapitulating all these reasons in detail, I should 
remind you that His Majesty’s Government at that time made 
it clear: — 

(a) That their offer of unqualified freedom after 
the hostilities was made conditional upon 
the framing of a Constitution agreed by the 
main elements of India’s national life and the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


541 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 541 

negotiation of the necessary treaty arrangements with 
His Majesty’s Government; 

(b) That it is impossible during the period of hostilities 
to bring about any change in the Constitution by 
which means alone a “National Government” such as 
you suggest could be made responsible to the Central 
Assembly. 

The object of these conditions was to ensure the fulfilment of 
their duty to safeguard the interest of the racial and religious 
minorities, of the Depressed Classes and their treaty obligations 
to the Indian States. ” 

— Extract from the letter by Lord Wavell to Mr. Gandhi, 

dated 15th August, 1944. 

5. The Cabinet Mission’s proposal not to give separate 
representation to the Untouchables is not the result of their 
individual judgement arrived at on an honest examination of 
the relevant facts. On the other hand, what the Mission has 
done is to pamper to the prejudices of Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Gandhi 
is vehemently opposed to the recognition of the Untouchables 
as a separate clement in the national life of India. He opposed 
their recognition at the Round Table Conference. When he 
found that notwithstanding his opposition they were recognized 
as a separate clement by the Communal Award of Mr. Ramsay 
Macdonald he threatened to fast unto death if the separate 
recognition of the Untouchables was not withdrawn. Again in 1945 
at the First Simla Conference Mr. Gandhi raised his opposition 
when he found that H.M.G. had given separate recognition of 
the Untouchables. The Cabinet Mission were anxious to make 
a success of their proposals. That was not possible unless they 
could secure the consent of Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Gandhi demanded 
his price and the Mission gave it. That price was the sacrifice 
of the separate political existence of the Untouchables. Indeed 
one can go further and say that the proposals of the Cabinet 
Mission, so far as the minorities are concerned, are nothing but 
the reproduction of Mr. Gandhi’s formula which he resounded at 
the Second Round Table Conference. Mr. Gandhi said that he 
would recognise only three communities for political purposes (1) 
Hindus, (2) Muslims and (3) Sikhs. The Mission’s formula is a 
mere copy of Mr. Gandhi’s formula. There is no other explanation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


542 


542 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

hi 

Grounds urged by the Cabinet Mission in Justification 
of its decision. 

6. For justifying their decision not to recognise the 
Untouchables as a separate element the Cabinet Mission has 
relied upon the results of the elections to the Provincial Legislative 
Assemblies which took place in February 1948. In the course 
of the debate in Parliament on the Cabinet Mission’s proposals 
which took place on 18th July 1946, the members of the Mission 
have tried to make out the following points : — 

(i) That in the election, the Congress captured all scats 
reserved for the Untouchables; that therefore the Congress 
represented the Untouchables. That being the case there 
was no justification for giving separate representation to 
the Untouchables. 

(ii) That the following of the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation and my own was confined only to Bombay and 
Central Provinces. 

Futility of the grounds 

7. These are monstrous propositions and will not stand close 
and honest scrutiny. The Cabinet Mission, to start with committed 
a great mistake in adopting the results of the election as a basis 
for assessing the representative character of the Congress. In 
doing so, the Mission failed to take into account the following 
circumstances : — 

(i) The Hindu electorate was throughout the war intensely 
anti- British and although it did war work it did not do it 
willingly. The Congress Party which was anti- British and 
had non-cooperated with the war effort was a hot favourite 
of the Hindu electorate. The other parties particularly the 
Scheduled Castes suffered in the election because they 
were pro-British and had cooperated in the war effort. 

(ii) Just before the date fixed for election, the Viceroy and the 
Commander-in-Chief staged the trial of the I.N.A. men. 
The Congress at once took up the cause of the I.N.A. men 
and made it an election issue. The trial was the principal 
factor which enhanced the influence of the Congress which 
was on the wane. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


543 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 543 

(iii) The issue over which the election was fought was 
Independence and Quit India. The nature of the future 
Constitution of India was never the issue. If it had been 
the issue the Congress would never have got the majority 
it did. 

(iv) The Cabinet Mission did not take into account the 
open hostility shown by the Returning Officers and the 
Polling Officers — all of whom were Caste Hindus — against 
the Scheduled Caste candidates who were opposing 
the Congress. They went to the length of rejecting 
their nomination papers and refusing to issue ballot 
papers. The Cabinet Mission did not take into account 
the degree of terrorism and intimidation to which the 
Untouchable voters were subjected by the Caste Hindus 
on the ground that they were not prepared to vote for 
the Congress candidates. In the Agra City 40 houses of 
the Untouchables were burnt down. In Bombay one man 
from the Untouchable was murdered and in the moffusil 
Untouchable voters in hundreds of villages were not 
allowed to go to the Polling stations. In Nagpur a Police 
Officer became so much of a partisan of the Congress that 
he fired without the permission of the Magistrate on a 
crowd of Untouchable voters just to frightern them away. 
There were innumerable such cases all over India. 

8. If the Cabinet Mission had taken into account these 
circumstances they would have realized that the success of 
the Congress at the elections was due to purely advantageous 
circumstances. The results of the elections held under such 
circumstances should not have been taken as a justification for 
not giving separate representation to the Untouchables in the 
Constituent Assembly. 

How the Mission adopted a false criterion for its decision 

9. The criterion adopted by the Mission to decide whether 
the Congress did or did not represent the Untouchables was 
how many seats reserved for Untouchables were won by the 
Congress in the Final Election. This criterion was a false 
criterion because the results of the final elections are beyond 
the control of the Untouchables. Under the Poona Pact the final 
elections are determined by the Hindu votes. The true criterion 
which the Mission should have adopted was to find out how 
the Untouchables voted, how many votes were cast in favour of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


544 


544 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Congress and how many against the Congress. This can be 
judged from the results of the Primary elections only and not from 
the results of the final elections. For in the Primary election only 
the Untouchables vote. If the results of the Primary elections are 
taken as a basis, the decision of the Cabinet Mission, would be 
found to be absurd and contrary to facts. For only 28 per cent of 
the votes polled in the Primary elections were cast in favour of 
the Congress and 72 per cent against it. 

10. It is said if the Untouchables felt that they were not in the 
Congress they should have had a Primary election for every one of 
the 151 seats reserved for them. As a matter of fact, there were 
Primary elections for 43 scats only all throughout India. Why did 
the Untouchables not stage a Primary election for the rest of the 
108 seats ? 

The argument is absurd for the following reasons: — 

(i) Primary election is not obligatory. It becomes obligatory only 
when there arc more than four candidates contesting one 
scat. It is not realized that anyone who stands for Primary 
election must also face the necessity of having to stand for 
final election. The inability of the Untouchables to bear the 
expense of double election make it very difficult to induce 
members of the Untouchable communities to stand for 
Primary election. The fact that there have been Primary 
elections only for 43 scats cannot be made the basis for the 
inference that the Untouchables do not claim to be separate 
from the Congress. 

(ii) It is the Congress who must be asked as to why it did not 
put up 4 candidates in every constituency in the Primary 
elections. For if the Congress claims to represent the 
Untouchables, it should have put up more than 4 candidates 
on Congress ticket in every constituency and brought about 
Primary elections in each of the 151 constituencies and ousted 
every other party from coming into the final election. The 
Congress did not do this. On the other hand, even in the 43 
Primary elections, the Congress put up only one candidate in 
each constituency on the off-chance of his coming within the 
first 4 and then getting him returned in the Final Election 
with the Hindu votes. This shows that the Congress knew 
that the Untouchables had no confidence in the Congress. 

(iii) It is only in 1937 that the Untouchables for the first time got 
their right to vote. It is only after 1937 that the Untouchables 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


545 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 545 

started organizing themselves for conducting elections. 
From the mere fact that Scheduled Castes Federation was 
outmatched by the Congress in the elections, it is wrong 
to conclude that the Untouchables are with the Congress. 
The Cabinet Mission ought to have made allowance from 
the unequal strength of the Congress and the Scheduled 
Castes Federation in fighting elections drawing any 
conclusions adverse to the Federation from the results 
of the elections. 

Futility of other grounds urged by the Mission in 
justification of their decisions 

11. The members of the Cabinet Mission argued that 
Dr. Ambedkar’s following was confined to the Scheduled Castes 
in the Bombay Presidency and the Central Provinces only. 
There is no foundation for this statement. The Scheduled Castes 
Federation is functioning in other Provinces as well and it 
has won therein notable electoral successes, as great as, if not 
greater than, in Bombay and the Central Provinces. In making 
this statement the Mission has failed to take into account the 
signal victory Dr. Ambedkar obtained in the election to the 
Constituent Assembly. He stood as a candidate from the Bengal 
Provincial Legislative Assembly. He topped the poll as the 
general seats were concerned, beating even Mr. Sarat Chandra 
Bose the Leader of the Congress Party. If Dr. Ambedkar has 
no influence outside Bombay and Central Provinces how did 
he get elected from Bengal ? It must be further remembered 
that there are 30 seats for the Scheduled Castes in the Bengal 
Provincial Assembly. Out of the 80 as many as 28 were elected 
on the Congress ticket. Of the two who belonged to his party 
one fell ill on the day of the election. Notwithstanding this 
Dr. Ambedkar topped the poll. This could not have happened 
unless the Scheduled Caste members of Bengal elected on the 
Congress ticket had voted for him. It must also be remembered 
that Scheduled Castes in Bengal do not belong to the community 
to which Dr. Ambedkar belongs. This shows that even those 
Scheduled Caste members who belong to the Congress and who 
do not belong to his community regard him as the leader of 
the Scheduled Castes. This completely disproves the statement 
made by the members of the Mission. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


546 


546 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

12. The members of the Cabinet Mission argued that for 
the sake of maintaining uniformity in the composition of the 
Constituent Assembly they had to adopt in the case of the 
Untouchables the result of the Final elections as they had done 
in the case of the other communities. The argument is a form of 
special pleading which has no force. The Mission knew the final 
election of the Muslims, the Indian Christians and the Sikhs 
was by separate electorates. The final election of the Scheduled 
Castes was not by separate electorates. Consequently, for the sake 
of uniformity the Mission should have taken the results of the 
primary elections for giving representation to the Untouchables 
in the Constituent Assembly. The Mission was bound to do so 
because it was admitted by Sir Stafford Cripps in the debate 
that the system of election of the Untouchables as determined 
by the Poona Pact was incquilious. Why did the Mission then 
adopt it as a basis for its decision ? 

IV 

What could be done to save the Untouchables from 
impending peril 

13. The Cabinet Mission has by the Constitution of the 
Constituent Assembly left the Untouchables entirely at the mercy 
of the Caste Hindus who have an absolute majority in it. The 
Untouchables want the restoration of separate electorates given 
to them by the Communal Award by H.M.G. and the abrogation 
of the Poona Pact which was forced upon them by coercion 
practised by Mr. Gandhi through his fast unto death. This, the 
Hindus are bound to oppose. In reply to the criticism that they 
have been left to the mercy of the Hindu majority the Cabinet 
Mission has been advertising their proposal for an Advisory 
Committee on Minorities as a means of safeguarding minority 
rights. Anyone who examines the powers and Constitution of 
the Advisory Committee will know that the body is worse than 
useless. 

(i) In its composition it is only a pale reflection of the 
Constituent Assembly. The Hindus will dominate it in 
the same way as they do the Constituent Assembly; 

(ii) The fact that there will be a certain number 
of Untouchables in the Constituent Assembly as 
well as in the Advisory Committee elected by the 
goodwill of the Congress can be of no help to them 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


547 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 547 

for the Untouchable members of the Assembly and of the 
Committee are but the creatures of the Hindus; 

(iii) The decisions on questions relating to the minority 
protection by the Advisory Committee are left to the bare 
majority which means that the decision will be taken by 
the caste Hindus and imposed upon the minorities. 

(iv) The decision of the Advisory Committee even if they are 
favourable are no more than recommendations. They are 
not binding on the Constituent Assembly. 

14. The device of an Advisory Committee is thus a hoax if not 
a humbug and cannot be relied upon to counteract the mischief the 
Hindu majority may do to the cause of the minorities. The Hindu 
majority has singled out the Untouchables for their malicious 
intention and seems to be determined to deprive them of the right 
to claim the political safeguards which are due to a majority. This 
is apparent from the letter addressed by the Congress on 25th 
June 1946 (item 21 in Cmd. 6861). In that letter the Congress 
has taken the stand that the Untouchables are not a minority. 
This is an astounding proposition. For according to Mr. Gandhi’s 
own admission in his weekly called the Harijan of 21st October 
1939 the Untouchables were the only real minority in India. The 
Congress has thus taken a complete somersault. The stand now 
taken by the Congress is contrary to the underlying principles 
of the Government of India Act, 1935, which recognizes them 
a minority. What mischief is contemplated by this somersault 
it is not possible to know. If the Congress does not regard the 
Untouchables to be a minority it is possible that the Constituent 
Assembly might refuse to give them the same safeguards which 
it might agree to give to the other minorities. The Advisory 
Committee cannot therefore save the Untouchables from peril. 

15. Parliament must therefore intervene to see that the position 
of the Untouchables is not jeopardized. This Parliament must do, 
not merely because of the pledges it has given but also because 
of the fact that the discussions of the Constituent Assembly are 
not subject to ratification. 

16. What can Parliament do ? The Untouchables would like that the 
wrong done to them in regard to the Interim Government redressed. 
They would like their quota fixed. They would like to be given the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


548 


548 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

right to nominate their representatives to the Executive Council. 
These rights are not new claims. They are vested rights of 
the Untouchables which were recognized as late as the Simla 
Conference of 1945. They realize that this wrong it may be 
difficult to redress now. But if circumstances change and the 
Government is reconstituted they expect Parliament to press 
H.M.G. to right this wrong. 

17. Much can be done now to save the Untouchables from 
the injury which the Constituent Assembly, dominated by the 
caste Hindus who are determined to deprive the Untouchables 
of their political safeguards may do. To prevent this mischief 
the following steps could be taken: — 

I — Press H.M.G. to make a declaration that they regard the 
Untouchables as a minority. 

This is essential in view of the stand taken by the Congress 
in its letter of the 25th June 1946 (Item 21 in Cmd. 6861). This 
is all the more necessary because the Viceroy in his reply to 
the Congress dated 27th June 1946 (Item 38 in Cmd. 6861) has 
avoided giving a specific denial to the contention of the Congress 
that the Untouchables are not a minority. If the Government is 
not pressed to make a declaration now the Untouchables will 
suffer in two ways : — 

(a) The Constituent Assembly dominated by the Hindus 
will deny them the rights of the minority. 

(b) H.M.G. will be free not to come to their rescue on 
the ground that they were not committed to regard the 
Untouchables as a minority. 

II. Press for a declaration as to whether H.M.G. will Institute 
machinery, if so of what sort, to examine whether the safeguards 
for minorities framed by the Constituent Assembly are adequate 
and real. 

(a) In their Supplementary Statement dated 25th May 1946 
(Cmd. 6835) the Cabinet Mission say : — 

“When the Constituent Assembly has completed its labours, 

His Majesty’s Government will recommend to Parliament such 
action as may be necessary for the cessasion of sovereignty to the 
Indian people, subject only of two matters which are mentioned in 
the statement and which we believe, are not controversial, namely : 
adequate provision for the protection of the minorities (paragraph 
20 of the statement) and willingness to conclude a treaty with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


549 


THE CABINET MISSION AND THE UNTOUCHABLES 549 

H.M.G. to cover matters arising out of the transfer of power 
(Paragraph 22 of the statement) 

The idea behind this paragraph is not quite clear. It is 
necessary to press H.M.G. to clarify their intention. 

(b) If the words ‘subject to’ mean that H.M.G. reserve to 
themselves the right to examine the safeguards for the minorities 
framed by the Constituent Assembly in order to find out whether 
they are adequate and real it is necessary to press H.M.G. to 
state what machinery they propose to institute for such an 
inquiry. The machinery of a Joint Parliamentary Committee 
with power to examine witnesses from minorities communities 
would be most appropriate. There is a precedent for it. A joint 
Parliamentary Committee was appointed when the Government 
of India Act of 1935 was on the anvil. There would be nothing 
wrong in following the precedent in dealing with the report of 
the Constituent Assembly. 

III. Press H.M.G. to declare if they will insist upon the 
Constitution framed by the Constituent Assembly containing 
clause circumscribing the power of the future Indian Legislature 
to do away with minority safeguard by bare majority. 

(a) Neither the first Statement of the Cabinet Mission of 
May 16, 1946 nor the Supplementary Statement of May 25, 
1946 deal with the question of providing against the Legislature 
of a Free India altering the Constitution and abrogating the 
clauses dealing with the protection of minorities. There is no 
use in Parliament introducing safeguards if these safeguards 
can be done away with by the Indian Legislature. The only 
safeguards against such action is to see that the Constitution 
framed by the Constituent Assembly contains clauses putting 
limitations on the Constituent powers of the Indian Legislature 
and prescribing conditions precedent to be fulfilled before 
alterations in minority safeguards are made. Such provisions 
exist in the Constitution of U.S.A. and Australia. 

(b) Though this is a matter of vital importance to the 
minorities the Cabinet Mission has given no thought to the 
subject. It is necessary to press H.M.G. as to what they have 
to say on this question. 


— B. R. AMBEDKAR 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


550 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


551 


Part III 


Questions & Answers 


From 14th September 1942 
to 

12th April 1946 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


552 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


553 


1 

* Recent Labour Strikes in Industrial 
Undertakings 

16 . Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state whether during recent weeks there 
have been labour strikes in important industrial undertakings, 
such as iron and steel, coal and textiles ? 

(b) If so, will the Honourable Member be pleased to make a 
comprehensive statement dealing with the principal features of 
these strikes and giving in each case the issues on which the 
strike was declared, the number of persons involved and the 
duration of the strike ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Certain important 
industrial undertakings did cease to work for certain periods 
during the previous five weeks. It is not in public interest to 
name them or particularize them. 

(b) It is not in the public interest that the full information asked 
for should be given in respect of those industrial undertakings 
which are engaged on important war work. 

2. In many cases cessation of work appears to have had no 
connection with economic grievances; in a few others cessation 
of work has been more in the nature of an ordinary strike with 
demands for increase in wages or dearness allowance. 

3. Ahmedabad was the town in which cessation of work was 
the longest — here there were no economic grievances apparent 
and the mills have not yet reopened. In Bombay on date were 
all mills closed, and cessation of work in those mills that did 
remain closed was only of short duration — here too no economic 
grievances were put forward. In Coimbatore where mills reopened 
and have closed again economic grievances were to some extent 
apparent. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 15th September 1942, 
p. 87-90. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


554 


554 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

4. Apart from the cessation of work in the textile mills of 
Bombay, Ahmedabad and Coimbatore, the number of industrial 
undertakings which employ more than a thousand workers each 
and in which work was stopped for any appreciable time, for 
reasons not purely economic, was only about a dozen. In about 
ten other undertakings employing about a thousand workers each, 
cessations of work were of a very short duration. The number of 
undertakings employing less than a thousand workers in which 
work was stopped since the 9th August for non-political reasons 
was less than 20. 

5. A large majority of cessations of work were in the provinces 
of Bombay and Bengal, only just over half a dozen occurring 
elsewhere. 

6. The Government are not aware of any sabotage in industrial 
undertakings by persons who have ceased work. 

7. As regards strikes from the second week of August, which 
are known to have occurred for purely economic reasons, these 
numbered about 24, only seven of the undertakings employ more 
than a thousand workers. 

Dr. Sir Ziauddin Ahmad : May I ask whether it has 
been brought to the notice of the Government that some of the 
factories that closed allowed their workers to go out and paid 
them salaries for the day? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Government have 
no definite information beyond the statement already made. But 
there are indications that in some cases the things that have 
been referred to by my Honourable friend have in all probability 
occurred. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: May I know from the Honourable 
Member if these strikes were closed on certain terms, or were 
they closed of themselves, or with the help of the Government, 
on certain conditions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not follow 
the question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : The Honourable Member has said 
that some of these strikes ceased. Now I am asking if they did 
do it on certain terms given by Government, or of their own 
will, or whether they ceased these strikes on any conditions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In some cases they 
went back of their own will. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


555 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 555 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: May I know from the Honourable 
Member if any went on terms given by Government, and what 
were those terms ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. I am not aware 
of any case where Government had to give any terms to ask 
labourers to resume work. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask, on the statement made by the 
Honourable Member whether the demands made by the workers 
of Bombay were placed before the Government ? Whether he 
is aware that the Bombay Gimi Kamgar Union had sent to 
the Bombay Government more than a month ago, a statement 
regarding their demands about pay and other matters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am aware that 
some demands were made, but the point that I wish to emphasize 
is this : that in no case in Bombay so far as I am aware, the 
making of grievances was the cause for the stoppage of work. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask if the Girni Kamgar Union sent 
their demands to the Bombay Government, and if, after that, 
there were strikes, what is the point in the Honourable Member 
stating that no economic demands were made, or no economic 
demands were the cause of the strike ? How did he come by that ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no report 
from the Government of Bombay, but the information to which 
my Honourable Member has referred, is the information which 
I have got from the papers. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask the Honourable Member to 
enquire from the Bombay Government whether they have taken 
any steps to remove grievances of the Bombay textile workers 
and consider the demands made by the Bombay Girni Kamgar 
Union ? 

Sir Cowasji Jehangir : May I ask ihe Honourable Member 
how many strikes there were in the textile mills of Bombay after 
the 8th/9th August ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There were very few. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : Can the Honourable Member give 
any indication of the pay of the Tata Iron and Steel Company 
workers ? Were their specific demands sent lo Government ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


556 


556 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not in the 

interests of the public to give any information. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Does the Honourable Member know that it 
is published in the newspapers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: That may be so. 

Government will not take any responsibility. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : This report is from the Associated Press, 
one of the authorised agencies. It is stated that they struck work 
on the issue of a National Government in India. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know what 
the Honourable Member means that the Associated Press is an 
authorised agency. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I am afraid the Honourable Member does 
not care to read the Government communiques. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I know whether it is a fact that ah 
these strikes occurred after the arrest of Mahatma Gandhi and 
his co-workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Well, I cannot give 
definite information, but my impression is that these strikes were 
not spontaneous. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Will the Honourable Member 
be pleased to state the dates on which the strikes started ? We can 
draw inferences therefrom. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Where ? In what place ? 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : In Tata’s. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, I am not 
prepared to give any information because it is not in the public 
interest to give any information. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : I do not want the reasons 
for the strike or any such information ; I want the dates on which 
the strikes were declared. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have stated that it 
will not be in the public interest to give any information. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Is it a fact or not that all these strikes 
had occurred after the arrest of Mahatma Gandhi and does the 
Government believe or not that this shows the intensity of the 
movement and the following that Mahatma Gandhi has got in the 
country. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


557 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 557 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is an argument; 
it is not a question. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask whether the strike at Jamshedpur 
has ended? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I believe it has. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Next 
question. 


2 

* Programme of Activities of the Utilisation 
Section of the Geological Survey of India 

17. Mr. K. C. Neogy: (a) Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state whether a detailed programme has 
been drawn up in respect of activities of the newly started 
Utilisation Section of the Geological Survey of India ? 

(b) What are the minerals that are now intended to be included 
within the purview of such activities ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Section will be concerned initially with 
pioneering work in respect of select minerals with the help of 
experts, while ultimately entrusting their exploitation to suitable 
commercial concerns ? 

(d) Is petroleum included among the minerals with which 
the Section is concerned ? 

(e) What practical steps have been taken so far for furtherance 
of the object of this Section, and in respect of what minerals and 
with the help of which experts, and with what ultimate object 
in view have such steps been taken ? 

(f) Are the efforts of the Utilisation Section co-ordinated 
with the activities of the organisations relating to Scientific and 
Industrial Research and Utilisation attached to the Commerce 
Department ? If so, in what manner ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. The 
programme is, however, liable to alteration if there is urgent 
demand for a particular mineral. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 1st September 1942, pp. 
90-93. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


558 


558 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) All minerals which are required for war purposes and for 
which there are reasonable prospects of working in India. These 
include sulphur, mica, tungsten or wolfram, and non-ferrous 
metals such as lead, zinc, copper and tin. 

(c) The Utilisation Branch will with the help of experts prove 
deposits and undertake small-scale mining operations which may 
include the operation of experimental and pilot plants for smelting, 
etc., up to the stage when it becomes clear that production can 
be undertaken by Commercial firms. It is the present intention 
(subject to the necessity of maintaining war production and to 
the circumstances of each case) that at that stage commercial 
development should be encouraged. 

(d) No, according to present programme. 

(e) The Utilisation Branch has already taken steps to examine 
the possibility of obtaining early production of lead and zinc. The 
most promising lead-zinc mines in India appear to be the mines 
at Zawar in Udaipur State. The Government of India, acting 
through Mr. W. P. Cowen, late General Manager of the Mawchi 
mines in Burma, negotiated with the Mewar Government. They 
secured the cancellation on payment of compensation of the 
lease of the mines held by a private company, and obtained a 
prospecting licence from the Mewar Government. Mr. Cowen was 
placed in charge of the operations and began work at the end 
of May 1942. Operations have been planned in two stages (1) 
a detailed planetable survey and deep-drilling operations to be 
followed by (2) opening up of deposits and the erection of a pilot 
ore-dressing plant and smelters as soon as drilling operations 
establish the workability of the lode. As a result of the Survey’s 
progress so far made it is hoped that it will be possible to obtain 
information regarding the “payability” of the lode earlier than 
was originally expected. Most of the machinery required by Mr. 
Cowen in the way of drilling equipment, etc. has now arrived. Two 
Mining Engineers, one Mechanical Engineer, two Metallurgists 
and three Surveyors have been appointed to assist Mr. Cowen. 

Exploitation of the sulphur deposits in the extinct volcano 
of Koh-i-Sultan, has been taken over by the Utilisation Branch 
from the Supply Department and a Superintending Geologist of 
the Geological Survey of India is in charge of the operations. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


559 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 559 

The Branch is also engaged in an endeavour to stimulate the 
production of mica. A Superintending Geologist of the Geological 
Survey of India is in charge of a newly-formed Mica Production 
Section. It will be the work of the Branch to give all possible 
assistance to mica miners in obtaining the supplies necessary for 
increasing production. 

Investigations have also been taken in hand by the Branch 
regarding wolfram, copper, etc., and a possibility regarding tin 
is receiving urgent consideration. 

The ultimate object is to make India as self-sufficient as 
possible in respect of minerals which are needed for the war effort. 

(f) Yes; the Director, Scientific and Industrial Research and 
a Senior official of the Commerce Department are members of 
the Advisory Body which has been set up to assist this Branch. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : May I enquire, when the 
Honourable Member was referring to certain types of technical 
staff, if they are all British officials evacuated from Burma ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : With regard to the 
two mining engineers referred to in my reply to this part of the 
question, the information is this : the two gentlemen employed 
as mining engineers arc Mr. Smith and Mr. Robottam. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Do they all come from 
Burma ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They arc Burmese 
evacuees. Under them there are two probationers ; both of them 
are Indians. Then the mechanical engineer is one Mr. Symcs. He 
is also an evacuee. Of the two metallurgists, one is an Indian — 
Mr. Narayan — and the other is Mr. Fleming. There are three 
surveyors with regard to sulphur; they are all Indians. I may say 
that the reason why we had to employ these Burmese evacuees is 
because they are the only people who happened to know something 
about mining in regard to lead and zinc. They arc all taken from 
the Mawchi mines ; and probably the Honourable Member knows 
that the Mawchi mines in Bunna are the only mines which are 
lead and zinc mines. We had no expert from anywhere else. 
The policy of the Department is this, that while in the first 
place the necessity of employing Europeans who have experience 
in the mining of lead and zinc is inevitable, the department 
is taking steps that wherever a European is appointed there 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


560 


560 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

shall be appointed under him an Indian to be trained so that 
when the European vacates the Indian would be able to take 
charge of the department. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : The Honourable Member 
said just now that Mr. Cowen Started work at the end of May 
1942, and that in regard to these non-ferrous metals, zinc and 
lead the appointment of British officials was inevitable. When 
did it occur to the Government of India to have these mines 
explored ? Was it after the fall of Burma, so as to provide for 
these gentlemen who have been thrown out of employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot give an 
answer to that question. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : When did the Government 
first take it into their head to have these mines worked in India ? 
What have they been doing all this time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Probably quite 
spontaneously without reference to anything external. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I ask whether the need for working 
these mines was felt as a necessity to provide for the war effort, 
or was it to provide these evacuees from Burma with some jobs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly not; the 
supplies from Burma having ceased it was necessary for the 
Government of India to exploit their own resources. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With reference to clause (d) of the question, 
my Honourable friend stated that petroleum was not included 
among the minerals at the present moment. Has petroleum been 
excluded from the programme as a matter of discretion with the 
department or because the Government has been committed to 
some other agency for the development of petroleum in India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not at all. My answer 
was that for the present the programme docs not include it; it 
does not mean that it is excluded from the programme altogether. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member be surprised 
I were to tell him that Dr. Fox made a statement on the 6th 
of July, a portion of which I referred to yesterday, somewhat to 
that effect ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would like to say 
this to my Honourable friend, that Dr. Fox does not decide the 
policy of the Government of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


561 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 561 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : But Dr. Fox may at least be expected to 
be truthful. Anyway, may I ask another very short question? My 
Honourable friend stated that the Udaipur Durbar had to be 
persuaded to cancel the lease in respect of lead and zinc mines 
in that State, which had already been granted to a private party. 
Before getting the Udaipur Durbar obligingly to cancel this lease, 
was any attempt made by the Government to find out whether 
an agreement could not be arrived at with that private party 
for the purpose of enabling whatever activities the department 
wanted to carry on to be carried on ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 


3 

* “Bevin Boys ” Returned to India and 
their Employment 

23. Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state how many “ Bevin boys ” have returned 
to India and if all of them have got employment ? If not, what 
are the reasons for their unemployment? Are any of them taking 
any part in Trade Unions? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : 149 Bevin boys 
have returned to India of whom 26 arrived only on the 5th 
September and are now being tested by an Examining Board. Of 
the remaining 123, 105 have been placed in employment with an 
average increase of salary of 145 per cent. Of the balance of 18, 
nine boys who arrived at the end of July have been allotted to 
posts and will be appointed very shortly; two who do not wish 
to take up factory work are being considered for Emergency 
Commissions — one in the Indian Army and one in the Indian Air 
Force ; three have refused the posts offered to them and efforts 
are now being made to find them other appointments ; one is 
being returned to his original employment on increased pay; one is 
undergoing tests with a view to appointment as Welder Instructor 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 15th September 1942, 
pp. 112-113. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


562 


562 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

at a training centre ; one has been earmarked for a post but 
cannot at present be traced; and the last man was returned from 
England for misconduct without completing his training. 

It is too early yet to say whether any of the returned trainees 
are taking part in Trade Union Affairs. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : May I know if their unemployment 
is not due to the fact that they are taking part in Trade Union 
movements ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I do not think so. 
I do not see any evidence of unemployment among the trainees. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : My question was “ if all the 
‘Bcvin boys’ have got employment ” and the answer was that all 
the ‘Bevin boys’ who have returned are not employed, that some 
are being tested, that some are employed that some are sent 
back to their old jobs. I want to put this question whether their 
unemployment is in any way due to the fact that they are taking 
interest in trade union activities. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am sure it is not. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : What sort of misconduct was 
reported against one of the ‘Bevin boys ’ ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have not got the 

information at present. I want notice. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Has it got anything to do with 
his labour activities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would not like to 
spoil the chances of this young man, did not the Government think 
it advisable to make enquiries about what that misconduct was ? 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : When this case of misconduct was 
reported against this young man, did not the Government think 
it advisable to make enquiries about what that misconduct was ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no doubt 
that Government have got the information about the sort of 
misconduct he was found guilty of. I have not got the fact with 
me at present. I want notice. 

Dr. Sir Zkuiddin Ahmad : May I know whether the ‘Bevin 
boys’ come from the labouring classes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The Department is 
examining that aspect of the case. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


563 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 563 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : In view of the fact that the ‘ 
Bevin boys ’ return to India after obtaining proper training in 
England, where is the necessity for testing them again ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Most of the 
employers would not accept the word of the Government of India 
that they were trained, and the employer would like to satisfy 
himself that the man whom he is employing is properly trained. 
We cannot prohibit the employer from doing so. 

4 

* Depreciation in Labour Wages 

27. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya: (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state if he has 
ascertained the exact depreciation in wages in proportion to 
the increase in value of food-stuff and textile commodities and 
general cost of living ? If so, what is the ratio ? 

(b) Is it not a fact that the dearness allowance and wartime 
bonuses granted to Railway workers is not sufficient to make 
up for the proportional fall or depreciation in wages ? 

(c) If the answer to part (b) be in the affirmative, does the 
Honourable Member propose to reconsider the matter of wages of 
labour on the Railways and increase their wages to an amount 
which would be sufficient? 

(d) Do Government propose, during the war period, to set up 
food and cloth stores for supplying Railway labour with these 
commodities at prices commensurate with their present income 
and if it proves satisfactory to continue the arrangement as a 
permanent measure ? 

(e) Will the Honourable Member be pleased to make a 
comparative statement of wages paid to the Railway labour 
in Government controlled Railways, in private Railways (i.e. 
Company-managed and private State Railways) and in textile 
mills, jute mills and the iron and steel factories in India, and 
also their hours of work in a week ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 15th September 1942, 
pp. 115-17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


564 


564 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The costs of 
living have not risen at the same rates throughout India ; there 
are reliable cost of living indices only for a few large towns ; the 
rates of wages even at one centre differ considerably for different 
classes of employees, and the movements in the rates of wages 
have been uneven at the same place and as between different 
places. In view of these factors, it is not possible to give a reply 
to the question as put by the Honourable Member. If he desires 
information regarding any specific class of employees at a place 
where there is a reliable cost of living index, I shall attempt to 
furnish it. 

(b) No. I believe that the dearness allowance meets full the 
increased cost of living in the lower grades though to a diminishing 
extent in the higher grades. 

(c) Does not arise; but I would add that recently the dearness 
allowance was enhanced by a considerable extent, in negotiation 
with the All India Railwaymen’s Federation and there is no 
justification for a further revision at present. 

(d) Grain shops have been and are being opened by a number 
of railways when the administration considered it necessary to 
do so. Commodities supplied in these shops are sold at prices 
not exceeding the control prices fixed by Provincial governments. 
It is proposed to run these shops during the war as long as the 
necessity for them exists. No cloth shops have yet been opened 
on the Railways. 

(e) There is no known basis for making such a wide comparison; 
each factory employs specialised labour and comparison is difficult. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : May I know from the Honourable 
Member whether it is the contention of government that there 
has been no rise in price since 1939 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is not the 

contention of the Government. All that the Government say is 
that there is no uniformity in rise. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : There is some uniformity taking 
the minimum. Are the Government not prepared to accept the 
minimum rise in all commodities, which is above 50 per cent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am prepared to 
say that there is rise, but I cannot say that the percentage is 
as high as the Honourable Member suggests. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


565 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 565 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : Will the Government make 
enquiries and find out whether the allegation is correct ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot commit 
myself to making enquiries, which will require additional staff 
and time which Government may not be able to spare. v 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : The Government ought to have 
had this information since three years have elapsed. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Adur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is expressing an opinion. 

Dr. Sir Ziauddin Ahmad : May I ask if the dearness 
allowance mentioned in this question will be extended to other 
departments of the Government of India, especially post office ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This question should 
be addressed to the appropriate department. 

Dr. Sir Ziauddin Ahmad : This question refers to railways, 
but my Honourable friend has taken up this question as one 
concerning labour. I should like to know whether the labour 
conditions mentioned with regard to railways will be extended 
to labour conditions in other departments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think there has 
been an increase in dearness allowance given to all employees 
in the Government of India. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : With reference to part (d), may 
I know whether Government have taken any pains to compare 
the control rates at which they are selling now and the rates 
at which the commodities were being sold in 1939 and 1940 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is quite 
unnecessary to make any such comparison of percentage at all. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : Otherwise, you do not know 
what percentage of dearness allowance should be given. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is sufficient for 
Government purposes to know that there is an increase. In that 
case they may consider whether or not to increase the allowance. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi: What are the places 
where the rise in prices is the lowest ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


566 


566 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


5 

* Representation of Scheduled Castes 
in the Civil Pioneer Units 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state how many battalions of Civil Pioneer Force 
have been raised in the different Provinces ? 

(b) to what extent are the Scheduled Castes represented in 
the ranks and as officers ? 

(c) if the Scheduled Castes are not represented will he please 
state the reasons therefor ? 

(d) what steps do Government propose to take to secure their 
proper representation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Twelve units 
of the Civil Pioneer Force have been sanctioned in the first 
instance, as under: 

Bcngal-3, Madras-2, Bihar- 1, Bombay- 1, C. P. and Berar-1, 
N.W.F.P.-l, Orissa-1, Punjab-1, U.P.-l. 

Most of these units are still in the process of forming. Seven 
additional units have recently been sanctioned, as under: 

Bengal-3, Bombay-1, C. P.-l, Madras-2. 

Recruitment for these has now commenced. 

(b) At present Scheduled Castes are represented in the Civil 
Pioneer Force as under: 

Bengal 2 per cent. 

Bombay 10.5 percent. 

C. P. and Bcrar 26 per cent. 

Punjab 32 per cent. 

U. P. 20 per cent. 

Madras figure not known. 

N.W.F.P. All Muhammadans. 

These figures are liable to fluctuate as further recruits are 
enrolled. 

At present so far as information goes there is only 1 officer 
classed as Scheduled Caste. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 22nd September 1942, 
pp. 385-86. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


567 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 567 

(c) The raising of Civil Pioneer Force Units under Ordinance 
No. X of 1942 was entrusted to Provincial Governments who 
therefore become responsible for deciding on the composition of 
their respective units. 

(d) The Government of India addressed all Provincial 
Governments regarding the percentage of Scheduled castes to 
be recruited in future and directing that the percentage both of 
officers and men should be up to the percentage of Scheduled 
castes in the province and that where this percentage had not 
been previously met it should be made up in recruitment to 
subsequent units. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask what is the function of this 
Civil Pioneer Force ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The function of the 
Civil Pioneer Force is more or less analogous to that of the Fire 
Brigade. When there is an air raid and property is destroyed, the 
Civil Pioneer Force will come into operation and do rescue work. 

6 

* Prescribed Government Conditions 
for Contractors as regards 
Payment of Wages, etc., 
to their Employees 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state if he is aware that in Western Countries 
conditions have been prescribed to be observed by the contractors 
in the matter of wages and benefits to their employees ; if so, 
whether the Government of India have prescribed any such 
conditions for the contractors in India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. In 
certain western countries contracts require that contractors 
should observe certain labour conditions in respect of such 
matters as hours of work, wages and conditions generally. 
The Government of India have prescribed in the case 
of Central Public Works Department contracts that the 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 22nd September 1942, 
p. 386. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


568 


568 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

contractor should pay his labourers not less than the wages paid 
for similar work in the neighbourhood. 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : What steps, if any, are taken by 
the Government to enforce this clause in the contract ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say offhand, 
but I will make inquiries and let the Honourable Member know.. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether this condition about 
fair conditions to be given by contractors applies to the other 
Departments of the Government of India such as the contractors 
of the Supply Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend will give me notice I will make inquiries. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : The question was about contractors taking 
Government contracts, not only the Public Works Department. 
The Honourable Member only answered for the Public Works 
Department. He should have answered for the Government of 
India. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That question 
should be addressed to the Supply Department. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether there is a central 
Government of India or only a Government of India divided into 
ten or eleven of twelve members ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member knows that questions have to be addressed 
to the Departments concerned. 


7 

* Bevin Boys Selected from India for Training 
in the United Kingdom 

Dr. Sir Ziauddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state what is the total number of Bevin Boys 
selected by the Government of India for training in the United 
Kingdom ? In how many batches were they sent ? How many of those 
were (i) Muslims, (ii) persons belonging to scheduled caste, in each 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 23rd September 1942, 
pp. 455-56. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


569 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 569 

batch, separately ? (b) What minimum qualifications did the 
Government prescribe for selection ? Were they all manual 
labourers in the factories ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 304 Bevin 
trainees have so far been selected for training in die United 
Kingdom. Five batches have actually been sent so far, one of 
54 and four of 50 each. A tabular table is given below, showing 
the communal composition of the five batches already sent and 


the sixth batch 
sent out of 304. 

now selected. 

It 

shows 

that 

50 

Muslims 

were 


1st 

2nd 

3rd 

4th 

5th 

6th 

Total 

Hindus 

21 

25 

27 

29 

26 

34 

162 

Muslims 

13 

9 

8 

8 

8 

4 

50 

Anglo-Indians 

4 

5 

4 

3 

7 

3 

26 

Indian Christians 

4 

7 

6 

8 

4 

4 

33 

Parsis 

6 

3 

3 

3 

1 

3 

19 

Sikhs 

2 

1 

2 

3 

4 

2 

14 


50 

50 

50 

54 

50 

50 

304 


No information is available as to the number of Scheduled 
Caste trainees in the first 5 batches. Particulars in the case of 
the 6th batch are awaited. 


(b) The following are the minimum qualifications required. 

Candidates — 

(1) must be young and healthy but not below die age of 
eighteen ; 

(2) must be intelligent, able to read, write and do simple 
calculations, and possess manual dexterity and a sufficient 
knowledge of English to understand and make themselves 
understood. 

(3) must belong to one of the engineering trades preferably 
fitting, turning or maching ; 

(4) must have had a minimum of three years’ experience 
of factory work and have given proof of intelligence and 
adaptability ; and 

(5) must be medically fit and free from all traces of 
tuberculosis. A limited number of students were included 
in the first two batches, but it was then decided to restrict 
die Scheme to men of me working classes and mat rule 
has since been enforced. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


570 


570 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sir Cowasji Jehangir : Is it a fact that some of these young 
boys have not found employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My information is 
that a great many have found employment. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : How many have returned ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : 149, light believe. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : What is the test of intelligence to 
which the Honourable Member has referred ? 

Sir Cowasji Jehangir : Is it a fact that some of these boys 
have been offered less wages than they were earning before they 
left for this training ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not to my knowledge. 

Sir Cowasji Jehangir : Will the Honourable Member inquire 
as to how many arc unemployed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Very few, to my 
knowledge, arc unemployed. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : Were they sent under a guarantee 
of employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No guarantee of 
employment. 

Dr. Sir Ziaucklin Ahmad : Will Government consider the 
employment of Bevin boys for training as war technicians ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will consider that. 

8 

* Recruitment of Scheduled Caste Boys under 
the Bevin Scheme 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state the number of scheduled castes 
boys recruited under the Bevin Scheme ? 

(b) What steps do Government propose to take to secure 
adequate representation of these castes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No particulars were 
kept in respect of the first five batches. Particulars are being collected 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 23rd September 1942, p. 457. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


571 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 571 

about the sixth batch which will sail shortly and statistics will 
be kept of all future batches. 

(b) Candidates for training under the scheme are selected by 
the National Service Tribunals and Government have suggested 
to the Chairmen of these Tribunals that when making their 
selections they should associate with the Tribunal non-officials of 
influence belonging to the Scheduled Castes preferably members 
of the local Legislature. 


9 

* Approved Contractors of the Central 
Public Works Department 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : (a) Will the Honourable the labour 
Member please State the total number of contractors on the 
approved list of the Central Public Works Department according 
to classes ? (b) How many of them belong to scheduled castes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The total number 
of contractors on the approved list of the Central Public Works 
Department is 1,171, according to the classification given below : — 

1 . Building contractors — 

Class I (No limit) ... 115 

Class II (below Rs. 50,000) ... 236 

Class III (below Rs. 20,000) ... 620 


Total ... 971 

2. Electrical contractors — 

Class I (above Rs. 20,000) ... 28 

Class II (below Rs. 20,000) ... 42 


Total ... 70 


Furniture and Sanitary contractors ... 130 

(no classification). 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1942, 23rd September 1942, 
p. 458. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


572 


572 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) It is regretted that no information is available because 
the names of Hindus and of the members of Scheduled castes 
are indistinguishable. Moreover, it has not been the practice 
to enquire from contractors about their community. 

Rao Bahadur N. Sivaraj : With reference to the last 
part of the Honourable Member’s reply, will the Honourable 
Member make the necessary inquiries and get full information 
on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : Do the Government appoint 
contractors also on a communal basis ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am only 
answering a question which calls for information. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : I want a reply to my question. 
Is it the intention of Government to appoint contractors on a 
communal basis, so many Muslims, so many Europeans, so 
many scheduled castes and so on ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is not a 
question that arises now. I am only giving information. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Are building materials 
also produced and purchased on a communal basis ? 

(No answer). 


10 . 

* Applications under Payment of Wages 
Act by or on behalf of Employees of 
Federal Railways 

1. Mr. Muhammad Azar Ali : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please lay on the Table a 
statement showing the applications presented to the 
authorities appointed under the Payment of Wages 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. m of 1942, 24th September 1942, p. 507. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


573 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 573 

Act, 1936, by or on behalf of the employees of Federal Railways 
Between the 1st April, 1937, and the 31st August 1942, showing 
inter alia: 

(a) the application number; 

(b) the particulars of the parties, i.e., name and address ; 

(c) allegations in the application ; 

(d) amount of the relief claimed ; 

(e) findings of the Authority, and qualifications of the 
Authority ; 

(f) if appeal preferred, the result of the appeal together with 
the full description of the appellate court, and 

(g) if revision preferred, the result of the revision together 
with the particulars of the Revisional Court ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for is not readily available and its collection would involve 
an amount of time and labour that would not be justifiable in 
war time. 


11 


* Summons Fees under Payment of Wages Rules 
for Delhi Province 

2. Mr. Muhammad Azar Ali: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please refer to Rule 18 of the Payment of Wages 
(Federal Railways) Rules, 1938, and to Rule 21 of the United 
Provinces Payment of Wages Rules, 1936, and Rule 21 of Delhi 
Province Payment of Wages Rules, 1937, and state the amount 
of the process fee for summoning the opposite party by the 
Authority and by the court which is prescribed for the Delhi 
Province ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government are 
advised that no process fee is leviable for issuing notices to the 
opposite party under the rules mentioned. This is, however, a 
matter of interpretation of the rules. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. m of 1942, 24th September 1942, p. 507. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


574 


574 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


12 

*Paucity of Muslim Gazetted Officers in 
the Printing and Stationery Office 

23. Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi: (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to state how many Gazetted 
Officers there arc in the Printing and Stationery Office of the 
Government of India ? Are there any Muslims among them ? If 
not, why not ? 

(b) Is it a fact that recently the vacancy of a Second 
Assistant Controller in the Central Stationery Office was filled 
up by a Hindu Sub- deputy Collector from Bengal, ignoring the 
legitimate claims of Muslim candidates and in violation of the 
Government circular regarding the maintenance of a ratio for 
Muslim appointments ? 

(c) Do Government propose to take any steps to increase the 
existing ratio of Muslim Gazetted Officers for safeguarding the 
interest of Muslims ? 

(d) Is it a fact that Government propose to create shortly 
one post of Assistant Controller and another of Superintendent 
in the Central Stationery Office ? If so, will they be pleased to 
reserve these appointments for Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Presuming that 
the Honourable Member refers to the Stationery and Printing 
Department as a whole, the number of gazetted officers is 24 of 
which two posts are at present held by Muslims. The last part 
docs not arise. 

(b) Yes. The reply to the second part is in the negative. 

(c) All gazetted posts in the Stationery and Printing 
Department are selection posts appointments to which are 
made by selection on merits in accordance with existing rules. 
Assurance to increase the proportion of Muslims to such posts 
will not be in conformity with those rules. 

(d) There is no proposal to create any additional post of 
Assistant Controller in the Central Stationery Office. A temporary 
post of Superinendent has recently been sanctioned for that office 
for a period of less than three months. Orders regarding communal 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 11th February 1943, p. 71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


575 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 575 

representation do not apply to the filling of temporary vacancies 
of such duration. The post in question will not accordingly be 
reserved for a Muslim. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know from the Honourable 
Member if these officers are selected by the Public Service 
Commission or by the higher officer themselves ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know from the Honourable 
Member if appointments arc made by promotion; and in case 
of promotion are recruitments made on a communal basis or 
otherwise ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The communal 
ratio does not apply to promotions. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Therefore, may I know whether 
in this case the officers are taken by promotion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

13 

* Paucity of Muslims in Calcutta 
Central Stationery Office, etc. 

24. Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi: (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for labour please state how many Superintendents and 
Head Assistants there are in the employ of the Central Stationery 
Office, the Calcutta Press and the Central Forms Store located 
in Calcutta ? What proportion of these appointments are held 
by Muslims ? 

(b) What is the total number of Assistants and clerks employed 
in the Central Stationery Office, the Calcutta Press and the 
Central Forms Store located in Calcutta separately ? 

(c) What is the proportion of Muslims in each office and in 
each cadre ? 

(d) How many new posts of Assistants have been created 
in each of the above three offices and how many of them were 
filled by Muslims ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 11th February 1943, p. 72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


576 


576 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(e) If the number of Muslims in employ is not commensurate 
with the ratio laid down by the Government circular, why has 
no attempt been made to rectify things ? 

(f) Is it a fact that some junior Hindu clerks with minimum 
educational qualifications and meagre office experience were 
promoted to the cadre of Assistants in the Central Stationery 
Office during the year, thereby superseding the claims of senior 
Muslim clerks ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a), (b), (c) and 

(d). A statement containing the required information is laid on 
the table. 

(e) The Government circular applies to direct recruitment and 
is being followed. No question of rectification arises. 

(f) No. As posts of Assistants are filled by selection on merit 
the question of supersession of senior men does not arise. 

Statement showing the Number of Assistants and Clerks 

employed the proportion of Muslims in those categories and the 

Number of posts of Assistants created owing to war in the Central 

Stationery Office, the Central Forms Store and the Calcutta Press. 

(a) Two Superintendents and ten Head Assistants. None of 
them is a Muslim. 

(b) and (c). 


Proportion 


Assistants 

No. 

of Muslims 
per cent 

Central Stationery Office 

... 31 

9.7 

Central Forms Store 

13 

7.7 

Calcutta Press 

... 5 

Nil 

Clerks — 



Central Stationery Officer 

... 329 

19.1 

Central Forms Store 

166 

21.1 

Calcutta Press 

49 

20.4 

(d) 

Assistants’ post created 

No. of 


as a result of the war 

Muslims 

Central Stationery Office 

13 of which 11 filled 

1 

Central Forms Store 

9 (none yet filled) 


Calcutta Press 

... Nil 

Nil 


Note . — Figures given against the Central Stationery Office include the 
number of Assistants and clerks employed in the Stationery 
Store Branch to which the communal orders were applied 
from the 18th June, 1942. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


577 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 577 

14 

* Working Hours of the Central 
Stationery Office 

25. Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi: (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state if it is a fact that the working 
hours of the Central Stationery Office have been extended by 
thirty minutes ? 

(b) Is it a fact that a concession of thirty minutes allowed to 
Muslim employees in the Central Stationery Office during the 
last Ramzan was disallowed ? If so, why ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the working hours in certain branches 
of the Central Stationery Office have been further extended 
by sixty minutes ? If so, are Government prepared to sanction 
overtime allowance to the employees of those branches for the 
extended time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. The concession was previously allowed on the analogy 
of local Government orders. It was disallowed in 1942 as the 
Government of Bengal withdrew the concession in view of earlier 
closing hours. 

(c) Yes. As a temporary measure for a short period only. To 
tide over the rush of work in connection with Defence supplies 
the staff of certain branches was required to remain in office 
one hour more. It is not customary to pay for such additional 
overtime to non-industrial staff. 

15 

@ Announcement re Grant of Inadequate 
Dearness Allowance to Workers 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : 
The next one is also in the name of Mr. Jamnadas 
Mehta. He wishes to discuss a definite matter of urgent 
public importance, namely, the extreme discontent created 
among nearly three lakhs of workers in the employment 
of the Government of India by the action of the latter in 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 11th February 1943, pp. 
72-73. 

@ Ibid., 12th February 1943, p. 169. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


578 


578 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

failing to consult their respective Trade Unions, before announcing 
a very meagre and inadequate grant of Dearness Allowance to 
the workers concerned. 

When was this announcement made ? 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : On the 23rd January this year. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): After 
the last Session ? 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Who is 
the Member in charge ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): I 
do not think that the failure to consult Trade Unions is a matter 
of urgent public importance. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not a definite 
matter, because there has been no obligation placed upon 
Government by any 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): That 
may be an answer on the merits. This announcement was made 
on the 23rd January ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is so. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
allegation is that there is considerable dissatisfaction among the 
workers who number three lakhs. That suggests that it is rather 
an important public matter. I hold that the motion is in order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I object to the 
motion. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : As 
objection has been taken will those who are in favour of leave 
for the motion being granted rise in their places ? 

(More than 25 Members stood up.) 

As not less than 25 Members are for leave being granted, the 
motion will be taken up at 4 p.m. or earlier, if the business on 
the agenda is finished earlier. I take it that that is the desire 
of the House. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


579 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 579 

16 

* Desirability of Raising the Standard of 
Labour Wages 

86. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state what is the standard by which the 
wages of labourers are determined ? 

(b) In view of the fall in the purchasing power of a rupee 
from sixteen to six annas, have the Government of India taken 
any action to enforce proportionate rise in the daily wages of 
labourers ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The question of 
wages is generally a matter of contract between the employer 
and labour. 

(b) The rise in the cost of living, which amounts to a fall in 
purchasing power, has not been uniform throughout India. 

The Government of India has not taken action to enforce 
increase in wages or to grant any specific dearness allowance 
for the following reasons — 

(1) Government has not as yet accepted the policy of fixing 
a minimum wage by law. That is a matter which needs to be 
considered before any compulsion is enforced. 

(2) There are no index numbers throughout India which can be 
relied upon to measure the actual cost of living and consequently 
no specific dearness allowance can be prescribed. 

(3) The rise in the cost of living not being uniform, it is 
not possible to lay down from the Centre a policy which could 
be applicable to all Provinces having regard to the diversity of 
circumstances obtaining in them. 

The appointment of Labour Commissioners and the provision 
made for adjudication under the Defence of India Rules in the case 
of disputes occurring in war time are steps taken by Government 
to ensure fair conditions of work for labour. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask when Government propose to 
undertake legislation for fixing up the minimum wages ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, pp. 
267-68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


580 


580 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not possible 
to undertake any such legislation during the war period. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask what is the difficulty created 
by the war period to undertake legislation of this kind ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is a controversial 
legislation. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : Has any attempt been made 
to find out the cost of living or the Index number ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is only one 
province where Index numbers arc framed, namely, Bombay. 

N. M. Joshi: May I ask whether Government realises that 
the Act prohibiting the strikes and lock-outs is a step which 
necessitates a dispute and whether such a necessity of creating 
a dispute the war time is in the interests of war effort ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think the 
premise is correct. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask which part of the premise is 
correct. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The fact that 
we have on the statute book a legislation does not necessarily 
involve that it will give rise to disputes as mentioned by the 
Honourable Member. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask whether the Government docs 
not realise. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): That is 
arguing. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Will the Government try to 
find out the price Index of bigger towns having a population of 
more than 200,000 ? This information is rather important for us. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Unless we have 
an Act which enables the Government to collect statistics, it is 
not possible to have Index numbers prepared throughout India. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether the Honourable Member 
is aware that there is an Act of the Central legislature which 
enables the Government to collect statistics ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Next 
question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


581 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 581 

17 

* Discontentment among Factory Labourers 

87. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Is the Honourable Member 
for Labour aware that there exists great discontentment among 
the factory labourers on account of the fact that the capitalists 
who are making abnormal profits do not give an adequate share 
to their labourers in the form of rise in their wages ? 

(b) What action has the Honourable Member taken to force 
the capitalists to give a share of their profits to persons by whose 
labour the profit is achieved ? 

(c) Is the Honourable Member aware that the unrest in the 
factory labour is not due so much to political consciousness as 
it is due to economic coercion of their employers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Where there is, 
as now, a tendency for prices to rise and where profits are being 
made, labour is always likely to claim an increase in emoluments 
Government are aware that such claims are being put forward. 

(b) A considerable portion of the profits of industry goes to 
Government in the shape of Excess Profits Tax. Out of the part 
left to the employers, many employers are distributing bonuses. 
Government has not found it necessary at present to take any 
action, for the purpose indicated. 

(c) The question is not understood. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Have the Government found 
out the names of those factories which are giving the bonus to 
their employees ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, we have. If the 
Honourable Member wants the information, it can be supplied 
to him. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Are all these factories giving 
this bonus or only some of them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend puts down a question, I can give the detailed information 
on the point. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 268. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


582 


582 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


18 

* Household Budget of a Labourer 

88. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please lay on the table the normal house-hold 
budget of a labourer for 1943, who earns eight annas a day and who 
has to support his family which normally consists of six persons ? 

(b) What is the grain consumption of such a family and what 
price is to be paid ? 

(c) What action have the employers of labour taken to feed 
their labourers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There is no uniform 
budget for a labourer throughout India. It is regretted also that no 
family budget figures for 1943 can be supplied for any area. The 
statistics about family budgets in Bombay in some previous years 
can be supplied if the Honourable Member so desires. 

(b) In the absence of statistics it is not possible to say what 
the grain consumption of a labourer’s family is. Diets and prices 
vary in different areas. 

(c) A number of employers have opened grain shops or canteens 
and the Government of India are advising the main All-India 
Employers Associations that they regard such opening as very 
desirable. The attached statement gives a summary of information 
so far available with the Government of India. 

Statement 

(The information is the latest available but is not up-to-date.) 

Madras. — Thirty-one factories have grain shops ; 13 of them have 
been opened by employers and 18 by workers’ Co-operative Societies, 
which are in several cases assisted by employers. 

In 50 factories employers have laid in reserves of essential food 
articles against an emergency ; in six factories arrangements have 
also been made to supply cooked food to workers in an emergency. 

In two factories employers are running canteens for workers. 

Bengal — In 146 factories there are grain shops and emergency 
reserves are also held by them. Besides emergency grain stocks alone 
are held by 35 factories. Arrangements for supply of cooked food 
during an emergency exist in 73 factories. 

Bombay/Punjab. — Detailed information is not available. 

But many employers have opened grain shops and have made 
arrangements as far as possible to hold emergency stocks of grains. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 161h February 1943, pp. 
268-69. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


583 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 583 


Bihar. — Seven employers, including the leading employers, 
have opened grain shops for their workers and are maintaining 
as far as possible emergency stocks of foodstuffs. One prominent 
employer has advanced capital to a Co-operative society of workers 
for running grain shops and has also provided storage accommodation 
at reduced rent. 

United Provinces. — All the large Cawnpore factories have 
grain shops and emergency reserves are laid in as far as possible. 

Central Provinces and Berar. — About 14 grain shops have 
been opened by employers ; one employer is helping a trade union 
to open such a shop. About seven prominent employers and one 
Co-operative society have made or arc making arrangements for 
storing food grains for an emergency. 

Sind. — Seven leading employers in Karachi and Hyderabad 
(Sind) have opened grain shops. 

Employers of all essential services have been required to keep 
within the work premises emergency stocks of foodstuffs with cooking 
arrangements and prominent employers have complied. 

One leading concern at Karachi has set up a canteen for 
supplying cooked food and milk to its employees. 

Assam. — Employers of industrial labour have made adequate 
arrangements for supply of foodstuffs by opening grain shops, etc. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: May I know whether the Labour 
Department has any hand in the fixation of the prices for the 
poor people ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. 

19 

* Measures for Making Essentials Available 
to Labourers 

89. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state what action his department 
has taken to safeguard the interests of labourers in getting their 
essential of life specially food stuffs ? If none, why ? 

(b) What steps, does the Honourable Member propose to take 
to ensure that the poor people get enough to eat and prices 
comparable to their wages ? If none, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
question has been engaging the attention of Government for some 
time and is now considered in the Food Department. Instructions 
have been issued to Provincial Governments to give priority of 
supplies to essential civil personnel, including industrial labour 
engaged in essential employments. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 269. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


584 


584 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


20 

* Measures for Ameliorating the Economic 
Condition of Labourers 

90. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state what steps he has taken to 
ameliorate the economic condition of labourers ? 

(b) In what manner does he propose to safeguard the interests 
of labourers ? 

(c) Is he prepared to reorganise the unions of labour and to place 
them in a position to safeguard their own interests ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Both in legislative 
and executive action Government have striven to ensure fair conditions 
to labour. A copy of Press Note issued when I met the Press is 
attached for Honourable Member’s information. It will give some idea 
of the ameliorative provisions. If the Honourable Member desires 
any more detailed information on specific points, it will be supplied. 

(b) This is already replied to under (a). 

(c) It is not for Government to reorganise labour unions. 

@ Labour Welfare in Wartime India 

In view of the appointment of a number of Assistant Labour 
Welfare Officers who will soon be posted to important industrial areas, 
we may take stock of what is being done for Labour’s betterment in 
wartime India. 

The old concept of a government’s job being to govern, to 
maintain law and order, has given place to a new ideal in which 
the responsibility of an administration for the material and cultural 
well-being of the people is recognised. In India Labour is mainly 
a provincial subject and we at the Centre have heretofore been 
responsible mainly in securing uniformity in Labour legislation and 
adherence to such of the International Labour Office Conventions as 
are practicable for India. Our legislation though comprehensive has 
been confined more to conditions of service and industrial relations 
than to such matters as wages and welfare. 

In wartime some curtailment of Labour’s rights is necessary to 
ensure continuance of production but in the very process of effecting 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, pp. 
270-71. 

@ Ibid. Press Note, dated 30th October, 1942. (Summary of Statement made by the 
Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar.). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


585 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 585 

those necessary curtailments we have been able to give Labour 
certain big advantages. Thus under the Essential Services 
Maintenance Ordinance workers must stick to their jobs. 
Simultaneously this ordinance guarantees men in essential 
industries fair terms of employment. Provision has had to be 
made to ensure the best use of the technical personnel, but here 
too statutory provision ensures their conditions of service being 
fair. So also while strikes without notice have been made illegal, 
adequate provision has been made for adjudication and power 
taken to enforce the results of such adjudication. 

While therefore some restrictions have been imposed on Labour, 
there has been a development of Government’s powers to ensure 
fair conditions of employment, the influence of which is likely to 
survive. 

Another matter in which developments resulting from the war 
are bound to have a lasting effect are the training schemes of the 
Labour Department and the novel experiment of sending skilled 
workers to England for further training. The Bevin Boys whose 
period in England has given Indian Labour an insight into English 
working class conditions and organisations, have themselves 
benefited by the training to such an extent that they now on the 
average earn two and a half times their former salaries. The 
scheme for training raw hands in India which will train 70,000 
skilled workers by June 1943, must have even greater result:, as 
this large increase in the skilled labour force of the country must 
be of the greatest value to India’s post-war industrial revival. 

Coming to our new Labour Welfare organisation, the best 
indication of the spirit which animates the Department is the 
choice of a Labour Welfare Adviser made by my colleague, the 
Honourable Sir Firoz Khan Noon. Mr. R. S. Nimbkar has been a 
labour leader all his life. He has been in and out of prison constantly 
in the cause of Labour. His work for the Bombay Girni Kamgar 
Union, one of India’s biggest unions, has shown his capacity as 
an organiser of workers, while he has served his home town and 
India as a member of the Bombay Municipal Corporation and as a 
delegate to the International Labour Conference where he was one 
of a team led by Sir Firoz Khan Noon. We are fortunate to have 
him now as a Government worker and you may be sure we will 
use his services to the utmost. So successful has been his work so 
far that we have now appointed seven Assistant Labour Welfare 
Officers to help Mr. Nimbkar. For the past three or four days these 
new Labour Welfare Officers have been here in Delhi in the Labour 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


586 


586 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Department learning something of the work before them. Shortly 
they (and an eighth officer, who is expected to join soon) will 
be sent to various areas where it is hoped they will maintain 
contacts on behalf of the Central Government with Labour. Their 
duties will be, on the one hand, to keep the Central Government 
apprised of Labour conditions and feeling and particularly of 
grievances of Labour in different parts of India and, on the other, 
to explain to the workers the policy of the Central Government 
In Labour matters. They can also help to secure the co-operation 
of the workers in bringing A.R.P. arrangements to the highest 
pitch of efficiency. 

The work of these officers will, it is hoped, bring the Central 
Government into closer touch with such Labour aspects as 
concern them (Labour is of course largely a provincial subject) 
and will help in the development of one of the main planks In 

Government’s policy that is tripartite collaboration between 

employer, employee and Government. We held our first tripartite 
conference last August — the Standing Committee of that conference 
will meet in December and we hope that these meetings will be 
held frequently in the future and lead to a well developed Labour 
policy throughout this country. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: With reference to part (c) of the 
question, may I ask whether the Government are contemplating 
to introduce any legislation on this point ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

21 

* Communal Composition of the 
Engineering Service in the Central 
Public Works Department 

100. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
member for Labour please state : 

(a) the number of officers of the Engineering service selected 
and appointed in the Central Public Works Department 
from the Public Works Department of every province 
during the last 3 years with their nationalities and creed ; 

(b) the criterion, if any, for such selection and appointments ; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 279. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


587 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 587 

(c) whether the Home Department Resolution of 1934 
regarding communal composition of services applies to 
such appointments ; 

(d) if the reply to part (c) be in the negative, the reason and 
the order of the Government, if any, on the subject; and 

(e) the total strength of officers in the Engineering service 
of the Central Public Works Department and the number 
of Muslim and Sikh officers of such services ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The collection of 
this information to cover officers of every grade would involve an 
amount of time and labour which would not, in the opinion of 
Government, be justifiable in war time. The number of gazetted 
officers is, however, 83. Their nationalities are : five Europeans, 
rest Indians. Creeds : Hindus 61, Muslims 10, Sikhs 2, others 10. 

(b) In the case of three appointments, which have been made 
on a permanent basis, the selection of the officers was made in 
consultation with the Federal Public Service Commission and 
with due regard to the requirements of the Home Department 
Resolution of 1934 regarding communal representation in the 
public services. The rest of the appointments are all temporary, the 
officers concerned having been obtained on loan from Provincial 
Governments for the execution of certain specific works. In these 
cases, the officers were selected and placed at the disposal of the 
Government of India by the Provincial Governments themselves, 
in accordance with the requirements of the Government of India 
indicated to them from time to time. 

(c) No, so far as the temporary appointments mentioned in the 
answer to clause (b) are concerned : Yes, so far as the permanent 
appointments referred to above are concerned. 

(d) The Home Department Resolution of 1934 does not apply 
to persons who are on deputation for a definite period and are 
expected to revert to their substantive posts thereafter. 

(e) The total strength of gazetted officers is 174, of whom 18 
are Muslims and 8 Sikhs. Figures of non-gazetted staff cannot 
be readily given. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : May I know the number 
of officers recruited from Bihar Public Works Department in the 
Central Public Works Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I require notice of that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


588 


588 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

22 

* Monopoly of Export of Mica to 
the Joint Mica Mission and 
Metal Reserve Company of the 
United States of America 

104. Babu Baijnath Bajoria : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact 
that export of Mica is allowed only when effected by the Joint 
Mica Mission and Metal Reserve Company of the United 
Slates of America and none else is allowed to export Mica 
to any country outside India ? 

(b) If the answer to part (a) be in the affirmative, for 
what reasons and on what conditions has such a monopoly of 
export of Mica been granted to the above mentioned foreign 
interest ? 

(c) Is the Honourable Member aware that such restrictions 
of export have resulted in these concerns securing Mica in 
India at much lower rates and making enormous profits for 
themselves by selling at much higher rates in America and 
other allied countries ? 

(d) Are these concerns Government concerns or private 
companies ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) The prices at which the Joint Mica Mission secures mica 
have been fixed with the prior approval of the Government 
of India. The prices are in the opinion of the Government of 
India fair and reasonable. The prices offered by the Mission 
are almost invariably higher than or equal to the standard 
prices ruling before the Mission began to operate. Furthermore 
the Mission is prepared to buy all mica of merchantable 
quality which is offered to it. This covers practically the whole 
range of useful mica and may include mica which would 
previously not have found a market at all. The Metals Reserve 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, pp. 
281-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


589 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 589 

Company is not now buying mica in India. It bought certain 
quantities of mica in 1940-42 under contracts with the 
Government of India and the large increase in production in 
Indian mica in 1941 was largely the result of these purchases. 
The prices which it paid were fair and reasonable. Neither 
the Joint Mica Mission nor the Metals Reserve Company are 
profit-making concerns. 

(d) The Joint Mica Mission is a Government concern. It 
consists of three British and three American members appointed 
by the Government of Great Britain and of the United States 
of America. One of the British members is Chairman. The 
Mission buys mica for the Ministry of Supply in the case of 
the United Kingdom and for the Metals Reseve Company of 
the United States of America in the case of the United States 
of America. The Metals Reserve Company is a corporation 
created by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation of the United 
States of America under section 5 (d) of the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation Act and is a duly organised agency of the 
Government of the United States of America. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : With regard to para, (a) of the 
question, the Honourable Member has said “No”. Does it mean 
that other supply firms are allowed to export mica from India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend will find answer to that in the next question. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : But you have already said “No” 
to part (a) of my question. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : That means that other firms will 
be allowed to export mica from India. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is no 
prohibition ; there are certain conditions prescribed. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : As regards (c), is the Honourable 
Member aware that the Joint Mica Mission have raised the 
standard of quality and reduced the rate thereby ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. The answer 
to that also will be found in the next question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


590 


590 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

23 

* Plan for Providing Against Mass — 
Unemployment of Indian Labour 

@ 103. Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state if he has planned any scheme to 
provide against mass unemployment of Indian Labour so that it 
may enjoy freedom from want of necessaries of life ? If so, what ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No formal scheme 
to provide against mass unemployment has been planned. 

In War time the scope for employment has increased 
enormously. As regards post-war conditions, the Reconstruction 
Committee appointed in the Commerce Department will devote 
attention to them. 


24 

f Monopoly of Export of Mica to the Joint Mica 
Mission and Metal Reserve Company of the 
United States of America 

105. Babu Baijnath Bajoria : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if it is a fact that when the Joint 
Mica Mission assumed control of export of Mica from this country, 
they gave an undertaking to the Government of India that they 
would purchase the entire production of Indian Mica ? 

(b) If the answer to the part (a) be in the affirmative, what 
steps are Government taking for the implementing of this 
undertaking ? 

(c) Is the Honourable Member aware that the Joint Mica 
Mission is purchasing only scheduled qualities of Mica and 
refuses to purchase other qualities, e.g. lower grade splittings and 
Block Mica, and many a time refuses to purchase even certain 
scheduled qualities, which has resulted in large stocks of these 
qualities remaining unsold in the hands of Indian merchants ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 281. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent, 
t Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, pp. 
282-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


591 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 591 

(d) What steps are Government taking so that the industry 
may be able to dispose of its stocks of qualities not purchased 
by the Joint Mica Mission ? 

(e) Are Government prepared to permit the export of Mica by 
private firms to the United States of America and other Allied 
countries ? If not, why not ? 

(f) Are Government aware that since the Joint Mica Mission 
is controlling the purchase and export of Mica, the production 
of loose Mica splittings has considerably decreased and several 
thousands of workers have been thrown out of employment due 
to the closing of numerous factories and home splitting centres ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Joint Mica 
Mission has not assumed control of export of mica from this 
country. It has, however, undertaken to purchase all mica offered 
to it which is of merchantable quality and which is trimmed and 
graded to the usual recognised trade standards. 

(b) Government have no reason to suppose that the Mission 
is not implementing the undertaking. 

(c) The Mission is only purchasing scheduled qualities of mica ; 
no other qualities are merchantable among the United Nations. 
Such qualities can however be exported to neutral countries 
provided they do not conflict with any general orders issued by 
Government. The Mission never refuses to purchase schdeuled 
qualities of mica provided they arc up to the Mission’s standards. 
The Government of India are not aware that there arc any large 
stocks of scheduled qualities of mica remaining unsold. 

(d) Qualities of mica not purchased by the Joint Mica Mission 
are not merchantable in the United Nations. Government are 
accordingly not taking steps to assist the industry to dispose 
of such stocks. In the unlikely event of such stocks being 
merchantable in neutral countries, Government have no objection 
to the issue of licences for the export of such stocks provided they 
do not conflict with any general orders issued by Government. 

(e) Export of mica by private firms is not prohibited. 
The United Nations will however not import mica by 
private firms but will only import mica purchased by 
the Joint Mica Mission. The United Nations require all 
merchantable mica which the mica industry in India can 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


592 


592 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

produce. The sale of mica to the United Nations has been 
canalised through the Joint Mica Mission because the United 
Nations including the Government of India consider that a single 
purchasing agency buying on the spot provides the quickest and 
easiest means of providing mica in the very large quantities 
now required by the United Nations. 

(f) The United Nations already have considerable stocks 
of mica splittings and their principal requirements are now 
of block mica. Nevertheless the Mission continues to buy all 
mica which comes split from the mines. They will not however 
buy mica which is split from old dumps and such mica is no 
longer merchantable among the United Nations. Such mica can 
however be sold in neutral countries provided such sale does 
not conflict with any general orders issued by Government. 
Government are not aware that any factories have been closed, 
although possibly a number of home splitting centres may have 
been closed. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : As regards part (a), again I repeat 
the question that there is a demand for Mica of other varieties 
in America and that is not being allowed to be exported. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I am not aware 

of that. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : Will you make inquiries ? If there 
is a demand in the U.S.A. of the qualities which this Mission 
does not buy then private firms should be allowed to export 
those qualities to America. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I will make 
inquiries. 


25 

* Fixation of Prices of Grades of Mica by the 
Joint Mica Mission 

106. Babu Baijnath Bajoria : (a) Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member aware that the Joint Mica Mission fixes the 
prices of the various grades of Mica without any consultation 
with the representatives of the industry ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 283. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


593 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 593 

(b) Is the Honourable Member aware that the Joint Mica 
Mission raised the standards considerably, compared to those of 
the Metal Reserve Company who bought through the Director, 
Geological Survey of India ? 

(c) Arc Government aware that the Joint Mica Mission has 
reduced its purchasing prices by 10 per cent to 30 per cent from 
the ruling prices in the market and the factories are compelled 
to sell their products at their rates for want of any other outlet ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the Government of India accepted the 
reduction in prices as mentioned in part (c) above ? 

(c) Arc Government prepared to appoint an advisory committee 
consisting of representatives of mine-owners and factory-owners 
to advise the Joint Mica Mission on the question of fixation of 
prices of different qualities ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Before fixing 
the prices of various grades of mica, the Joint Mica Mission have 
invariably consulted the mica industry, including representatives 
of individual firms both in Bihar and Madras. 

(b) The Joint Mica Mission has not raised the standards 
considerably. It has however raised the standards slightly in 
certain cases although no change has been made in splittings 
and films. Wherever the standard has been raised the price has 
been raised in proportion. Taking pre-Mission standard and price 
as 100, the Mission standard where it has been raised is 105 
and the Mission price 110. The range of standards required by 
the Metals Reserve Company when buying through the Director 
of the Geological Survey of India was small compared with the 
very wide range of scheduled standards being dealt with by the 
Mission. 

(c) The Joint Mica Mission has not reduced its purchasing 
prices by 10 per cent to 30 per cent. 

(d) Does not arise. 

(e) No. The prices offered by the Mission were fixed after 
consultation with the representatives of the mica industry and 
with the approval of the Government of India. They are in the 
opinion of the Government of India fair prices and the Government 
of India see no justification for the appointment of an Advisory 
Committee. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


594 


594 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : What objection can the 
Government have to appoint an advisory committee consisting of 
representatives of mincowners and factories ? That will strengthen 
their hands and that of the Mica Mission for purchasing the 
requirements of Mica. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The answer as 
stated in part (e) is that the Mica Mission does fix the price 
after consultation with the representatives of the Mica industry. 

Babu Baijnath Bajoria : I do not think that is correct. 

26 

* Irregularities in Payment of Wages 
to Railway Staff 

109. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state when the Payment of Wages 
Act, IV of 1936, was made applicable to the Railways in India, 

(b) Is it a fact that several irregularities in the payment to 
staff have been noticed by the Labour Inspectors ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and 
the Supervisor of Railway Labour, who is the Inspector under 
the Act, generally tries to report these irregularities to the 
administrations concerned for relief, if any could be given ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that in several cases of late payments, 
etc., relief can be given lo the affected employees when once the 
provisions of the Payment of Wages Act have been violated ? 
Arc prosecutions launched in such cases to act as a deterrent ? 
If not, why not ? 

(e) Have any prosecutions been launched against the Railway 
Paymasters or the administration ? If so, does the Honourable 
Member propose to lay a statement of such cases on the table 
of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 28th March, 
1937. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) The irregularities detected are brought to the notice of 
the Railway Administration for rectification. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 16th February 1943, p. 285. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


595 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 595 

(d) Relief can be given under section 15(3) of the Act. But 
no prosecutions are launched as it has always been possible to 
remove defects so far discovered by administrative action. 

(e) No prosecutions have been launched. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Why are the payments made late ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In a huge 
administration such delays are bound to occur. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : What does the administration do 
in the case of late payments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They make the 
payments. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Only make the payments, or do 
they do anything further ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What does the 
Honourable Member expect the administration to do ? 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: To avoid these occurrences, what 
does the Government do ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no doubt 
that they must be trying to avoid these delays. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : But what do they do ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know. If 
the Honourable Member wants an answer, he may put down a 
specific question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Will the Honourable Member direct 
the administration to see that such things do not recur and that 
warnings be issued. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, certainly. 

27 

* High Rates for Contracts for Construction of 
Aerodromes at Gaya Nawadih 

@ 143. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that contracts for the 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I or 1943, 19th February 1943, pp. 
417-18. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


596 


596 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

construction of certain aerodromes were sanctioned by the Chief 
Engineer, Central Public Works Department, originally at very 
high rates against which the Provincial Public Works Department 
was compelled to lodge protests ? 

(b) Is it a fact that as a result of such protests a committee 
was appointed to examine these rates, and the committee reduced 
the rates to about one third of what were agreed upon by the 
Chief Engineer ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the contractors also agreed lo reduce the 
rates correspondingly proving thereby that the rates originally 
awarded were abnormally high ? 

(d) If the answer to (c) above be in the affirmative, what action 
do Government propose to take against the Chief Engineer who 
was responsible for sanctioning the original rates ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Rates for the 
construction of the aerodromes in question were accepted by Chief 
Engineer on proposals put forward by the Executive Engineer 
through the Superintending Engineer. The rales were high but 
reliable contractors were not obtainable for work of the dimensions 
required at lower rales at the lime the work was started. A report 
was received through the Divisional Commissioner complaining 
that these rates were unduly high. 

(b) and (c) Almost a month before the receipt of any protests 
from the local officers the Chief Engineer had instructed the 
Superintending Engineer to make an enquiry and subsequently 
deputed his Personal Assistant and Financial Adviser to make 
a further enquiry. By that time conditions had become easier 
and it was possible to enforce reductions in the rates previously 
accepted. As a result some rates were considerably reduced, 
but no rate was reduced to one-third of the previous rates. The 
reductions accepted by the contractors were nil in respect of 
certain works, 15 per cent in respect of main runway, 50 per cent 
in respect of ordinary buildings, and between 30 per cent and 
60 per cent in the case of special buildings. The contractor has 
however, refused to accept the reduced rates proposed in the case 
of domestic buildings which have therefore been taken away from 
him and given to another contractor at reduced rates. 

(d) There is no case for taking any action against the Chief Engineer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


597 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 597 

28 

* High Rates for Works of Landing Grounds in 
New Delhi Cantonment 

@ 144. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that the rates for works 
of Landing Grounds in the new Cantonment, New Delhi, were 
sanctioned and awarded at high levels originally, but later on 
they had to be reduced, and the contractors are now doing the 
works at these reduced rates ? 

(b) If the answer to (a) above be in the affirmative, why were 
the higher rates sanctioned in the beginning, and under whose 
authority ? 

(c) What action do Government propose to lake against the 
officers who are responsible for this state of affairs ? 

(d) What precautions have been, or are going to be, taken by 
the Government of India to prevent a recurrence of such instances 
to ensure rigid economy in the execution of all such works ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). Three 
items of works, viz. (1) Landing Ground, (2) Domestic Buildings 
and (3) Technical Buildings were carried out in connection with 
the construction of the New Cantonment, New Delhi, Landing 
Ground. As regards (1) and (2) the answer is in the negative. 

As regards (3) some reduction in rates was effected owing to 
change of specification. 

(c) and (d). Do not arise. 


29 

f Irregularities in Connection with Application of 
Chapter VI-A of the Indian Railways Act 

146. Mr. N. M. Joshi (on behalf of Mr. Lalchand Navalrai) : 
(a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state 
when the Indian Railways (Amendment) Act XIV of 1930 came 
into force ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 19th February 1943, p. 118. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent, 
f Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 19th February 1943, pp. 
420-21. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


598 


598 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is it a fact that in the annual reports of the Conciliation 
Officer (Railways) and the Supervisor of Railway Labour, who 
is an Inspector under the Act, it has been noted that the same 
irregularities have continued to be noticed on the Railways in 
connection with the application of Chapter VI-A of the Indian 
Railways Act ? 

(c) If the reply to part (b) above be in the affirmative, has 
the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and the Supervisor of Railway 
Labour at any time invoked the aid of penalty provisions of 
the Indian Railways (Amendment) Act, 1930, to stop these 
irregularities ? If so, will the Honourable Member please lay a 
statement on the table of the House giving instances ? 

(d) If the reply to first portion of part (c) above be in the 
negative, will the Honourable Member please give reaons for not 
enforcing the penalty clauses of the law ? 

(e) Is it proposed to do so now ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Section 1 of 
the Indian Railways (Amendment) Act of 1930 came into force 
on the 261h March, 1930. Section 2 came into force on different 
Railways on the dates given below : 

North Western and East Indian Railways — 1st April, 1931. 

Great Indian Peninsula and Eastern Bengal (now Bengal and 
Assam) Railways — 1st April, 1932. 

Bombay, Baroda and Central India and Madras and Southern 
Maharatta Railways — 1st November, 1935. 

Bengal and North Western (now Oudh and Tirhut) Railways — 
1st October, 1937. 

South Indian and Rohikund and Kumaon (now part of Oudh 
and Tirhut) Railways — 1st April, 1940. 

Bengal, Nagpur and Assam Bengal (now part of Bengal and 
Assam) Railways — 1st January, 1941. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. 

(d) and (c). It has not been necessary to invoke the aid of 
penalty provisions of the law as it has always been possible to 
rectify irregularities by administrative action. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


599 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 599 


30 

* Field of Activities of the Conciliation Officer 

(Railways) 

147. Mr. N. M. Joshi (on behalf of Mr. Lalchand Navalrai): 
(a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to 
state whether it is a fact that on the creation of his post the 
Conciliation Officer (Railways) was posted to Calcutta, to carry 
on his conciliation activities amongst the group of railways with 
headquarters at Calcutta ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the office of the Conciliation Officer 
(Railways) and the Supervisor of Railway Labour has now been 
transferred to Lahore ? Will the field of his conciliation activities 
be confined to the group of railways with headquarters at Calcutta, 
or to the North Western Railway at Lahore or to railways with 
headquarters at both these places, Lahore and Calcutta ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The headquarters of the Conciliation Officer (Railways) 
and the Supervisor of Railway Labour was transferred to 
Lahore purely as a temporary measure as a new incumbent 
to the post was being appointed and the Deputy Supervisor of 
Railway Labour whose headquarters are at Lahore was holding 
additional charge of the post of Conciliation Officer (Railways) 
and the Supervisor of Railway Labour. The headquarters have 
now been transferred back to Calcutta after the appointment of 
a new incumbent to the post. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether the Government 
will consider the question of extending the function of the 
Conciliation Officer to Railways other than those headquarters 
are in Calcutta ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, I will consider 
that. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I have 
allowed these two questions to be put by Mr. N. M. Joshi, though 
the Honourable Member, Mr. Lalchand Navalrai, who gave notice 
of these questions had not authorised Mr. Joshi. It is ordinarily 
the practice that no other Member can put a question unless 
the Honourable Member in whose name a question stands has 
authorised him to do so. But in the special circumstances of this 
case, I have allowed Mr. Joshi to put the questions. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. 1 of 1943, 19th February 1943, p. 421. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


600 


600 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

31 

* Help to Dependents of Enemy 
Air Raid Victims 

183. Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait: Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) the arrangements that have been made to succour the 
heirs and dependents of those who are killed or injured 
as a result of enemy bombing in India ; 

(b) whether such arrangements for their succour will come 
into play immediately after the raids or the dependents 
are expected to go through the formalities of putting up 
applications and undergoing enquiries, etc., before help 
is rendered to them; and 

(c) the details of the help that was rendered to the citizens, 
especially the poorer section of Calcutta and other places 
in India, which were bombed by the enemy for: 

(i) the disposal of their dead, 

(ii) the treatment of the injured, 

(iii) the loss of their means of livelihood, and 

(iv) their rehabilitation generally ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) Provision 
for relief of persons injured by enemy bombing and of the 
dependents of those killed by such action has been made in the 
War Injuries Scheme prepared by Government under the War 
Injuries Ordinance. 

Applications for relief have naturally to be made, but the 
procedure has been made as expeditious as possible. When the 
person concerned is incapable of making an application, provision 
has also been made to entertain applications on his behalf. 

Provision has also been made for advances by employers of 
amounts upto Rs. 50 in each case against awards that may be 
made in respect of the injury or death. 

A copy of the pamphlet containing the War Injuries Ordinance 
Scheme and Regulations has been placed in the Library of the House. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 24th February 1943, p. 556. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


601 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 601 

(c) (i) and (ii) These are matters of Provincial responsibility 
and the Government of India are not in possession of details 
as to how they worked. Full advice has been given by the 
Government of India as to the formation of organisations for 
corpse disposal and the treatment of the injured and schemes 
on the lines recommended have in fact been put into operation. 
The Government of India have been informed by the Provincial 
Governments that the schemes worked satisfactorily. No 
complaints or criticisms as to their efficient working have come 
to the notice of the Government of India. 

(iii) and (iv) The Government of India have no detailed 
information on these points. The scale of raiding has hitherto 
been light and as far as the information in the possession of 
the Government of India would indicate, no special problems in 
this connection have arisen in the case of any bombed area. It is 
understood that relief under the War Injuries Scheme has been 
granted in many cases and some cases are under investigation. 

Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait : With regard to part (b) 
has my Honourable friend satisfied himself that there was really 
no complaint of delays ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not aware 
of any. 


32 

* Summaries of the Proceedings of the Fourth 
Labour Conference and of Meetings of the 
Standing Labour Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I lay on the table a copy@ each of the following : 

(1) Summary of Proceedings of the Fourth Labour Conference 
(First Tripartite Conference) held on 7th August, 1942. 

(2) Summary of Proceedings of the First meeting of the 
Standing Labour Committee held on 30th November and 
1st December, 1942. 

(3) Summary of Proceedings of the Second meeting of the 
Standing Labour Committee held on 25th January, 1943. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 25th February 1943, p. 603. 
@ Not included in these Debates, but a copy of each has been placed in the Library 
of the House . — Ed. of D. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


602 


602 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


33 


* Desirability of Applying the Control of 
Rent Act to the Notified Area, 

Shahdara and Delhi 

211. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state : 

(a) if it is a fact that most of the workers employed in 
the industrial, commercial and Government offices at 
Delhi reside within the Notified Area, Shahdara and 
Delhi. 

(b) if it is a fact that the said workers are mostly low paid 
staff and are in greater number than the residents of 
the Notified Area, Civil Station, Delhi, and the newly 
expanded areas of Daryaganj and Karol Bagh, Delhi, 
where the Control of Rent Act applies; 

(c) the reasons for not applying the Control of Rent Act 
to the Notified Area, Shahdara, Delhi ; and 

(d) if Government propose to apply the Control of Rent 
Act to the residential buildings within the Notified 
Area, Shahdara and Delhi, if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) I am 

prepared to take these facts from the Honourable Member. 

(c) and (d) It is not administratively practicable to apply 
the New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939, to these 
areas, but the Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act has been 
extended to them. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: What are the reasons for not 
applying the New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Because one 
is more expeditious. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 2nd March 1943, p. 653. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


603 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 603 

34 

* House Rent Control Cases in New Delhi 

f228. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of cases decided by the Rent Controller, New 
Delhi, regarding the extension of tendency of houses in 
New Delhi in 1942; 

(b) whether there were cases in which the landlords applied 
that they required the houses for their own use ; 

(c) if the answer to (b) be in the affirmative, how many 
applications from the landlords were rejected and how 
many accepted ; and 

(d) if it is a fact that the rejection of such applications operated 
harshly against the landlords and is against the intention 
of the Rent Control Order; if so, whether the Honourable 
Member for Labour proposes to enquire into such cases 
and to revise the decisions of the Rent Controller, where 
necessary ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for is not readily available and its collection would involve 
an amount of time and labour that would not be justifiable in 
war time. 


35 

@ House Rent-Control Cases in New Delhi 

f229. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of cases for the fixation of rent for houses in 
New Delhi which were decided by the Rent Controller, 
New Delhi, in 1942 ; 

(b) in how many cases were the landlords asked to submit 
their objections; 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 2nd March 1943, pp. 660-61. 
@ Ibid,., p. 661. 

t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


604 


604 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) why the landlords were not summoned in other cases ; and 

(d) whether the Honourable Member proposes to instruct the 
Rent Controller to summon landlords in cases referred to 
in (c) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 534. 

(b) to (c) The information asked for is not readily available 
and its collection would take an amount of time and labour that 
would not be justifiable in war time. 

(d) The Controller summons the landlords in all cases where it 
is necessary to do so for the purpose of determining properly the 
matters on which he has to adjudicate, and no special instructions 
are necessary. 


36 

* House Rent-Control Cases in New Delhi 

f230. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether the cases for the extension of tenancy were actually 
heard during 1942 in New Delhi, by Mr. Jones, late Rent 
Controller, but decisions were given by his successor without 
hearing the parties concerned ; if so, what is the number 
of such cases ; and 

(b) whether he proposes to appoint an officer to re-examine 
such cases ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No ; the latter 
part of the question does not arise. 

(b) Does not arise. 


37 

@ Desirability of Extension of the Punjab Rent 
Restrictions Act to Entire Delhi Province 

f 231. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha: Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether the Punjab Rent Restrictions Act has been applied 
to some parts of the Delhi Province ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 2nd March 1943, p. 661. 
@ Ibid., p. 661. 

t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


605 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 605 

(b) if it is a fact that the areas covered by the Rent Control 
Order have been excluded from the operation of that Act; 
and 

(c) whether the Honourable Member proposes to withdraw 
the Rent Control Order and advise Government to extend 
the application of the said Act lo those areas also ; if not, 
why not? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) and (b) Yes. 

(c) No. The Rent Control Order provides a speedy method of 
determining the fair rent of a house not provided for by the Punjab 
Act and I do not see any reason for withdrawing the Order. 

* House Rent Control in Simla 

f 232. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : (a) Is 

the Honourable the Labour Member aware that in 1940 the rents 
of private properties in Simla were reduced considerably owing to 
the retention of the civil Departments of the Government of India 
in Delhi and that a large number of houses remained vacant or 
were leased on a nominal rent by the landlords concerned during 
the course of that year ? If so, do Government propose not to 
determine the rents for that year as basic rents under the Rent 
Control Order ? 

(b) Is the Honourable Member aware that the cost of repairs 
has gone up very high and that the Punjab Government have 
imposed a new tax of 7 14 per cent on the property under a new 
Act? 

(c) Are Government aware that the landlords in Simla 
are suffering financially from the restrictions imposed by the 
Government concerned in one way of the other ? 

(d) Docs the Honourable Member propose to amend the House 
Control Order for Simla, so as to determine the rents for 1939 as 
basic rents plus 25 per cent on account of the increased cost of 
repairs or alternatively lo withdraw the Rent Control Order and to 
apply the Punjab Rent Restrictions Act instead ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Rents 
at the beginning of 1940 were lower than in 1939 when 
landlords had raised rents to an unreasonably high 
figure. Houses were not, however, rented at nominal rents 
in 1940, and the Government of India considered that 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 2nd March 1943, p. 662. 
t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


606 


606 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the rents of 1940 were fair rents to take as basic rents under 
the Rent Control Order. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Landlords are not suffering financially from the restrictions 
imposed upon them by Government but they are prevented from 
making more than reasonable profit on their properties. 

(d) No ; the Rent Control Order is an emergency measure 
designed to expedite decision regarding rents of houses. If Punjab 
Urban Rent Restriction Act is enforced instead, the tenants will 
have to seek redress in the Civil Courts which will not only 
be expensive but will take a long time to arrive at a decision. 

38 

* Allotment of Central Government Employees’ 
Quarters to Staff of Local Schools, etc. 

@ 234. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state if he is aware of the fact that 
the Public Works Department quarters specially built for the 
Central Government employees are allotted to the staff of the 
local schools and courts in preference to the Central Government 
servants of certain Departments ? 

(b) Is he aware that the purely temporary staff of the so-called 
“entitled offices” is given preference over the permanent staff of 
other offices who are drawing higher salaries notwithstanding 
the loss of revenue to Government ? 

(c) Is it a fact that sister offices of the same Department 
are treated differently ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the Railway clearing Accounts Office was 
treated as non-entitled but that decision has since been changed ? 

(c) Does the Honourable Member propose to review the 
position and take steps to treat all the Central Government 
offices alike ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) These quarters are 
meant for employees of the Central Government and of the Local 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1943, 2nd March 1943, p. 663. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


607 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 607 

Administration of Delhi posted in New Delhi and Delhi and may 
be allotted to such employees working in Schools and Courts. 

(b) I am prepared to accept that the operation of the rules 
may have led to the result suggested by the Honourable Member. 

(c) A more liberal interpretation of the rules regarding offices 
entitled to this accommodation has recently been adopted and it 
is possible that as a result there may be some anomalies. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) I am prepared to examine the case of any particular 
office brought to my notice, but do not propose to undertake a 
general review. 


39 

* Private Houses leased by Government 
in Delhi 

252. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member kindly state the number of private houses leased by 
Government in the different areas in Delhi, e.g., New Delhi, 
Notified area, Karol Bagh, Darya Gunj, etc. separately ? 

(b) When were the first and the last houses leased in each 
area ? 

(c) Is it a fact that all houses were leased before the winter 
season began ? If not, how many were leased after the beginning 
of the winter season ? 

(d) On what basis is the rent paid by Government to the 
owners of these buildings, how were the houses classified for 
purposes of allotment and how were they allotted according to 
that classification ? 

(e) In how many cases were persons eligible for a lower type 
allotted a higher type, and why ? 

(f) How is the rent charged for these houses from the allottees ? 

(g) Is it a fact that it cannot be more than 10 per cent of 
their pay ? 

(h) When were the first and the last houses occupied in each 
area, separately, during 1942-43? 

(i) Is it a fact that several houses are still vacant? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 19-43, 8th March 1943, pp. 811-12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


608 


608 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(j) How much loss have Government incurred by the difference 
in payments to owners as a whole and the actual rents realized 
from the tenants ? 

(k) How much loss have Government incurred by the houses 
remaining vacant for months ? 

(l) Were Government not aware of the probable demands ? 

(m) Is it a fact that in certain cases rents paid to owners 
were more than the rents realized by them immediately prior to 
their leasing to Government ? If so, why, and who is responsible 
for this loss and what action do Government propose to take 
against the officers responsible for this ? 

(n) What do Government propose to do for the next year ? 

(o) Will they still require more houses on lease or will they 
release some out of those already leased ? 

(p) Are Government prepared to have an Enquiry Committee 
to look into the leasing of houses in the past to allay any 
suspicion that Government were put to unnecessary loss due to 
the negligence of officers and want of proper estimate of news ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) A 

statement containing the information asked for is laid on the 
table of the House. 

(c) No. Forty six houses were leased after the commencement 
of the winter season. 

(d) Government have paid the “fair rent” as determined under 
the provisions of the New Delhi Rent Control Order, 1939. 

Flats in houses suitable for allotment to officers were classified 
as those suitable for officers with wives and families, and those 
suitable for officers with wives only and were allotted accordingly 
in accordance with the principle that the houses carrying higher 
rental were allotted to higher paid officers. Houses suitable for 
clerks were not classified and were allotted in accordance with 
the abovementioned principle. 

(e) None. The houses were not divided into types but the 
principle “higher rented accommodation for higher paid officer” 
was always followed in allotting available houses. 

(f) Rent is calculated in accordance with the rules and is 
recovered from the allottees at ten per cent of the emoluments 
or the full rent whichever is less. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


609 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 609 

(g) Yes ; ten per cent of emoluments and not pay. 

(h) , (j) and (k) The information asked for is not readily 
available and its collection would involve an amount of time and 
labour that would not be justifiable in war-time. It is impossible 
that in a large housing estate all houses will be full all the 
time — some loss is bound to occur from occasional vacancies and 
from the operation of the ten per cent rule. 

(i) None of the leased houses in New Delhi and Darya Gunj 
are vacant and only four suites of accommodation suitable for 
officers and three suites of accommodation suitable for clerks 
are vacant in Karol Bagh. 

(l) Government were fully aware. 

(m) The rents paid were those fixed by the Rent Controller. 
So far as is known, in cases where houses had previously been 
leased, these did not exceed rents previously paid. The latter 
parts of the question do not arise. 

(n) and (o) Government are not in a position to give a definite 
answer. It is probable that Government will want more houses. 

(p) No. In view of my reply to other parts of this question, 
this does not seem to be necessary. 

STATEMENT 


(a) New Delhi area 
Notified area 

Karol Bagh 

Darya Gunj 
First house based on 

(b) New Delhi 
Notified area 
Karol Bagh 
Darya Gunj 


122 bungalows and flats. 

8 bungalows. 

^ fiats (including accommodation 
suitable for clerks). 

34 fiats (suitable for clerks only). 

Last house based on 


1-4-41 

2-2-43 

1-6-41 

31-12-42 

7-7-42 

15-1-43 

15-8-42 

25-10-42 


Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: May I know why some of the houses 
are lying vacant; are they not required by officers and clerks ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


610 


610 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There must be 
some temporary reason of which I am not at present aware. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Is there a demand for more houses 
for clerks or officers, or not ? Or have you got a full complement ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Is it not a fact that Government 
had to provide so many tents for the accommodation of officers 
and other people ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That is quite so. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : This shows that sufficient 
number of houses are not available. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

40 

* Improvements in the Combined “C” Type 
Quarters in New Delhi 

279. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) With reference to the answer 
to part (f) of starred question No. 437, asked on the 18th March, 
1940, will the Honourable the Labour Member please state 
what improvements in the combined “C” type orthodox quarters 
in New Delhi were asked for in the representations received 
by Government, either through Tenants’ Associations or from 
individual residents of such quarters ? 

(b) What would have been the cost of all the additions and 
alterations asked for per quarter ? 

(c) Have any additions or alterations been made in any clerks’ 
or officers’ quarters in New Delhi since the 18th March, 1940 ? 
If so, which are the different classes of quarters in which such 
additions, etc., have been made ? 

(d) What was the amount of expenditure incurred on each 
different class of quarter so added to or altered ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
containing the information is laid on the table of the House. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11th March 1943, p. 969. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 611 

L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 611 

(b) and (d) The information is not readily available and its 
collection would involve an amount of time and labour that would 
not be justifiable in war time. 

(c) Yes. Additions and alterations were made in “A”, “B”, “C”, 
“D” and “E” type quarters. 

Statement 

(i) The kitchen, the bath and store rooms at the existing sites 
be dismantled and new ones constructed in lieu thereof 
in the open space in the courtyard between the latrines 
and bath room, and a long verandah be provided in front 
of all the three rooms. 

(ii) A window may be provided in each of the rooms towards 
the inner verandah to make the rooms well ventilated. 

(iii) A window may be provided adjoining the outer entrance 
of the first room. 

(iv) A door may be constructed in the room on the other 
extreme opening on the outer verandah. 

(v) One more water tap may be provided. 

(vi) A servant room. 

(vii) An additional bath room with a window therein. 

(viii) Standard type ventilators in all the rooms and closing of 
the existing holes in the ceiling. 

(ix) Wooden mantles in all the rooms without fire places. 

(x) Wall almirahs in all the rooms. 

(xi) Increasing the inner verandah accommodation, etc. 

41 

* Improvements in the Combined “C” Type 
Quarters in New Delhi 

280. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the cost of making the following alterations 
in each combined “C” type orthodox quarter in New Delhi: 

(i) fitting in of a window in the front room ; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11th March 1943, pp. 969-70 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


612 


612 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) provision of regular ventilators, like those provided in 
other types of quarters, in all the three rooms ; 

(iii) providing a pucca floor in the courtyard; and 

(iv) providing another window in the kitchen ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Rs. 415 per quarter. 

42 

* Improvements in the Combined “C” Type 
Quarters in New Delhi 

281. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether it is a fact that all “D” type 
orthodox quarters in the D.I.Z. Area, New Delhi, were provided 
with pucca floors in the courtyard in 1940 or 1941 ? 

(b) what is the number of such quarters and other quarters 
in which this modification was made? 

(c) What is the total number of combined “C” type quarters 
which are located in the midst of these “D” type quarters ? 

(d) What would have been the cost of providing pucca floors 
in all of these combined “C” type quarters ? 

(c) What was the amount spent on all “D” type quarters in 
which this modification was made ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) 1079. 

(c) 60. 

(d) Rs. 13,500 at present day prices. 

(e) Rs. 29,415. 


43 

@ Inspection of Combined “C” Type Quarters in 

New Delhi 

282. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please refer to the answer to two 
supplementary questions to starred question No. 438 
answered on the 18th March, 1940, in which the then 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11th March 1943, p. 970. 
@76 id. p. 970. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


613 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 613 

Labour Member promised to inspect the combined “C” 
type quarters in New Delhi, and state whether he actually 
inspected these quarters ? If so, does he propose to lay on 
the table a copy of his report on the matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No The latter 
part of the question does not arise. 

44 

* Improvements in “D” Type Orthodox 
Quarters in New Delhi 

283. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether it is a fact that in 1940 
when the galleries inside the “D” type orthodox quarters in 
the D.I.Z. Area, New Delhi were covered, a suggestion was 
made that ventilators provided in the walls of the two rooms 
on either side of the gallery should be of glass case so that 
they might be closed ? 

(b) Is it a fact that only wire gauze ventilators with big 
holes were provided, instead of the old type glass-case ones 
on the ground that the Health Officer, New Delhi, objected 
to the provision of the latter type of ventilators as being 
unhealthy ? 

(c) Is it a fact that it was proposed to cover up the open 
space between the bath room and lavatory in these quarters 
in order to provide shelter for storing fuel, etc. ? 

(d) Is it a fact that this covering up was also objected to 
by the Health Department, New Delhi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) yes 

(b) No. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) No. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) . The answer 
to the other questions of Sardar Sant Singh will be laid on the table. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11 th March 1943, p.970. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


614 


614 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


45 

* Inspection of Combined “C” Type Quarters in 

New Delhi 

f284. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Education Secretary 
please state whether the Health Officer, New Delhi, was ever 
invited to inspect the residential accommodation in New Delhi, 
and to see that all accommodation for living purposes was 
provided with proper ventilation, etc. ? 

(b) If the answer to (a) be in the affirmative, did this officer 
ever inspect the combined “C” type quarters in the D.I.Z. Area, 
New Delhi? 

(c) If the answer to (b) be in the affirmative, did the said 
officer submit any report either to the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee or to the Government of India about the suitability or 
unsuitability of the rooms in those quarters for use as bed rooms, 
etc. ? If so, does he propose to lay a copy of that report on the 
table of the House ? If he did not submit any report, why not ? 

(d) If the Health Officer was never invited to inspect these 
quarters, what were the reasons for not doing so ? Is he prepared 
to issue instructions that these quarters are thoroughly inspected 
at an early date ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) and (c) Do not arise. 

(d) The design of these quarters was approved by the Municipal 
Committee before they were constructed and Government have 
not considered it necessary to have these quarters inspected 
by the Health Officer. I am however arranging to have these 
quarters inspected by the Health Officer. 

46 

@ Transfer to Lien to Allottees of Combined 
“C” Type Quarters in New Delhi 

f285. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that up to last year the allottees 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11th March 1943, pp. 970-71. 
@ Ibid., p. 971. 

t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


615 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 615 

of the combined “C” type quarters in New Delhi on Maud, Ibbetson 
and Reading Roads, were allowed, on application, to exchange 
their quarters with lien with the regular “C” type quarters in 
Havelock Square, Baird Road, Market Road, Irwin Road, etc., 
as and when such quarters were available ? 

(b) What was the longest period which it took to allot a regular 
“C” type quarter to an allottee of combined “C” type quarter in 
cases where such allottees asked for an exchange from the very 
time of allotment of such combined quarters to them ? 

(c) Will the present allottees of such combined quarters be 
allowed to exchange with lien this year ? If not, why not ? 

(d) What is the total number of quarters (regular “C” type) 
in the squares and roads mentioned in (a) above which will fall 
vacant this year due to the present allottees having to vacate 
them permanently for some reason or other, like retirement or 
allotment of a higher type of quarter ? 

(e) Does he propose to see that at least the tenants of these 
combined “C” quarters are allowed to exchange with lien if they 
so want ? If not, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The information asked for is not readily available and 
its collection would involve an amount of time and labour that 
would not be justifiable in war time. 

(c) and (e) Yes.: the revised rules are being altered to allow 
of this as soon as possible. 

(d) The information cannot be given unless all applications 
for next summer and winter seasons are received in. 

47 

* The War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) 

Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to impose on employers 
a liability to pay compensation to workmen sustaining war 
injuries and to provide for the insurance of employers against 
such liability. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 11th March 1943, p. 976. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


616 


616 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to impose on 
employers a liability to pay compensation to workmen sustaining 
war injuries and to provide for the insurance of employers against 
such liability.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


48 

* Dismissals of Instructors, etc., in the Technical 
Training Centre, Delhi Polytechnic 

311. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur: (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please refer to part (c) of the 
reply to unstarrcd question No. 75, on the 25th March 1942, 
and state the reason for frequent dismissals of instructors and 
Assistant Instructors in the Technical Training Centre, Delhi 
Polytechnic, especially when there is an acute shortage of skilled 
men ? 

(b) Is it a fact that some Muslims have been discharged 
without any reason being assigned therefor ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Fourteen 
Instructors have been discharged since the 1st April, 1942, 13 
for inefficiency and one for political activity. 

(b) According to my information, no. 

49 

@ Grievances of Employees in the Binding 
Department of the Government of 
India Press, New Delhi 

312. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state whether the entire employees 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. II of 1913, 16th March 1943, p. 1120. 
@ Ibid.,p. 1121. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


617 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 617 

of the Government of India Press, New Delhi, went on strike on 
the 1st and 2nd December, 1942 and that on the 2nd December, 
1942, the Labour Secretary went there and was presented with 
six demands and that one of the demands was for the annual 
increment to the Binding Department and that the start of the 
salary should be from Rs. 30 per mensem and that within the 
period of 20 years the salary should reach the maximum grade 
of Rs. 75 per mensem ? 

(b) Is it or is it not a fact that the Binding Department 
since 1927 has been submitting questions and memorials to 
the Works Committee for an annual increment, and has been 
putting questions in the Assembly, and the Press Union has also 
submitted a memorial ? 

(c) Is it or is it not a fact that people are receiving a certain 
pay since the last 15/20 years and most of them, after having 
paid from their salaries the usual cuts, i.e., for Fund, Society, 
Water, Quarters, etc., receive only 10/12 rupees per month, with 
which it is not possible for them to make ends meet easily ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the Union of the Binding Department had 
submitted a memorial to the Secretary, Labour Department, in 
November, 1942 in which it was laid down that until the annual 
increment is enforced, the employees of the Binding Department 
should not be retired before 25 years’ service and in this way 
they be compensated a little ? 

(e) Are Government prepared to retain the people in the 
Binding Department until they have put in 25 years’ service ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, with the 
exception of the supervising staff and a few other employees. 
The question of the introduction of a time-scale of pay in the 
bindery is receiving attention. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. 

(d) No. The Press Workers Union submitted a representation 
in November 1942. But it does not contain the prayer as stated. 

(e) No. No employee is ordinarily required to retire before he 
attains the age of 55 years. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


618 


618 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


50 

* Grievances of Employees in the Binding 
Department of the Government of India Press, 

New Delhi 

@ 313. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state if it is a 
fact that there are some persons in the Binding Department 
of the Government of India Press, New Delhi, who are getting 
Rs. 30 per mensem ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the office mistakenly cut down their 
service and uptil now that service has not been restored to 
them with the result that for years they are getting Rs. 30 per 
mensem though others who are of less service are getting more, 
for instance those who used to get Rs. 22 and Rs. 25 per mensem 
are at present getting Rs. 40 and Rs. 45 per mensem ? 

(c) Is it a fact that those whose services have been cancelled 
have submitted a memorial to the Controller requesting him for 
the inclusion of their past service in their present service ? 

(d) Are Government prepared to include the service of those 
whose service has been cancelled ? If so, is it possible to make 
them senior to those who superseded them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Condonation does not imply that the period previous to 
the break be counted as service for fixing the pay to be drawn 
after the break and no mistake has been made. 

(c) No. 

(d) Does not arise. 


51 

# Paucity of Muslim Engineers, etc. in the Central 
Public Works Department 

319. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour please state, community-wise, the 
number of Superintending Engineers, Executive Engineers and Sub- 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 161h March 1943, p. 1121. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 

# Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 16th March 1943, pp. 
1124-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


619 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 619 

Divisional Officers (gazetted and non-gazetted) employed in the 
Central Public Works Department inclusive of the Aviation and 
Access Road Works ? 

(b) Is it a fact that Muslims are under-represented in each of 
the cadres mentioned above ? If so, what action do Government 
propose to take to make up the under-representation of Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement is 
placed on the table, (b) Yes. The under-representation of Muslims 
is due to the fact that most of the appointments were made for 
Aviation works which were urgent and important and required 
a large number of experienced and qualified officers. Owing to 
the Japanese threat to India, these officers were required at 
the shortest notice, and appointments according to the strict 
communal roster would have led to delay which would have 
been highly prejudicial to the defence of the country. All the 
appointments in regard to which communal rules have not been 
observed, are temporary only, and irregularities will be put right 
as soon as the present emergency ceases. 

Statement 


Designation of 
Officers 

Eruo- 

peans 

Anglo- 

Indians 

Hin- 

dus 

Mus- 

lims 

Sikhs 

Indian 

Christians 

Parsees Total 

1 . Superintending 
Engineers 

5 


3 


2 


10 

2. Executive 
Engineers 

12 

4 

35 

5 

1 

5 

62 

3. Sub-Divisional 
Officers Gazetted 
(Assistant Execu- 
tive Engineers) 

1 

5 

25 

6 

2 

4 

43 

4. Sub-Divisional 
Officers Gazetted 
(Temporary 
Officers) 


4 

43 

4 

3 


1 55 

5. Sub-Divisional 
Officers 
(Non-gazetted) 


3 

124 

23 

22 

1 

173 


Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : Are we to 

understand that when urgent appointments are made, it is only 
the unfortunate, Muslim community that has to suffer ? 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is not the 

only unfortunate community; there are other communities which 
are equally affected. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


620 


620 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Do Government propose 
to recruit Muslim officers from provinces if they are found fit ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : When the communal proportion is 
restored, will those who have already been appointed be dismissed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They are all 
temporary appointments. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : So they will be dismissed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are temporary. 
There is no question of dismissal. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta continued standing in his scat even 
after putting the question. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): When the 
Honourable Member has asked a question, he ought to resume 
his seat. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : I want to ask another question, 
Sir. That means that those who came to your assistance — at the 
critical moment will be given a short shrift ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The appointments 
are temporary and there is no question of dismissal or discharge. 

Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : What is the 
duration of these temporary appointments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is quite impossible 
to say. 

Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : Is it not laid 
down in the rules or in the resolution passed by the Government 
that any temporary appointment for three months and over should 
be made in accordance with the Resolution of the Government 
keeping in view the percentages of various communities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : All that must be 
subject to emergency. 


52 

* New Assistant Estate Officers and Assistants to 
the Estate Officer 

320. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour please state the number of the new 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 16th Mareh 1943, p. 1125. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


621 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 621 

posts of Assistant Estate Officers and Assistants to the Estate 
Officer created during the last two years ? 

(b) Has any of the above posts been given to a Muslim ? If 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Number of 
Assistant Estate Officers — three ; number of Assistants to the 
Estate Officer — one. 

(b) No. 

Three of the posts were filled by selection and promotion from 
among the Superintendents in the Chief Engineer’s Office. This 
is the normal method of recruitment to these posts. No suitable 
Muslim Superintendent was available. The fourth post was filled 
by an Officer temporarily on deputation from the Burma P.W.D. 

Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : May I know 
if Mr. Karim Baksh was the seniormost Superintendent at the 
time when these posts were filled up ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I want notice. 

Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : May I know 
if Mr. Brown, Mr. Grant, Mr. Ellis, and Mr. Bronkhurst held 
the posts of Superintendent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : May I know whether all enquiries 
were made, whether other people were efficient or not, and when 
the Honourable Member wants notice for everything, he must 
have come here with proper replies if no Muslim was found fit ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no doubt 
that proper enquiries must have been made. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : But the Honourable Member 
has no information on that at least. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : That is 
not a question. Next question. 

53 

* Contracts in Aviation Works 

321. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha: (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour please state whether it is a fact that 
in the case of Aviation works it has been the practice of Government 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 16th March 1943, p. 1125. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


622 


622 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to award contracts for emergency works by private negotiations 
without calling for tenders ? 

(b) What is the total value of contracts awarded by private 
negotiations during the calendar year 1942 ? 

(c) What is the total value of such contracts awarded by 
private negotiations to Muslim contractors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for by the Honourable Member is being collected and 
will be laid on the table in due course. 


54 

* Grievances of the Staff of the Binding 
Department of the Government of India Press, 

New Delhi 

338. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state if it 
is a fact that as the annual increment is not given to the 
people of the Binding Department of the Government of India 
Press, New Delhi, they wish to go to other Departments 
when vacancies fall vacant there, but their applications are 
not forwarded ? 

(b) Is it or is it not a fact that some people were given a 
trial in which they were successful, but they have not been 
provided with a situation until now ? 

(c) Is it or is it not a fact that many a time the Manager 
has been asked that until the annual increment is enforced 
in the Binding Department, those who are already working 
in that Department should be given a chance and situations 
should be provided for successful candidates in preference 
to outsiders, but the Manager did not heed these requests ? 

(d) Are Government prepared to take the successful 
candidates in the ‘Distributory’ section so that those who 
have passed the test may not suffer? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 20th March 1943, p. 1269. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


623 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 623 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. Transfer 
of industrial employees from one establishment to another is 
governed by the National Service (Technical Personnel) Ordinance, 
1940. 

The application of one warehouseman who applied last 
January for service in the Air Force was in fact forwarded. 

(b) One warehouseman qualified as a distributor in the test 
held in 1941. As there were other candidates who had qualified 
earlier and as the post of distributor does not he in the ordinary 
range of promotion of warehousemen, the qualified warehouseman 
was not appointed to the vacancies that occurred. 

(c) The answer to the first part is in the negative. The second 
part does not arise. 

(d) The successful candidates will be considered for distributors’ 
posts in accordance with the rules. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : As regards the answer 
to part (d) of the question may I know the position exactly 
as regards those who had been given a trial and were found 
successful ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, there 
were other candidates who had qualified earlier. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi: But as far as those 
persons who were found successful are concerned, will their 
claims be considered ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly. 

55 

* Selection Grade Posts in the Binding 
Department of the Government of India Press, 

New Delhi 

339. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) When selection 
posts have been announced in nearly all the Departments of the 
Government of India Press, New Delhi, will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state why no such selection grade 
posts are given to the Binding Department ? 

(b) Is it or is it not a fact that previously the strength of the Binding 
Department was 50/60 persons and for the supervision of their work 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 20th March 1943, pp. 1269-70 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


624 


624 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

there was one foreman, one Jamadar and one Binding Examiner, 
but now that the strength has increased to 135 persons, there 
are still only three persons in the supervisory rank ? 

(c) Are Government prepared to divide the Binding Department 
into two sections and provide one more Foreman Jamadar and 
Examiner . 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There is a 
selection post of Bindery and Warehouse Foreman in the Bindery 
of the Press. 

(b) The previous strength was over sixty and there was only 
one supervisory post of a Bindery Warehouse Foreman. The 
present strength in the Bindery is 107 including 20 temporary 
war posts and there are now three persons in the supervisor rank. 

(c) No. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : I did not quite catch 
the reply of the Honourable Member. May I know whether he 
admits the increase of numbers that I have given ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. I said that 
the present strength in the Bindery is 107. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : With that increase, will 
the Honourable Member consider the advisability of increasing 
the supervisory staff in view of the increase in the number of 
the lower paid ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will consider. 

56 

* Grievances of the Piece Workers in the 
Machine Department of the government of India 
Press, New Delhi 

340. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state whether or 
not it is a fact that there are several persons in the Machine 
Department of the Government of India Press, New Delhi, who 
are employed on piece work and several on salary ? 

(b) Is it a fact that all piece workers are not given an equal amount 
of work with the result that some got mere wages than others ? 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 20th March 1943, p. 1270. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


625 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 625 

(c) Is it not a fact that officials show partiality and favour 
to some in the allotment of work in such a way that there is 
a very unequal distribution of wages and the wages of a large 
number of piece workers amount to very little and do not suffice 
for their requirements and the maintenance of their families ? 

(d) Do Government propose to consider the advisability of 
giving equal work to all, so that at the end of the month all 
should have a nearly equal amount of pay and thus redress 
their grievances ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) The answer to the first pail is in the negative. The second 
part does not arise. 

(c) No. 

(d) This is actually done but equal work does not ensure equal 
earning. The attention of the Honourable Member is invited to 
the reply to part (c) of starred question No. 85 given in this 
House on 17th February 1941. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : May I know whether the 
Honourable Member has made an enquiry into the allegation 
that the actual distribution of the work at present does not give 
equal wages to the persons employed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The answer is 
based on enquiry. 


57 

* Annual Election for the Works Committee of 
the Government of India Press, New Delhi 

341. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state if it is a fact that 
the annual election for the Works Committee of the Government 
of India Press, New Delhi, which is held on 81h April, is not 
properly conducted ? 

(b) Is it or is it not a fact that the voters are not called one 
by one but all the voters gather together and stand in the room 
where the voles are received ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1993, 20th March 1943, pp 1270-71. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


626 


626 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Are Government prepared to make proper arrangements for 
keeping the voters away from the clerk concerned, and to allow only 
those to come forward who are called to give their votes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) No. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi: Did the Honourable Member 
make an enquiry as to the complaints that were made to the polling 
officer at the time the votes were taken and satisfy himself that 
there were complaints of the kind that I have made in the question ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. I will make 
enquiries if the necessity arises. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi: Now that I have put the 
question, will the Honourable Member be pleased to make an enquiry 
whether it is a fact that the complaints that are made are correct ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

58 

* Fall in Coal Output of Bengal and 
Bihar Coal Fields 

349. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
please state if it is a fact that the output of coal in the Bengal and 
Bihar coal fields in the year 1942 was considerably less than that of 
the previous years ? If so, what were the percentages separately of 
the decrease as compared to the output for the years 1939, 1940 and 
1941 ? What are the factors responsible for this reduction in output ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. The output of coal 
in the Bengal and Bihar coalfields for 1942 was very considerably 
above that for 1939. The peak year to date has been 1940. There 
was a very slight drop in 1941 on the 1940 figures and a further 
slight drop in 1942. The total drop on the 1940 figures is less than 
one per cent. 

As the drop in production is so slight no detailed enquiry has 
been held into its cause. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: Has any representation been made to the 
Government of India by the trade interests on this particular point, 
mentioning any grievance due to which this drop might have occurred ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 

as yet. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 20th March 1943, p. 1276. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


627 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 627 


59 

* Criterion for Enlistment of Contractors in 
Central Public Works Department 

417. Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state the criterion for the enlistment of 
contractors in the Central Public Works Department ? Is this 
enlistment subject to any fee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Enlistment of 
contractors in the Central Public Works Department is made 
with due regard to their financial status and their experience as 
evidenced by the extent and quality of the works previously executed 
by them. In the case of firms, registration under Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932, is also insisted upon as an essential condition. The 
answer to the latter part of the question is in the negative. 

60 

@ Muslims in the Offices and the Subordinate 
Engineering Services of the Central Public Works 

Department 

418. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state : 

(a) the total strength of the class I and Class II Officers and 
the Subordinate Engineering Services of the Central Public Works 
Department. 

(b) the strength of Muslims in each of the categories given in 
part (a); and (c) what steps have been taken so far to make up 
the deficiency, if any ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Class 1 — 122. 

Class 11—63. 

Subordinate Engineering Service — 1179. 

(b) Class 1 — 14. 

Class II— 4. 

Subordinate Engineering Service — 202. 

(c) Attention of the Honourable Member is invited to the 
answer given to part (b) of the starred question No. 319 on the 
16th March 1943. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1582. 
@ Ibid. p. 1582. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


628 


628 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

61 

* Proposed Retrenchment Scheme for Engineering 
Establishment of the Central Public 
Works Department 

419. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state if a retrenchment scheme for 
the Engineering Establishment of the Central Public Works 
Department is under contemplation ? If so, will Muslim employees 
be affected by it even if their strength is short of 25 per cent 
of the total strength ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not at present. 
The second part of the question docs not arise. 

62 

@ Muslim Lino Operators, Mono Operators, etc., 
in the Government of India Press, Calcutta 

420. Hajee Chowdhury Muhammad Ismail Khan : (a) Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member please state the number of 
Lino Operators, Mono operators, Mono Casters and forme carriers 
in the Government of India, Press, Calcutta, and how many of 
them are Muslims ? 

(b) What is the total number of appointments made in these 
grades during the last three years, and how-many Muslims were 
appointed in each of these grades ? 

(c) What steps have been taken to appoint Muslims in these 
posts ? 

(d) Does the Honourable Member propose to place on the 
table of the House a detailed statement showing the figures, 
communitywise, in regard to posts of clerks and copy-holders in 
permanent and temporary employ in the Government of India 
Press, Calcutta ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a), (b) and (d). A 
statement is laid on the table. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1582. 
@ Ibid., p. 1582. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


629 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 629 


(c) Orders regarding communal representation in the services 
are being followed in the Government of India Presses. 


Statement 




Post (Permanent) 


Number No. 

of Muslims 

Lino Operators 


6 

2 


Mono Operators 


6 

1 


Mono Casters 


10 



Forme Carriers : 





Permanent 


12 

Nil 


Temporary 


10 

Nil 


Statement showing the total number of appointments made in the posts of Lino 
Operators, Mono Operators, Mono Casters and Forme Carriers in the Government 
of India Press, Calcutta, in 1940, 1941 and 1942. 

Post (Permanent) 


Appointment in 



1940 

1941 


1942 

Lino Operators 

Nil 

Nil 


Nil 

Mono Operators 

Nil 

Nil 


Nil 

Mono Casters 

Nil 

1 (Hindu) 


Nil 

Forme Carriers (Permanent 
& Temporary) 

Nil 

Nil 


Nil 


Statement Showing Communal composition of clerks and copy-holders (Permanent 
and temporary) in the Government of India Press, Calcutta. 



Total 

Hindus 


Muslim 

Anglo 

Indian 

Chris- 

tian 


Number 

Other 

than 

Scheduled 

Caste 

Sche- 

duled 

Caste 


Indian 

Clerk (excluding 
computers, 

Time Keepers etc.) : 







Permanent 

43 

31 

1 

10 

1 

Nil 

Temporary 
Copy-holders : 

7 

5 

Nil 

1 

Nil 

1 

Permanent 

34 

23 

Nil 

5 

2 

Nil 

Temporary 

4 

3 

Nil 

1 

Nil 

Nil 

(Regular) Temporary 
(for limited period) 

5 

2 

Nil 

2 

Nil 

1 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


630 


630 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

63 

* Muslim Executive Engineers in the Central 
Public Works Department 

421. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state how many 
Executive Engineers have been taken in from the various 
Provinces in the Central Public Works Department during 
the last two years and how many of them are Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Twenty-two, 
of whom two were Muslims. Three, including one Muslim, 
have been since reverted. 


64 

@ Temporary Buildings in New Delhi 

422. Sir F. E. James : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state: 

(a) whether his attention has been drawn to the notice 
erected near certain temporary buildings in course of 
construction in Connaught Place, intimating that these 
buildings are to be demolished immediately after the war; 
and 

(b) if the same condition applies to the temporary 
buildings erected on Queens way ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) All the buildings have been constructed as temporary 
buildings. The intention is that they shall be pulled down 
as soon as may be after the conclusion of the war, though 
no final decision has yet been taken. 

Sir F. E. James : Will the Honourable Member explain 
the difference between immediately after the war and ‘as 
soon as may be’, because some of the buildings in Connaught 
Place are placarded as ‘to be demolished immediately after 
the war’ ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1583. 
@ Ibid., p. 1583. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


631 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 631 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think 
the placard makes any di ff erence. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Why should they be demolished 
and not used for some other purpose ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said no 
final decision has yet been taken. 

65 

* Paucity of Muslim Officer in the Printing and 
Stationery Establishment under 
Labour Department 

423. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state whether 
the Controller of Printing and Stationery, the Deputy 
Controller, Stationery, the Assistant Controller, Printing, the 
Assistant Controller, Stationery, and the Assistant Secretary 
and the Superintendent of the Printing Branch in the 
Labour Department are all non-Muslims? If so, what steps 
do Government propose to take to give due. representation to 
Muslims in these posts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar. The reply to the 
first part of the question is in the affirmative except that the 
present Superintendent of the Stationery and Printing Branch 
in the Labour Department is a Muslim. All posts mentioned 
the question are ordinarily filled by promotion on merit and 
the communal representation rules do not apply to cases of 
promotion to selection posts. In the case of appointments to 
be made subject to communal considerations the rules are and 
will be followed. Government do not consider that any other 
steps are necessary. 

Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : May I ask the 

Honourable Member if it is a fact that when two incumbents 
of the same qualifications were in the field, a Muslim was 
appointed on Rs. 50 and a non-Muslim of the same qualification 
was appointed on Rs. 200. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1583. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


632 


632 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information. 

Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : Will you kindly 
make inquiries. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will make 
inquiries. 


66 

* Paucity of Muslim Officers in Printing and 
Stationery Establishment under 
Labour Department 

424. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : (a) Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to slate the number 
of Muslim gazetted officers in the office of the Controller of 
Printing and Stationery, the Central Stationery Office, Calcutta, 
the Central Publication Branch, and the various Government 
of India Presses ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the post of Assistant Controller in the 
office of the Controller, Printing and Stationery, has ever since 
its creation been held either by Bengali Hindus or Christians 
and a Muslim has never been considered for this appointment ? 
If so, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Two. One in 
the Forms Press, Calcutta and the other in the Government of 
India Press, New Delhi. 

(b) The answer to the first part is in the negative. As regards 
the second part, I may say that this post is filled by promotion 
and not by direct recruitment. There has never been any Muslim 
senior enough lo be considered. 

Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : In this 
connection may I ask the Honourable Member if it is a 
fact that the Muslim appointed on Rs. 50 having found no 
prospects of being promoted got himself transferred to Bengal 
where he is getting Rs. 225 and the man who was appointed 
on Rs. 200 is now getting Rs. 350 and the claim of the 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1584. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


633 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 633 

Muslim who is already senior and also drawing Rs. 250 has 
been overlooked ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information but if my Honourable friend so desires, I can make 
inquiries. 

Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : Will you kindly 
make inquiries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

67 

* Paucity of Muslim Officers in Printing and 
Stationery Establishments under 
Labour Department 

425. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) the present strength of the Assistant Managers of the 
various Government of India Presses and how many of 
them are Muslim ? 

(b) the number of Muslim Assistants and clerks, separately, 
in the Printing Branch of the Labour Department, and in 
the Administration Branch of the office of the Controller 
of Printing and Stationery ; and 

(c) the number of Muslim Superintendents in the office of 
the Controller of Printing and Stationery and in the 
Publication Branch ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Three. One 
of them is a Muslim. 

(b) In the Stationery and Printing Branch of the Labour 
Department there is one Muslim Assistant and in the 
Administrative and Finance Branch of the Controller’s Office 
one Assistant and one clerk. 

(c) None. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1585. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


634 


634 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


68 


* Discrimination Between Muslim and 
Non-Muslim Apprentices in the Printing 
and Stationery Department 

426. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : (a) Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state whether 
it is a fact that suitable men are trained as apprentices in 
the Printing and Stationery Department of the Government 
of India ? 

(b) Are these persons eligible for appointment to higher 
posts in the various presses ? 

(c) Is it a fact that one such apprentice, Mr. B. C. Sen 
Gupta, has been appointed in the Government of India 
Press, New Delhi, on Rs. 200 per mensem and another such 
apprentice — a Muslim — was not given any suitable job and 
had ultimately to get himself transferred to the Government 
Press, Calcutta, as Assistant Manager ? 

(d) If the reply to part (c) is in the affirmative, what are 
the reasons for such discrimination ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes, they are eligible, but have no specific claim. 

(c) Mr. Sen Gupta was initially appointed by mistake on 
the old scale of Rs. 200-10-250. On discovery of the mistake 
he was brought on to the proper new scale starting at Rs. 
100 . 

The Muslim was appointed in the proper new scale 
starting at Rs. 100. 

Since then both have been promoted. 

(d) Does not arise. 

Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : May I know 
if both of them have been promoted to the same scale of 
salary ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I should think so. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1585. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


635 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 635 

69 

* Repair of Machines of the Government of India 
Press, New Delhi 

427. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : (a) Will 

the Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state the 
amount of expenditure incurred on the local repair of machines 
of the Government of India Press, New Delhi ? 

(b) Is it a fact that there is a mechanical section in the 
said Press ? If so why are the repairs not carried out there ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Head Mechanic personally gets 
the parts repaired in the city, and the letter to the firm 
undertaking repairs never gives instructions regarding the 
nature of the repairs but simply states that these will be 
explained by the Head Mechanic ? If so, why are the full 
details of the repairs not given in the letter to the firm 
undertaking the repairs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The total 
amount spent on local repairs to plant during 1942-43 is 
Rs. 1,177-2-0. 

(b) The answer to the first part is in the affirmative. As 
regards the second part, only such work is entrusted to an 
outside agency as cannot be done in the Press. 

(c) No. 


70 

@ Extra Staff in the Government of 
India Press, Aligarh 

f428. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : (a) 
Will the Honourable Member for Labour please State how 
much extra work has been received from the Calcutta 
Forms Press by the Aligarh Press in connection with 
the dispersal of stocks of forms, and for that purpose 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, pp. 
1585-86. 

@ Ibid., pp. 1585-86. 

t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


636 


636 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

how much extra staff has been appointed by the Manager, 
Government of India Press, Aligarh ? 

(b) Is the staff appointed commensurate with the work 
received ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
showing the work received up to the 16th March 1943 and the 
staff appointed is laid on the table 


(b) The answer is in the affirmative. 

Statement 


Sr. 

No. 

Form No. 

No. of copies 
required 

Sr. 

No. 

Form No. 

No. of copies 
required 

1 

I.A.F.A. 

176 

13,000 books 

11 

I.A.F.A.-2 

(Large) 

37,000 books 

2 

I.A.F.O. 

1287 

3,00,000 

12 

I.A.F.F.-1068 

43,000 books 

3 

I.A.F.O. 

1435 

1,400 books 

13 

I.A.F.O. 1367-A 

1,50,000 

4 

I.A.F.M. 

1213 

1,000 books 

14 

A.F.O.-1810A 

7,500 books 

5 

I.A.F.Z. 

2187A 

30,000 

15 

A.F.W 3010 

9,000 books 

6 

I.A.F.Z. 

2197 

35,000 books 

16 

I.A.F.Z. 2135 

6,000 books 

7 

I.A.F.Z. 

2011* 

50,000 books 

17 

S. 90-A 

1,00,000 

8 

I.A.F.Z. 

2011** 

40,000 books 

18 

S. 90-B 

50,000 

9 

I.A.F.Z. 

2157 

2,500 books 

19 

S. 97-A 

4,00,000 

10 

I.A.F.A. 

175 

7,000 books 





* Small 
** Large 

Statement showing appointments made in connection with the primary of forms, 
etc., received from the Forms Press, Calcutta. 

3 Compositors on Rs. 25. 

1 Reader in the grade of Rs. 90-4-110. 

1 Copy holder in the grade of Rs. 28-2-38. 

3 Stercotypers on Rs. 20. 

1 Typesupplier on Rs. 20. 

3 Paper Issuers on Rs. 20. 

3 Computors in the grade of Rs. 35-2-75. 

2 Clerks in the grade of Rs. 35-2-75. 

1 General Foreman in the grade of Rs. 125-5-150. 

1 Assistant Foreman Primer in the grade of Rs. 55-3-70. 

1 Assistant Foreman Compositor in the grade of Rs. 50-3-65. 

1 Head Computor in the grade of Rs. 70-3-100. 

1 (Clerk) Assistant Stationery and Store Keeper in the grade of Rs. 80-4-100. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


637 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 637 

71 


* Complaints Against Manager, Government of 
India Press, Aligarh 

429. Maulvi Syed Murtuza Sahib Bahadur : (a) Will 

the Honourable Member for Labour please state how many 
envelope-makers have been appointed in the Government of 
India Press, Aligarh, within one year, and in what proportion 
of different communities ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the Manager, Government of India 
Press, Aligarh has appointed them without any trial, and most 
of them are non-Muslims ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Manager, Government of India 
Press, Aligarh appoints technical staff without any practical 
test, and always fills in the unreserved posts and sometimes 
also reserved posts by appointing non-Muslims ? If so why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 43 envelope- 
makers were appointed in 1942 of whom 29 arc Hindus 11 
Muslims and 3 belong to other minority communities. 

(b) No. 

(c) No. 


72 


@ Temporary Rooms, etc., in the South and 
North Blocks of the Secretariat in New Delhi 

431. Bhai Parma Nand : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether it is a fact that some 
corridors or verandahs in the South and North Blocks of the 
Secretariat in New Delhi were converted into rooms and are 
being used as such by the staff of the different Government 
of India offices ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 16th March 1943, p. 1586. 
@ Ibid., p. 1587. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


638 


638 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is it a fact that some of these converted rooms face the 
sun nearly the whole day ? 

(c) Is it a fact that such rooms as mentioned in part (b) have 
only ordinary glass panes to keep the sun out from them ? 

(d) Is it a fact that some of these rooms are very narrow ? 

(e) What is the width of the narrowest of such converted 
rooms which face the sun nearly the whole day ? What is the 
number of such rooms ? 

(f) What was the temperature in these rooms in the day 
time, say, in the second fortnight of February, and in the first 
fortnight of March ? What was the temperature in these converted 
rooms (facing the sun) during the months of April, May, June, 
July and October 1942? 

(g) Is it a fact that these rooms are just like burning ovens 
where the staff are roasted for the whole day ? 

(h) Have these rooms ever been inspected by any Health 
Officer to see that they were fit for occupation during the 
summer ? If so, has his report been that they were fit for 
occupation ? 

(i) if the answer to the latter part of (h) be in the affirmative, 
are Government prepared to consider the allotment of these 
rooms to gazetted officers of the various offices concerned and 
put the staff at present working in them in the rooms originally 
built for them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) Some of these converted rooms, which face South, are 
exposed to sun in the afternoons. 

(c) No. Such rooms are provided with curtains in addition 
to glass panes. 

(d) No. 

(e) The narrowest width of these converted rooms is 8 ft. 3 
inches. The number of such rooms is 3. 

(f) A statement containing the information asked for is laid 
on the table of the House. 


(g) No. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


639 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 639 

(h) Yes ; these rooms were inspected by the officers of the 
Health Department but no objection was raised. 

(i) Some of these converted rooms were actually occupied by 
the Gazetted Officers during the last summer season. 

Statement 


Second fortnight of February 

First fortnight of March 

April 1942 

May 1942 

June 1942 

July 1942 

October 1942 


60°F 

75°F 

98°F 

104°F 

106°F 

96°F 

90°F 


73 


* Insufficient Lighting of Clerks’ Lavatories, etc. 
in the North Block Secretariat, New Delhi 

@ 432. Bhai Parma Nand : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if most of the clerks’ Lavatories in 
the North Block Secretariat, New Delhi, specially on the first 
floor are not fitted with electric bulbs ? 

(b) Is it a fact that all the officers’ lavatories in that building 
are equipped with electric bulbs ? 

(c) Is it a fact that some clerical staff work till late in the 
evening ? 

(d) Do Government expect these men to use the lavatories 
in the dark or do they expect them not to feel the necessity of 
using lavatories after dark ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, pp. 
1587-88. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


640 


640 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(e) What are the reasons for not providing electric bulbs in 
the lavatories for clerks only ? 

(f) Is it a fact that certain stairs are not sufficiently lighted, 
or in parts are left without lights after dark ? 

(g) Is it a fact that the whole of the area surrounding the 
secretariat buildings is fully and brightly lit up each evening ? 

(h) If the answer to part (g) be in the affirmative, why 
cannot the stairs especially the main ones, inside the buildings 
be sufficiently lit up ? 

(i) If it is not practicable to light up the stairs, are Government 
prepared to issue definite instructions to all offices not to allow 
any of their staff to stay after dark, so that they may not have 
to grope their way down these stairs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A certain number 
of bulbs had been fused and could not be replaced on account 
of paucity of bulbs. 

(b) Yes ; not only officers lavatories but all lavatories are 
equipped with electric bulbs. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) No. 

(e) The reason why some of the lavatories were partially fitted 
with bulbs for some time was that bulbs were not available. A 
consignment of bulbs has recently been received and action has 
already been taken to replace those which were fused. 

(f) The lighting in stair-case was reduced in keeping with the 
general reduction in lighting which had to be effected owing to 
the shortage of power. They are partially lit. 

(g) I take it that the Honourable Member is referring to road 
lighting. This is adequately lighted as it must be owing to the 
amount of traffic. 

(h) The lighting standard will be increased when sufficient 
power becomes available. 

(i) This does not arise as sufficient light is generally provided 
in the stairs. In cases where there is doubt I will have the lighting 
improved in so far as the power position permits. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


641 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 641 

74 


* Hardships under the Delhi Rent Control Order 

436. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if it is a fact that a representation 
was submitted by the New Delhi House Owners’ and Lessees’ 
Association in December last against the provisions of the 
Rent Control Order to the Labour Department ? If so, has the 
representation been examined by the Department ? If so, what 
conclusions have been reached ? 

(b) Is the Honourable Member aware that the Rent Control 
Order is causing great hardship ? If so, are Government prepared 
to replace it by the Punjab Rent Restriction Act, 1941, which is 
in force in Old Delhi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. The 
representation is still under consideration. 

(b) No. The latter part of the question does not arise but I 
would refer the Honourable Member to the reply to part (c) of 
starred question No. 231. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I ask the Honourable Member if 
he has seen the recent judgment of the Honourable the Chief 
Commissioner of Delhi in this connection ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not. 


75 


©Licences for Exploration and Scientific 
Prospecting of Potential Oil Sources 

441. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member for Labour 
be pleased to state whether it is a fact that licences for carrying on 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1590. 
@ Ibid., p. 1594. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


642 


642 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

exploration work and scientific prospecting in respect of certain 
potential sources of oil in India, have been granted to British 
and American Companies ? If so, to which parties have such 
licences been granted, and what are the terms thereof? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Except in 
Centrally Administered Areas, the licences referred to are 
granted by Provincial Governments. The Central Government 
has no information regarding licences granted by Provincial 
Governments. No such licences have been granted in Centrally 
Administered Areas. 

The second part of the question docs not arise. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : In view of the fact that the Department 
of Geological Survey has recently started Utilisation Branch, 
do Government think it necessary to keep themselves informed 
about licences granted by the Provincial Authorities in the case 
of important minerals ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Do I take it that according to the 
information of the Government of India, particularly of the 
Geological Department, no such licences have been granted by 
any Provincial Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We have at present 
no information. If My Honourable friend wants I can collect it 
for him. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I understand from a scientific journal 
that licences have actually been granted to British and American 
companies for exploration work in connection with minerals. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend wants the information I will collect it for him. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Thank you. 

76 

* Desirability of Partitioning Compounds in front 
of Orthodox Quarters in New Delhi in 
Furtherance of ‘Grow More Food’ Campaigns 

444. Hajee Chowdhury Muhammad Ismail Khan : With reference 
to the propaganda made by Government in regard to growing more 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1595. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


643 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 643 

food, does the Honourable the Labour Member propose to 
consider the desirability of partitioning the joint compound 
in front of the A, B and C type of orthodox quarters in New 
Delhi by hedges to enable the tenants thereof to follow that 
scheme ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There has 
been no general demand from the tenants concerned and if 
concrete suggestions are put forward by the tenants I am 
prepared to consider. 


77 


* Desirability of Allowing Government Servants 

Living in the New Area to Apply for Quarters in 
the Old Area of New Delhi 

89. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Is the 

Honourable Member for Labour aware that: 

(i) according to Classification Rules the quarters in 
New Delhi for the ministerial establishment of the 
Government of India, are divided into two areas (a) 
Old Area (near the Secretariat) and (b) New Area 
(Minto Road side); 

(ii) when a member of the staff goes out of a certain class 
of quarter and becomes eligible for a higher class, 
he is required to live in the New Area at least for a 
year before he is provided with a quarter in the Old 
Area ; 

(iii) the Government of India have recently passed new 
rules for allotment under which persons holding Lens 
on quarters have been debarred from applying for any 
other quarters in the same class; 

(iv) under the new rules referred to above, new 
applicants have straight off become eligible for 
quarters in the old area whereas persons, who 
have been living in the New Area for a sufficiently 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943, p. 1595. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


644 


644 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

long time and whose names have been on the waiting 
list, have been deprived of this privilege which they have 
been enjoying for a long time without any cogent reason; 

(v) the Government of India have framed the new rules 
without consulting the Imperial Secretariat Association, 
Attached Offices Association and the General Headquarters 
Association who watch the interests of the ministerial 
staff; 

(vi) persons living in the New Area have pay at least six annas 
per day per head on bus or tonga hire while coming to, 
and going back from, office ; and 

(vii) members of the staff living in the New Area are not 
drawing any conveyance allowance ? 

(b) If the replies to parts (a) (i) to (vii) above in the affirmative, 
does he propose to remove this disability, with a view to allowing 
Government servants living in the New Area (Minto Road Area) 
to apply for quarters in Old Area ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) (i) and (ii) No. 

(iii) Yes. 

(iv) Change of quarters is not allowed under the new rules 
except in the case of ‘C’ combined orthodox type, but as stated 
in the reply to (a) (i) the quarters are not divided into areas. 

(v) Yes. 

(vi) I am prepared to take this fact from the Honourable 
Member. 

(vii) No conveyance allowance is given to the tenants of any 
quarters. 

(b) I am prepared to have the matter Considered. 

78 

*Operations of the Utilisation Branch of the 
Geological Survey of India in Respect of Certain 

Minerals 

92. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member for Labour be 
pleased to make a detailed statement indicating the progress of the 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 30th March 1943 pp 1596.98. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


645 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 645 

operations of the Utilisation Branch of the Geological Survey 
of India in respect of lead, sulphur, wolfram, tin, copper 
and mineral waters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A statement 
is laid on the table. 

Statement 

1. Lead. — In 1941-42, a thorough examination was made 
by the Geological Survey of certain long abandoned lead- 
zinc ore mines in Rajputana. It appeared that the most 
promising lead-zinc deposits in India were the mines at 
Zawar in Udaipur State which were at one time worked 
but have been abandoned for over 100 years. The mineral 
rights appertained to the Mewar State who had leased them 
to a commercial firm. As this firm was not in a position to 
exploit its lease rapidly (and rapid exploration was necessary 
if assistance was to be given to the war effort) Government 
decided to buy out their rights and themselves take a lease 
from the State. This has been done (fair compensation being 
paid to the commercial firm) and Government are carrying 
out their exploration under the terms of a lease granted 
by the Mewar State. Operations began at the end of May, 
1942. They have been planned in two stages — (1) a detailed 
plane-table survey and deep drilling operations to be followed 
by (2) the opening up of deposits and the erection of a pilot 
ore-dressing plant as soon as drilling operations establish 
the workability of the lode. The old workings are being 
opened up by 4 Adits or headings. One of these headings 
has encountered a lode of lead-zinc ore which is of wide 
extent but which is not at present as a whole as rich as is 
desired. Another heading has entered some old workings 
which suggests rich ore. The other two headings have still 
to meet the lode. The progress of these operations has been 
satisfactory considering the difficulty in obtaining mine 
stores and machinery. It is not possible at present to say 
that any of the four headings must necessarily encounter 
high grade lead ore. They are merely initial operations 
and until they are fully conducted it would be premature 
to speculate as to the size and richness of the deposit. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


646 


646 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Under peace-time conditions another two years development 
at the present rate of progress would be advisable before any 
decision is taken as to the plant required. The Government 
of India are, however, anxious to secure the earliest possible 
production in the interests of the war effort. It is hoped that 
in about three months’ time it will be possible to gauge at 
least to some extent the character of the ore. Should payable 
ore have been found at the end of this period, Government 
will take steps to order and to erect ore-dressing machinery. 

2. Sulphur. — On the outbreak of war the Geological 
Survey of India, as part of its drive for the discovery of 
menerals required for war purposes, devoted particular 
attention to sulphur. The most promising occurrence of 
sulphur in India is in a crater of an extinct volcano at 
Koh-i-Sultan in Baluchistan. Having carried out the original 
prospecting and examination of the working of the deposits 
to the administrative charge of the Supply Department, 
who established a small mining section under a special 
officer. The mining operations have however required more 
technical planning than it was first contemplated and with 
the formation of the Utilisation Branch of the Geological 
Survey it was found more convenient that that Branch 
should take over the mining and this has been done. There 
are two workable areas at Koh-i-Sultan — (i) Miri — which is 
higher up, less accessible and has not yet been worked ; and 
(ii) Batal — which is the deposit at present being worked. 
Considering quantities of+50 per cent, sulphur ore have been 
delivered to Indian industry. Proved reserved in the deposit 
at Batal are now nearing exhaustion in regard to +50 ore 
though there is still some quantities of lower grade ore and 
the Utilisation Branch are actively considering opening up 
the Miri deposits which are expected to be considerably richer 
than at Batal but there are considerable difficulties in regard 
to transport. The climate at Koh-i-Sultan, particularly at 
Miri, is very severe ; extreme cold being experienced during 
the winter and intense heat and high winds in summer. 
Labour is consequently difficult to attract. Owing to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


647 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 647 

inaccessibility difficulties are likely to be experienced in the 
Transport of ore down from Miri, but all possible steps are being 
taken to overcome them. 

So far only +50 per cent., sulphur ore has been extracted 
and the Utilisation Branch is now considering the possibility of 
opening up lower grade ores and washing the ore near Koh-i- 
Sultan to improve its quality. 

The Utilisation Branch is also carrying out operations to prove 
some old sulphur mines near Sanni in Kalat State. At present 
boring operations are in progress there. 

3. Wolfram. — The Utilisation Branch has been exploring 
two small deposits of wolfram-one in the Bankura district of 
Bengal and the other in the Nagpur District, C. P. A. certain 
quantity of wolfram has been extracted from the former deposit 
and supplied to the Supply Department. This deposit is not 
particularly attractive as the wolfram occurs dispersed in the 
rock reef and must be extracted therefrom. Quite a steady output 
has, however, been obtained from several scattered old low grade 
occurrences and it is now being considered whether machinery 
should be installed. The deposit in the Central Provinces is even 
poorer than that in Bengal. Owing, however, to the great value of 
wolfram for the war this deposit too is being further investigated 
and it is hoped to extract a certain quantity of wolfram. The 
principal occurrence of wolfram in India occurs in Jodhpur State 
and these mines are being worked by the Jodhpur Government. 
At the request of the State authorities the Utilisation Branch 
is giving every assistance by means of technical advice where 
required and in the supply of machinery. 

4. Tin. — The Utilisation Branch has concentrated on a possible 
workable occurrence of tin ore in India in the Hazaribagh District 
of Bihar. Samples taken from the dump heaps show that tin ore 
has been worked in this area extensively. Efforts are being made 
to open up the old mines which appear to have extended deeply 
but are now filled with water. De-watering operations are now 
in progress, but have been hampered up to date by lack of or 
proper pumping equipments. Efforts are being made to secure 
pumping machinery. 

5. Copper. — The Utilisation Branch have investigated the possibility 
of re-opening an abandoned copper mine in Bihar. These old mines 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


648 


648 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

will also require de-watering and extensive underground survey 
and assays will have to be made before it will be possible to state 
whether they are workable. One or two other copper occurrences 
are also being investigated. They appear rather disappointing, 
but if assays are good, further exploration will be made. 

6. Mineral waters. — The Geological Survey has made an 
exhaustive examination of the mineral springs in India and for 
the last 18 months experimented with 6 types of ‘Indian spring’ 
Waters. They have been bottled as Red label (acid), White label 
(neutral), Green label (neutral), Blue label (Gastein), Blue label 
(Axis-les-Bains) and Yellow label (Vichy) types. The Red, White 
and Blue (Gastein) waters have been found to be efficatious and 
steps have been taken to bottle them for trial on a larger scale 
but arrangements have still to be made with the proprietors. 
The commercial aspect of these waters, both for Table mineral 
waters as well as for their valuable medical properties, is also 
under consideration. 


79 

* Provision of Taps and for Unfiltered Water in 
Compounds of Orthodox Quarters in New Delhi 

468. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : (a) Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member aware: 

(i) That sometime back his predecessor promised to provide 
taps for unfiltered water in the compounds or courtyards 
of the orthodox quarters of the ministerial establishment 
in New Delhi but later on decided to keep the taps already 
installed outside the quarters open during the last summer 
months which concession was withdrawn during the last 
summer owing to thefts of the connection-locks ; 

(ii) that sort of arrangement was most inconvenient and in 
many cases the water had to be carried to the quarters 
from great distances by ladies and children in the sun 
during the summer months ; and 

(iii) that there are fairly big compounds in front of the quarters 
which can be usefully used by the tenants for growing 
vegetables 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 2nd April 1943, pp. 1733-34. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


649 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 649 

and other things in accordance with the Government propaganda 
for growing more food ? 

(b) Does the Honourable Member propose to consider the 
desirability of having unfiltered water taps installed in the 
courtyard of each quarter as in the case of unorthodox quarters ? 
If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) (i). Presumably 
the Honourable Member is referring to the reply given by my 
predecessor to starred question No. 230 asked by Bhai Parma 
Nand in this House on the 28th February, 1940. My predecessor 
did not promise to provide taps for unfiltered water in the 
compound or courtyards of the orthodox clerks quarters in New 
Delhi and he stated that he was considering the desirability of 
doing so. It was decided to keep the hydrants (and not taps) in 
front of these quarters open during the summer months and 
to fix some mechanical contrivance on the hydrants, and this 
arrangement was continued during the last summer season except 
in cases where the attachment was either damaged or stolen. 

(ii) I cannot say that the arrangement was most inconvenient. 

(iii) Yes. 

(b) No. In view of the financial stringency and non-availability 
of the material the question of providing unfiltered water taps 
in the courtyards of these quarters cannot be considered until 
normal times. I may mention for the information of the Honourable 
Member that taps have not been provided in the courtyards of 
the unorthodox clerks quarters and that the mechanical devices 
similar to the one fixed on the hydrants in front of the orthodox 
clerks quarters has been provided on the hydrants in the orthodox 
quarters. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know from the Honourable 
Member what is the free allowance of water given to these 
orthodox quarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would like to 
have notice of that. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : In view of the fact that the 
Government is not able to give them unfiltered water now, will 
the Honourable Member consider the question of increasing the 
free supply of filtered water to 10,000 gallons. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will consider that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


650 


650 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


80 

* Deputation on Behalf of the Coal Industry in 
Bengal and Bihar 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state whether he received on the 25th March last 
a deputation on behalf of the different organisations representing 
the coal industry in Bengal and Bihar ? If so, what was the 
subject matter of the representation made by the deputation, and 
what action is proposed to be taken by Government thereon ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A deputation of the 
organisations representing the coal industry in Bengal and Bihar 
was received on the 25th March as stated by the Honourable 
Member. 

The subject matter was their anxiety concerning future 
arrangements to replenish their existing rice stocks. The 
deputation stated that their Associations saw no certain prospects 
of maintaining their stocks as the Provincial Governments 
concerned, whilst promising whatever help they could give, did 
not feel able to guarantee supplies. The Central Government 
pointed out that they had asked the organisations some time back 
for a combined distribution scheme which had not been received. 
The deputation was informed that the Central Government were 
importing considerable quantities of rice into Bengal and that if 
it were found the Provincial Governments were not able to help, 
then assistance would be given by the Central Government. Since 
then representatives of the organisations have had an interview 
with a representative of the Food Department in Calcutta, and 
the food position of coal mining labour has been secured for a 
future period by the provision of certain supplies by the Central 
Government. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : The Honourable Member referred to 
replenishing existing stocks of rice. Is the Honourable Member 
in a position to state approximately the quantity of rice that 
may be available now to the different collieries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I stated in 
my reply, the food position of the coal-mining labour has been 
secured for a further period by the provision of certain supplies 
by the Central Government. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 2nd April 1943, pp. 1734-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


651 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 651 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : What I was referring to was the existing 
rice stocks which the Honourable Member referred to. What is 
the amount of these existing rice stocks ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The position 
differed in Bengal and Bihar, and if I remember correctly, what 
was stated by the deputation was that they had stocks for four 
or five weeks. 


81 

* Scheme for Cheap Grain Shops for Bengal and Bihar 

Colliery Labour 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state if it is a fact that in a communication to 
the Governments of Bengal and Bihar, the Labour Department of 
the Government of India proposed a scheme for the establishment 
of cheap grain shops in April 1942, for the benefit of colliery 
labour ? If so, what response did the scheme meet with at the 
hands of the two Provincial Governments and of the organisations 
of the coal industry ? 

(b) Has any effective action been taken by either of the two 
Provincial Governments as an alternative to the above scheme 
for ensuring a cheap supply of food grains to colliery labour ? If 
so, on what lines, and when ? 

(c) What action, if any, has been taken by the organisations 
of the coal industry or by individual collieries for the supply of 
cheap food grains to labour; and what help, if any, has been 
rendered by either of the two Provincial Governments to them 
in the matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. The Bihar 
Government considered that other methods of dealing with the 
problem were preferable. No reply was received from the Bengal 
Government. 

(b) So far as the Central Government’s information goes both 
the Provincial Governments have through their local officers 
taken all possible steps to ensure a supply of food grains at 
cheap rates to colliery labour. 

(c) It is not understood what the Honourable Member means by 
cheap food grains. The principal Employers’ Organisations in the coal 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1943, 2nd April 1943, p. 1735. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


652 


652 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

industry made arrangements to supply food grains at reasonable 
prices to their labour. The Provincial Governments assisted them 
in obtaining food grains. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I am afraid I have not received a reply to 
the second part, clause (b), of my question, viz., “Has any effective 
action been taken by either of the two Provincial Governments : 
if so, on what lines and when ?” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, they 
helped them to secure food supplies. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : But exactly in what way ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They helped them 
in getting them. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : But in what way was that help rendered, 
because we have instances in which there was actual hindrance ? 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : What steps have the colliery 
owners taken to supply food to their labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, they 
maintained stocks and were also helped by the provincial 
Governments to maintain them. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Has the attention of the Honourable 
Member been drawn to an instance in which certain stocks of 
rice which certain colliery owners acquired for their collieries 
were actually commandeered by the Government and a complaint 
to that effect was made by them to the Provincial Governments 
and here ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no such 
information. 


82 

* The War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Bill 
Presentation of the Report of the Select 
Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I present the Report of the Select Committee on the Bill to 
impose on employers a liability to pay compensation to workmen 
sustaining war injuries and to provide for the insurance of 
employers against such liability. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 26th July 1943, pp. 42-43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


653 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 653 

83 

*The Indian Boilers (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the Indian 
Boilers Act, 1923. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The question 
is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend the 

Indian Boilers Act, 1923.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

84 

@ The Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill to amend the Mines Maternity 
Benefit Act. 1941. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The question 
is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to amend the Mines 

Maternity Benefit Act, 1941.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

85 

fThe Motor Vehicles (Drivers) Amendment Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill to amend the Motor Vehicles 
(Drivers) Ordinance, 1942. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The question 
is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to amend the Motor 

Vehicles (Drivers) Ordinance, 1942.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 26th July 1943, p. 43. 
@ Ibid., p. 43. 
t Ibid., p. 43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


654 


654 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

86 

*Unsatisfactory Arrangements for 
Accommodation of Assembly at Simla 

61. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state if it 
is not the duty of the Estate Officer, Central Public Works 
Department, to arrange for the accommodation of the Member 
of the Assembly when they are wanted temporarily at Simla for 
attending Committee meetings ? 

(b) Is it not their duty to see that the Members are not put 
to any inconvenience on account of light or bad arrangements 
for accommodation ? 

(c) Is the Honourable Member aware of the fact that the Cart 
Road quarters which were set apart for the Assembly Members 
viz., 2, 3 and 11 during the Hindu Law Committee Sittings were 
more inconveniently arranged in comparison with No. 20 ? Is 
the Honourable Member prepared to enquire into the matter of 
selecting these quarters for the Assembly Members by the Estate 
Officer during Committee meetings in May and June ? 

(d) Will the Honourable Member consider changes in the 
arrangements in these quarters after proper enquiries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Estate 
Officer’s duty is to allot such accommodation to the Members 
of the Central Legislature as is specified by Government in 
consultation with the House Committee. 

(b) All the quarters are planned so as to avoid, as far as 
possible, any inconvenience to Members. 

(c) The quarters on the Cart Road were built according to 
approved plans. Quarters Nos. 2 and 3 are on the highest level 
and were reserved for the Members in consultation with the 
House Committee of the Legislature, as they were considered 
to be very conveniently situated. The arrangement of the 
rooms in Nos. 2 and 3 differs slightly from that of the rooms 
in No. 20. Some Members consider a particular arrangement 
of the rooms in a house convenient irrespective of the level 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 28th July 1943, p. 129. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


655 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 655 

of the house, while others may prefer quarters at a higher level 
irrespective of the arrangement of the rooms. It cannot therefore, be 
said that quarters Nos. 2 and 3 are more inconveniently arranged than 
No. 20. No. 11 was not occupied by any Member of the Legislature, 
as it was exchanged for No. 20. In the circumstances explained, no 
special enquiry is called for. 

(d) As already stated, the quarters for the Members of the 
Legislature were reserved in consultation with the House Committee 
of the Legislature. No changes seem necessary unless the House 
Committee expresses a desire for them. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : May I ask if the Members who 
attended the Sub-Committee meetings in Simla were asked to deposit 
a sum of Rs. 75 as security before they could get electricity and water ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice of 
that question. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Does the Honourable Member 
know that Members have been asked to deposit money here in Delhi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no idea. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I ask if there is any officer appointed 
to go round these quarters and look to the comforts of the Members ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no idea. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Will the Honourable Member then 
appoint some officer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will make inquiries 
in the matter. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea : How many meetings of the House Committee 
are held during every Session ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is for the House 
Committee to decide how many times they should meet. 

Dr. P. N. Banerjea : Have you any information on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I remember there was 
a meeting of the House Committee during the last Session. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know if some of the Members 
of the House Committee have died and have they been replaced by 
some other Members ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am very sorry to hear 
the news but I am sure the house will take such steps as are necessary 
to fill the vacancy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


656 


656 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

87 

* Provision of a Rickshaw Stand at the 
Cart Road Quarters, Simla 

62. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state if Cart 
Road quarters in Simla are kept for occupation by the Members 
of the Central Legislature ? If so, does he propose to ask the 
Municipal Committee of Simla (i) to set up a Rickshaw Adda 
near about the quarters for the convenience of the Members ; 
and (ii) not to charge security deposit for temporary occupation 
of the quarters by the Assembly Members for electric light ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As the Members 
occupy a very limited number of quarters on the Cart Road 
for short periods at a time, Government do not feel justified 
in approaching the Simla Municipal Committee for the 
provision of a rickshaw stand in the locality. The supply of 
electric energy in Simla is the concern of the Simla Municipal 
Committee and Government regret they are unable to interfere 
with the Municipal arrangements in this respect. 

88 

@ Water Supply in New Delhi and Delhi 

66. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state the arrangements 
that have been made for the supply of sufficient water for 
all purposes in New Delhi and Delhi itself to remove the 
inconvenience caused by the scarcity of water in these very 
hot days ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the Jumna river bed was being 
straightened to get water to the pumps ? If so, how far has 
that scheme progressed, and will the water brought therefrom 
be sufficient for all purposes in both Delhi and New Delhi ? 

(c) What arrangements are proposed to be made to cool 
the water which in these summer days gets too hot in the 
pipes ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 28th My 1943, p. 130. 
@76 id., pp. 134-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


657 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 657 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) In order to 
improve the supply of filtered water, five additional filters were 
installed this summer, and two large pumping sets have been 
ordered from England and are expected in India in October. The 
scarcity of unfiltered water was due to a sudden fall in the level 
of the Jumna. In order to raise the level of the water, a series 
of bunds was put up across the channel. The situation has since 
improved and there is now no shortage. 

(a) Experiments for training the river so as to divert its dry 
weather channel along the right bank, on which the pumping 
station is situated, are being conducted at the Central Hydro- 
dynamic Research Station, Poona. A committee of experts recently 
appointed to investigate the matter have submitted their report 
which is being examined. 

(b) No arrangements for cooling the water are feasible. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Why is it not feasible ? Is it because 
it is too cold here ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member is entitled to draw his own conclusions. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Is it unusually cold here ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I leave my 
Honourable friend to draw his own conclusions. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : Why don’t you utilise the 
Defence of India Act for this purpose. 

89 

* Muslim Assistant Estate Officers in 
Central Public Works Department 

71. Mr. Nabi Baksh Mahi Baksh Bhutto : (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state the number 
of Assistant Estate Officers in the Central Public Works 
Department ? 

(b) How many of them are Musalmans ? 

(c) Is the ratio of Muslims maintained ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Four ; one post 
being vacant at present. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 28th July 1943, p. 139. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


658 


658 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) None. 

(c) Not at present, but the ratio of Muslims will soon be 
adjusted as the Federal Public Service Commission has been 
asked to recruit a Muslim for the Vacant post. 

90 

* Construction of New Buildings at Ghaziabad 

72. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state if his attention has been drawn 
to the leading article in Dawn of the 29th June, 1943, under 
the caption “Thick Waste”? If so, what is the reason for building 
these houses at Ghaziabad and not near about New Delhi ? 

(b) Is it a fact that, these houses will be temporary 
constructions for the period of war ? If so, is he aware that 
accommodation for the Gazetted personnel of the Government of 
India is inadequate in New Delhi ? If so, why do not Government 
propose to construct houses which may be of use to the Gazetted 
staff after the war ? 

(c) What use will Government make of the houses at 
Ghaziabad if these are not required by the Defence Department 
after the war ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. But the 
facts stated in the article are not entirely correct. 

(b) and (c). The matter is under consideration, and no definite 
decision has been reached. 


91 

@ Scheme of Sickness Insurance for Industrial 

Workers 

127. Mr. Nabi Baksh Illahi Baksh Bhutto : (a) Will 

the Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state if the 
Scheme of Sickness Insurance for Industrial Workers has been 
completed ? 

(b) When is the Scheme expected to come into operation ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. Ill of 1943, 281h July 1943. p. 139. 
@ Ibid., 2nd August 1943, p. 268. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


659 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 659 

(c) Does the Honourable Member propose to lay on the table 
a copy of the Scheme ? 

(d) Is it also proposed to lay on the table the opinions expressed 
by Provincial Governments on the Scheme ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) The Government of India have appointed a Special Officer 
to prepare a draft scheme of Sickness Insurance for workers in 
selected industries. The scheme is now under preparation but it is 
not possible at this stage to say when it will come into operation. 

(c) and (d) These points will be considered later on. Legislation 
will be necessary, and the House will of course be fully informed 
of the details of the scheme. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : How far has the scheme been 
completed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A preliminary 
report has been received. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : When approximately is this going 
to be completed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say 
anything about it. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Say two years or one year ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Within two months’ 
time. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Thank you. 

92 

* Fixing Rents Lower than Pre-war Rental Value 
in Babar Road Area 

132. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Is the Honourable the Labour 
Member aware : 

(i) that rents for middle class tenement houses in the Babar 
Road Area have been fixed by the Rent Controller at 
Rs. 42-8-0 per mensem from the 1st July, 1942 ; and 

(ii) that this rent is less than the rental value of Rs. 
560 per annum assessed by the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee for levying house-tax on these houses ever 
since 1938-39 ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, p. 271. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


660 


660 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) What are the grounds for fixing the rents lower than the 
prewar rental value as assessed by the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee in 1938-39 ? 

(c) How do Government justify the levy of house-tax at an 
excessive rate for all these years ? 

(d) If the assessment was not excessive, how do Government 
justify the order of the Rent Controller ? 

(e) Is he aware that the house-owners in this area are mostly 
middle class people who have been hit hard by this arbitrary 
decision of the Rent Controller ? 

(f) What rents are fixed by the Rent Controller for houses 
having approximately a similar residential accommodation near 
the Pusa Road in Qarol bagh Area, and in any other composite 
area in New Delhi ? 

(g) Is he aware that while controlling rents of houses in 
Calcutta, the Bengal Government have allowed an increase of 
ten per cent, in rents over the rents prevailing in 1941 ? 

(h) Does he propose to allow a similar increase in rents in 
New Delhi ? If not, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) (i). There are 
several different classes of tenements in the Babar Road Area 
carrying different rents. The rent of Rs. 42-8-0 is for one class 
tenements only. 

(ii) Yes. 

(b) The rents are fixed under clause 8 of the Delhi House Rent 
Control Order, 1939, under which the Rent Contoller has to fix the 
fair rent of a house having regard to the prevailing rates of rents 
for the same or similar accommodation in similar circumstances 
during the twelve months prior to the 1st September, 1939. 

(c) This is not a matter for Government. 

(d) In view of the reply to part (b) above, the question does 
not arise. 

(e) Yes, but Government have no reason to believe that the 
house-owners have been hit hard. 

(f) There are no houses in Qarol bagh having the same or 
similar accommodation. 

(g) I have no official information on the point. 

(h) No, Government do not see any justification for it. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable Member make inquiries 
as to the difference in rental value assessed by the New Delhi Municipal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


661 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 661 

Committee and the rent which is allowed to the owner and see 
that some justice is done to the landlords and the rents are 
increased ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot do that, 
because the fair rent is fixed by the officer. There is no reason 
to supose that his judgment is in any way miscarried by any 
circumstances which he ought not to take into account. 

93 

* Prohibition of Constructions Involving Use of 
Cement, Steel and Timber 

135. Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi : (a) In view of the 
Government order announced in some places by beat of drums 
prohibiting constructions of all descriptions involving the use of 
cement, steel and timber, will the Honourable Member for Labour 
be pleased to state whether this order applies to constructions 
which are nearing completion and do not require cement, steel 
and teak wood ? 

(b) If the answer to (a) is in the negative, will the owners 
of such premises be granted permission for making and fitting 
the requisite panels for doors and wood-sashes for windows out 
of mango wood and other materials already in their possession, 
provided that the authorities are satisfied after verification that 
all the materials required are already in their stock ? 

(c) If the answer to (b) is in the affirmative, do Government 
propose to issue instructions to that effect to all provinces ? If 
not, will all constructions, irrespective of whether they involve 
the use of cement, steel and timber, be kept in abeyance now ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) to (c) In order 
to curtail the demand for labour and materials and to check 
inflationary tendencies, the Government of India have asked 
the Provincial Governments to do what they can to discourage 
the construction of buildings, etc., by local bodies and private 
persons. These are general instructions and the Provincial 
Governments are at liberty to give effect to them in whatever 
manner they consider suitable having regard to the conditions 
prevailing in the Province. I would therefore suggest that 


*Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, pp. 273-74. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


662 


662 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Member approaches the Provincial Government whose 
orders he desires to have clarified. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know if these things 
have been prohibited because they are being supplied for war 
purposes or they have been prohibited for some other reason ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : For war purposes. 

Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi : May I inform the 
Honourable Member that the District Magistrate of Mathra 
has refused permission to an Honourable Member of this 
House to complete his house. He wanted to put in only 22 
panels of mango and 22 panels for doors. That was the only 
thing to be done, but the District Magistrate refused to give 
the permission. 

Mr. Chairman (Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang): That is a 
statement of facts and not a question. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am glad to 
receive the information. 

Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi : Is it a fact that the 
Commissioner of Agra Division was approached in this 
connection and he said that if the gentleman concerned 
could convince the District Magistrate that he already had 
in his possession the necessary wood to complete the house, 
he would give him the sanction. He convinced the District 
Magistrate that he had the ncessary wood in his possession 
and yet he refused to give him the permission. 

Mr. Chairman (Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang) : Again it 
is a statement and not a question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know if the half-completed 
house or three-fourths completed houses have also been 
prohibited from being built? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information on the point. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Have any exceptions been made 
in this matter? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We have given 
general instructions to the provinces. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


663 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 663 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : They have not been given any 
discretion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure the 
discretion will be exercised with due care. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Then the Central Government has 
not given any instructions yet ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say at this stage. 

94 

* Cost of Raising Buildings in New Delhi and Simla 
Connected with War Activities 

144. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the total cost incurred by the Government 
of India in raising buildings in New Delhi and Simla, separately, 
connected with the War activities since September 1939 ? Was 
any expense incurred on behalf of Americans ? If so, how much, 
and who met it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The following 
expenditure had been incurred up to the end of March 1943 : 

(i) New Delhi — Rs. 1,55,14,629. 

(ii) Simla — Rs. 24,65,137. 

(iii) On behalf of Americans — Rs. 38,47,916. 

(This has been debited to Defence Services Estimates under 
Reciprocal Lease/Lend arrangements.) 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : May I know if after the war all 
these temporary buildings will be demolished ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Which Government meets the expenditure 
of Rs. 38,47,916 on Americans ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The government of 
India under the reciprocal Lease/Lend arrangements. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Will this expenditure on the tax-payers 
of India be later on debited to the accounts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Notice. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, p. 282. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


664 


664 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


95 

* Factories Adversely Affected by the Former 
Standard Time 

@151. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state which factories 
(and in which part of the country) were adversely affected by 
the former standard time which used to be observed in India ? 

(b) What is the number of such factories, and what is the 
estimated amount of loss to those factories caused by the keeping 
up of the standard time? 

(c) Do Government propose to consider the advisability of 
restoring the old standard time ? If so, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
have no information that factories in any part of India were 
adversely affected by the former standard time. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) The reply to the first part is in the negative. The reasons 
for the advance of time have been explained by Government in 
a Press communique a copy of which is laid on the table of the 
House. No grounds have been shown for a restoration of the old 
standard time. 

Press Communique 

The existence of two different standards of time in India is 
for purposes of defence undesirable and since the 15th May this 
year a uniform standard time has been observed throughout the 
country. In deciding what that standard should be the Government 
have had to consider on the one hand the convenience of that 
portion of India which lies to the West of meridian 82/4 and 
already enjoys sufficient daylight saving and on the other the 
requirements of the eastern Provinces where it is essential to 
avoid any electricity overload due to overlap of factory demands 
with those of domestic, office and street lighting and where extra 
daylight may be needed to mitigate the effect of obscuration. Since 
in the summer months there is an adequate margin of daylight in 
the eastern areas, it was considered that by an adjustment of office 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943. p. 285. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


665 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 665 

and factory hours the requirements of those areas during 
the summer could be adequately met if Standard Time were 
fixed at 5 14 hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time throughout 
India and a unform time was introduced accordingly as 
from the 15th May. The Government of India undertook, 
however, to consider the question of a further change before 
the winter season commenced. It has now been decided 
that to insure the continuance of sufficient daylight in the 
eastern Provinces it is necessary to make such a change in 
the near future, and that Indian Standard Time throughout 
the country should be 614 hours ahead of Greenwich Mean 
Time. The change will take effect from midnight or the 
31st August — 1st September from which date clocks will be 
advanced by one hour. It is fully realised that the advance of 
clocks by one hour must inevitably cause some inconvenience 
to areas lying west of meridian 8214 but it is believed that 
by an adjustment of hours of work, this inconvenience can 
be overcome and that when the public becomes accustomed 
to the new time no great difficulty will be experienced. 

96 

* Fall in Output of Coal 

28. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state if it is a fact that since January, 
1943, the output of coal in British India has gone down ? If 
so, did Government make any enquiry about the reason for 
this fall in output, and what practical steps do Government 
propose to take to improve the situation ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the stock of coal was much less at 
collieries in British India on the 31st of May, 1943, than the 
stock that was reported to exist on the 31st of December, 
1942 ? If so, what are the reasons for such a deterioration ? 

(c) Is it a fact that sufficient number of wagons was not 
available between the 1st January, 1943, and 31st of May, 
1943, even to carry away the raisings of that particular 
period? If so, what is the explanation for the reduction in 
the stock ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, p. 286. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


666 


666 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(d) Is it a fact that about 30 collieries in the Kajora field in 
the Province of Bengal with a raising of approximately over ten 
lakhs of tons a year, are going to be shut down for want of wagon 
facilities due to the military authorities using the portion of the 
line serving these collieries, although it is possible to carry the 
military goods from the Ondal Junction by the military lorries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. The second 
part of the question does not arise. 

(b) The stock figures reported to exist on the 31st December, 
1942, are not reliable. Improved methods of collecting figures 
of stocks have since been introduced. It is believed that stocks 
have not deteriorated but increased between 31st December, 
1942, and 31st May, 1943. 

(c) Answer to the first part is in the affirmative. Answer to 
the second part is in the negative. 

(d) No. Kajora field is worked by several pilots. It is presumed 
that the question refers particularly to the area worked by Okhra 
Nos. 1 and 2 Pilots. Approximately 30 collieries are worked by 
these two Pilots. The capacity for coal of these two Pilots is 100 
wagons which represents approximately 2,000 tons of coal per 
day or 7,20,000 tons per annum. Both these Pilots have been 
getting preferential suplies of wagons as they have large orders 
from B and A Railway. With the wagon position as at present 
prevailing in the Bengal and Bihar fields, it is extremely unlikely 
that even if the capacities of these Pilots were increased the 
collieries would get more than 100 wagons a day. For the Military 
Depot 20 wagons in the capacity of Okhra No. 2 Pilots have been 
provided, but as explained above this arrangement is not likely 
to cause these collieries to shut down. The Government of India 
are not aware whether the military can carry goods from Ondal 
Junction by military lorries. 


97 

* Concessions re Oil Resources in British India to 
British or American Firms 

30. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member for Labour be 
pleased to refer to starred question No. 441, dated the 30th March, 
1943, and lay on the table a statement giving the names of British or 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, p. 287. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


667 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 667 

American firms that may have secured concessions (including 
exploration or prospecting licences) in respect of the potential oil 
sources in any part of British India, together with a summary 
of the principal terms and conditions thereof in each case ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The attention of 
the Honourable Member is invited to the statement placed on 
the table of the House today giving the information promised 
in answer to the supplementaries on question No. 441, dated 
the 30th March, 1943. 


98 

* Summary of Proceedings of the Third Meeting 
of the Standing Labour Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I lay on the table a copy@ of the Summary of Proceedings 
of the third meeting of the Standing Labour Committee held 
on the 7th and 8th May, 1943. 

99 

f Sikhs in High Salaried Posts in the Central 
Public Works Department 

209. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the number of posts carrying salaries 
of Rs. 400 per mensem or over in the Central Public Works 
Department and in Sections other than the Central Public 
Works Department ? How many of these posts are held by 
Sikhs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There are 60 
posts on salaries rising to Rs. 400 or more and 82 posts on 
salaries of Rs. 400 and upwards. Of the total of 142 posts, 6 
are held by Sikhs. 

It is not understood to which office the Member refers 
by the words ‘Sections other than the Central Public Works 
Department. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, p. 292. 
@ Not included in these Debates, but a copy has been placed in the Library of the 
House . — Ed. of D. 

t Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 5th August 1943, p. 426. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


668 


668 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


100 

* Establishment Branch of the Office of the Chief 
Engineer, Central Public Works Department 

f210. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member kindly state if it is a fact that a separate Branch 
to deal with establishment matters and to facilitate the work 
of selection board in the office or the Chief Engineer, Central 
Public Works Department, was set up recently ? 

(b) What is the total number of staff working in this Branch, 
and how many of them are Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs ? 

(c) Is it a fact that none of the members of the staff including 
the Superintendent has any experience of establishment matters ? 

(d) Why were not experienced people already working in 
the Establishment Branch considered suitable for employment 
in this Branch ? 

(e) Is it a fact that establishment matters of the Muslim 
personnel are dealt with quickly while those of other communities 
lie unattended to for an indefinite period ? 

(f) Do Government propose to investigate an enquiry into 
the communal work done by this Branch ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Total No. of staff 12 

Hindus ... ... 5 

Muslims ... ... 6 

Sikhs ... ... Nil 

Indian Christians ... ... 1 

(c) No; two assistants and three clerks were taken from the 
Establishment Branches. 

(d) More staff could not be removed from the Establishment 
Branches without detriment to the work there. 

(e) No. 

(f) No. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 5th August 1943, p. 426. 
t Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


669 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 669 

101 

* Representations Against the Appointment of 
One Bakshi Madan Singh in the Central Public 
Works Department 

@211. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if it is a fact that one Bakshi Madan 
Singh was appointed as an Assistant in the Works Section, 
Central Public Works Department, against a vacancy reserved 
for ‘other minorities’ ? 

(b) Was he asked at the lime of recruitment to produce a 
certificate as to the bonafides of his being a Sikh in accordance 
with the procedure laid down by the Home Department ? If not, 
why not ? 

(c) Are Government aware that Bakshi Madan Singh has 
been “Petit” 3 or 4 times before he joined service, and that he 
kept hair to deceive the Government to get a job reserved for 
the Sikh Community ? 

(d) Is it a fact that a number of representations were made 
to the Additional Chief Engineer and the administrative Officer 
by the local Sikh organisations and none of these has even been 
acknowledged so far? 

(e) Do Government propose to replace this person by a 
bonafide Sikh? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. The Department had no doubts as to his bonafide at 
the time of his appointment. 

(c) No. Government had no information to this effect. 

(d) Yes. They are being acknowledged. 

(e) Only, if it is established that he embraced Sikhism within 
a year of his application for employment, or being a Keshdhari 
had become patit before his employment. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 2nd August 1943, pp. 426-27. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


670 


670 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

102 

* Commercial Aspects of Indian Spring-Waters 

50. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to refer to the unstarred question No. 92, 
dated the 301h March 1943, and make a statement : 

(a) explaining whether the commercial aspects of the 
Indian spring-waters referred to therein have been examined, 
and whether the arrangements to bottle the waters for trial 
have been completed ; and 

(b) indicating the location of the different springs which 
have so far been tried and found satisfactory ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The 

commercial aspects of Indian spring-waters are still under 
examination. The arrangements to bottle the waters for trial 
are complete. 

(b) The springs occur on private land, as negotiations are 
still in progress with the proprietor of the land, Government 
do not consider it desirable to disclose the location of the 
springs at this stage. 


103 

@ Survey of Hydro-Electric Possibilities in India 

274. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari (on behalf of Mr. R. 
R. Gupta) : (a) Will the Honourable member for Labour be 
pleased to state if Government have directed a survey of 
Hydro-electric possibilities in this country ? If so, when was 
the survey last carried out, and by whom ? 

(b) Do not Government consider that, in view of the 
generally accepted policy of conservation of India’s better 
class coal resources, hydro-electric developments should be 
actively encouraged, particularly in the United Provinces, the 
Punjab and the Central Indian States, which are situated 
away from the sources of India’s coal supply ? If so, in what 
form do Government propose to encourage such development ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 5th August 1943, p. 434. 
@ Ibid., 12th August 1943, p. 642. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


671 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 671 

(c) What is the installed generating capacity of the State 
Hydroelectric schemes developed by the United Provinces and the 
Punjab Governments, Native States like Mysore and Travancore, 
and the Tatas in Bombay, and what is the unabsorbed load 
available from these schemes at present ? 

(d) Does the Honourable Member propose to lay on the table 
a statement showing from their latest data the possible head 
works site of the new hydro-electric schemes in India, together 
with the power likely to be obtained from each of the generation 
schemes ? 

(e) Have Government thought out any possibility of converting 
Railways to be driven electrically in those localities where cheap 
power can be obtained ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A brief survey 
of major hydro-electric possibilities throughout India was made 
about the end of 1941 by the Electrical Commissioner with the 
Government of India ; 

(b) Promotion of hydro-electric schemes is primarily the 
concern of Provincial Governments and States. The Central 
Government is, how ever, fully alive to the desirability of 
hydro-electric development and the post-war organisation of the 
electricity supply industry including hydro-electric development 
is engaging the attention of the Reconstruction Committee of 
Council. 

(c) and (d) During war-time it is not in the public interest 
to publish the information asked for. In any case, as already 
stated, the promotion of hydro-electric schemes is primarily the 
concern of the Provincial Government and States. 

(e) Yes, the question has been considered from time to time 
and is always kept in view, but the availability or cheap power 
is only one of the factors which would determine the conversion 
of a particular section to electric traction. 

104 

* Inclusion of certain Details in the Working of 
the Payment of Wages Act 

289. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state if it is a fact that the Report on the 
working of the Payment of Wages Act on Railways does not indicate 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 12th August 1943, p. 654. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


672 


672 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the particulars of the applications presented to and disposed 
of by the authorities appointed under the Payment of Wages 
Act? 

(b) If the reply to part (a) be in the affirmative, does he 
propose to take steps for the inclusion of the particulars of 
the applications with a review thereon in the next reports ? 
If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) At present 
what the Honourable Member suggestes is a fact. 

(b) I shall consider the suggestion. 

105 

* Sulphur Mined in Baluchistan and Firms 
Supplied with Sulphuric Acid 
Manufacturing Plants 

290. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari (On behalf of Mr. R. 
R. Gupta) : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member be 
pleased to state the quantity of sulphur mined in Baluchistan 
by the Utilisation Branch of the Geological Survey of India, 
and the total amount so far spent in such mining operations ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the deposit of sulphur in the present 
site of mining in Baluchistan, available for further exploration, 
is small ? In any case, what is the estimated tonnage of the 
unworked deposit at the moment ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Department of Supply has notified 
the sugar mill concerns in India that no supply of sulphur 
can be arranged for the mills in connection with the next 
crushing season ? If so, what is the reason for such a notice 
being given to the sugar mills ? If no such notice has been 
given, how were supplies of sulphur secured for the sugar 
mills in the last two crushing seasons, and how is it proposed 
to arrange the suply during the next ? 

(d) Is it a fact that a large quantity of sulphur- dioxide (SO.,) gas 
is wasted as a by-product in connection with the operation of copper 
smelling furnance in India ? If so, is it a fact that such gaseous waste 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 12th August 1943, pp. 
654-55. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


673 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 673 

can be easily converted into sulphuric acid ? Did Government 
examine the posibility or such a source of supply of sulphuric 
acid, and, if so, with what result ? 

(c) Is it a fact that since the outbreak of the war, the 
Department of Supply imported a number of sulphuric acid 
manufacturing plants ? If so, what is the number of such plants, 
and how have they been disposed of? Do Government propose 
to lay on the table a statement showing the firms to whom such 
plants, if any, have been made available, and the special reason 
for which the plants were supplied to them in each case ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is not in 

the public interest to state the quantity of sulphur mined. The 
total amount so far spent on Baluchistan Sulphur Operations 
is Rs. 11,85,000. 

(b) No. It is not in the public interest to disclose the estimated 
tonnage of unworked deposits. 

(c) No. Supplies of sulphur for the sugar industry during the 
last crushing season were met partly from American imports 
and partly by depiction of reserve stocks. Sugar mills are being 
supplied with Baluchistan sulphur ore which they will refine 
individually or alternatively have refined at a central plant set 
up with Government sanction and the resultant pure sulphur 
will be used in the sugar mills during the crushing season. Any 
deficit on estimated requirements will be met from American 
imports arranged by the Supply Department. 

(d) Sulphur dioxide is produced as a by-product during the 
smelting of copper in India. It occurs in the flue gases in a highly 
diluted form with other gases and its efficient conversion into 
sulphuric acid is difficult. The possibility of using this source 
of supply for production of sulphuric acid and sulphur was 
examined very early in the war but was not proceeded with as 
the processes called for the import of complicated and expensive 
machinery with technical personnel and even then successful 
recovery was problematic. 

(e) No. Full information regarding the proposed import of 
plants from America was given by the Honourable the Supply 
Member in answer to unstartred question No. 47 on 4th August 
1943. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


674 


674 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

106 

* Lead Mine in Jawar in Udaipur State 

291. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari (on behalf of Mr. R. R. 
Gupta) : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member please 
state if it is a fact that a lead mine is being worked in Jawar 
in the Udaipur State by the Utilisation Branch of the Geological 
Survey of India ? If so, what is the. amount of money spent 
so far in the working of this mine, and what is the average 
percentage of lead and zinc occurring in the ores extracted 
from this mine ? 

(b) Have Government any information or lead deposits 
occurring in any other part of India, and, if not, what fraction 
of India’s lead requirements is likely to be met from Jawar 
source alone ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. A sum of 
Rs. 614 lakhs has been spent upto the end of June 1943. The 
average percentage found in exploration up to date is 2 per 
cent lead and 8 per cent zinc. 

(b) Yes, the most likely occurrances known at present are 
at Chauthka-Barwara in Jaipur State. 

107 

@ Wolfram Deposits Discovered in a Bengal 

District 

292. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari (on behalf of Mr. R. R. 
Gupta) : Will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased 
to state if it is a fact that some wolfram deposits have been 
discovered by the Geological survey of India in a Bengal District ? 
If so, what is the quantity of wolfram so far won from this 
source, and how has it been disposed of? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R, Ambedkar : Yes. During war- 
time it is not in the public interests to disclose the quantity 
of wolfram won. The ore is disposed of through the Supply 
Department (Directorate-General, Munitions Production). 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 12th August 1943, p. 655. 
@ Ibid., p. 655. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


675 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 675 


108 

* Functions of the Labour Welfare Advisers and 
Labour Advisers 

297. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state the functions of the 
Labour Welfare Advisers and Labour Advisers appointed in the 
Labour Department ? 

(b) How many such officers have been appointed so far ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The functions of 
the Labour Welfare Advisor and his Deputy and Assistants are 
to report to Government and advise on all such meters relating 
to the welfare of industrial labour in India as Government may 
direct. 

The duties of the Labour Adviser were to advise on all 
important matters of labour legislation and administration, and 
in particular the manner in which labour problems that were 
under consideration or might arise had been or were being dealt 
with in England. 

(b) There is one Labour Welfare Adviser, one Deputy Labour 
Welfare Adviser and 7 Assistant Labour Welfare Officers. 

One Labour Adviser was appointed from December 1942 to 
June 1943. 

There is at present no Labour Adviser 

Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : Will they advise 
on dearness allowance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. Sir. 

Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari : Does the Labour Adviser, of 
the Honourable Member, as distinct from the Labour Welfare 
Adviser, represent the employees’ interests. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not at all Sir 

109 

@ Steps for Eliminating Immediate 
Causes of Industrial Disputes 

298. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state what effective steps for 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943 12th August 1943 p 657 
@ Ibid., pp. 657-58. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


676 


676 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

eliminating the immediate causes of industrial disputes to ensure 
the unhampered war production have been taken so far, both 
in the Government’s own war-factories and in private factories 
engaged wholly or partly on war-orders ? 

(b) Have Government decided to adopt an all round policy of 
having all disputes referred to the adjudication before workers 
are compelled to go on a strike ? 

(c) Do they propose to advise all Provincial Governments to 
do so ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
have attempted to secure fair conditions for labour both in their 
own factories and in private employment. Where disputes arise 
the methods of conciliation and adjudication are available. 

(b) and (c) No. The general policy of Government is to resort 
to adjudication if and when the method of conciliation has failed. 
The present machinery for the settlement or disputes has been 
evolved in consultation with Provincial Governments and general 
uniformity of practice has already been achieved. 

110 

* Demolition of a Mosque on Ashoka Road, 

New Delhi 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : I have 
received notice of motion of adjournment from Maulvi Abdul 
Ghani who wants to discuss a definite matter of urgent public 
importance, namely, the demolition of a mosque in the premises 
of quarter No. 9, Asoka Road, by the Government Officers and 
men of the Public Works Department. 

When did this take place ? 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani (Tirhut Division : 
Muhammadan): It was done about ten days ago but I got 
information about it only last night. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is not the only person interested. If it is 
an urgent public matter it is for every one to take notice of it 
immediately. Why was no notice taken before ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943, 21st August 1943, p. 897. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


677 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 677 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan (Agra Division : Muhammadan 
Rural): Sir, it did not come to the notice of any Member of 
the House until yesterday, because it was done in one of the 
Government quarters. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Then 
how did the Honourable Member come to know at all about it ? 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Some passers-by came and 
informed some Members and made a complaint. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Have 
Government anything to say about this ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I have had no notice of this motion. Evidently my Honourable 
friend wrote a letter giving notice of this adjournment motion 
to the Department of Education, Health and Lands, which has 
been just now handed over to me. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I want 
to know the facts. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have made 
inquiries from my Department and I am told that they do not 
know of any such incident at all. As I said, I have not had 
sufficient time to make inquiries in the matter, and I have no 
reason to suppose that any such demolition has taken place. 
However, if my Honourable friend chooses to put a short notice 
question. I will make inquiries and let him have the information 
he wants. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I think 
that will be the best course. 

Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait (West Coast and Nilgiris : 
Muhammadan): Then this motion can be held over. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : If a 
short notice question is put I will consider it later. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : In any case the short notice 
question cannot be put today and can only be asked on Tuesday 
if the Assembly sits till then. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Better 
ask a short notice question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


678 


678 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


111 

* Demolition of a Mosque on Asoka Road, 

New Delhi 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) Whether he is aware of the existence of a Mosque in 
Asoka Road in Government Quarter No. 9 ; 

(b) Whether the said Mosque has partly been demolished by 
Public Works Department men at the instance of a Public Works 
Department Official; 

(c) Whether the demolition work was stopped due to the 
agitation by Muslims; 

(d) What steps the Government have taken to prevent such 
demolition and whether they have taken steps against the person 
at fault; if so, with what result; and 

(e) What steps Government are going to take to remedy the 
harm done to the building ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes — of an old, 
dilapidated and unused mosque. 

(b) No. One of the arches on the northern wing of the mosque 
accidentally collapsed while felling a tree against which it was 
leaning. The request for the removal of the tree came from the 
present occupant of the house-Major Anwar who complained that 
the tree was obstructing the light. 

(c) No. 

(d) There was no demolition by the Central Public Works 
Department, and so this question does not arise. 

(e) It is an old dilapidated building, and no harm to it has, 
therefore, been caused. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : When the tree was cut, 
why the precaution was not taken to see that the arch which 
was leaning against the tree might be kept in a safe condition ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to suppose that due precaution was not taken against such an 
accident. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1943,25th August 1943, p. 980. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


679 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 679 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Even the efficient Engineers 
of the P. W. D. could not protect one arch ? Am I to take it with 
all due precaution, they were unable to protect one arch ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Such an accident may 
happen notwithstanding the due care and attention. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : When the mosque exists in a 
quarter which is occupied by the Government and which was open 
to the public before the Government built their quarter, is it not 
the duty of the Government to see that it is properly repaired and 
kept in proper order? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not suppose 
there is any reason to believe that this mosque was in actual use 
either before or after the quarter was built. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Will Government give us an 
assurance that the demolished portion of the mosque will be restored 
by necessary repairs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is quite unnecessary 
to do it because it was not used as a mosque nor is it a protected 
monument. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Will the Honourable Member 
make a way for the public to get into this mosque ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, it is no 
longer in use as a mosque. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : May I know the reason why 
it is not in use as a mosque ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is arguing. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : I want to know whether the 
Government is going to make it accessible to the public so that it 
can be used as a mosque ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It has never been 
in use as a mosque. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Has the Government any objection 
if I carry out the repair at my expense ? 

The Honourble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable Member 
may make an application and the Department will consider it. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : Is it not a fact that the occupant 
of this quarter did object to the cutting of the tree ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


680 


680 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The position is just 
the reverse. The tree was cut at the instance of the occupant of 
the quarter. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : Will the Honourable Member 
make a reference to the occupant of the quarter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason to 
suppose that the information I have given is not correct. 

Nawabzada Muhammad Liaquat Ali Khan : What reason 
has the Honourable Member to suppose that the information given 
by an Honourable Member of this House is not correct ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : That is 
arguing. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have official 
information. I don’t know how reliable is the source of the Hon. 
Member’s information. 


112 

* The Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the 
Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The question 
is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend the 

Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926” 

The Motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

113 

@ Equalization of Rates of Allowance for Men 
and Women under the Indian War Injuries 
Scheme 

47. Mr. N. M. Joshi : (a) Has the attention of the Honourable 
the Labour Member been drawn to the fact that the difference made 
between the rates of allowances paid to men and women under the 
War Injuries Schemes in Great Britain has been removed some time 
back so that men and women receive allowances at the same rates ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 8th November 1943, p. 30. 
@ Ibid., 9ih November 1943, p. 68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


681 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 681 

(b) If the reply to the above be in the affirmative, do the 
Government of India propose to make a similar change in the 
Indian War Injuries schemes, and to bring the rates of allowances 
paid to men and women on the same level ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Since notice of 
this question was received, I have ascertained the position in 
Great Britain. It is a fact that the distinction between rates for 
relief for men and women has been abolished in Great Britain. 

(b) The question will be considered. 

114 

* Insertion in Government Contracts of Condition 
for Fair Treatment of Labour 

48. Mr. N. M. Joshi : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether the subject of the need 
for insertion in Government contracts of a condition regarding 
fair treatment of labour was discussed at one of the Tripartite 
Labour Meetings ? If so, what action do the Government of India 
propose to take on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, it was at the 

third meeting of the Standing Labour Committee. To be precise 
the subject discussed was need for insertion of a condition 
regarding fair wages for labour in Government contracts, and 
not fair “treatment” of labour. Government have already accepted 
the principle so far as the Central Public Works Department is 
concerned and the necessary preliminary steps for enforcing such 
a provision are under active consideration. The question or the 
introduction of such a clause in the contracts of other Government 
Departments will be taken up soon after the scheme has been 
introduced in respect of Central Public Works Department labour. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : What is the meaning of “active 
consideration” ? Is there any time limit involved ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes; I see quite 
clearly the difference between a matter being under consideration 
and under active consideration. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : Is there any difference of time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That means that 
the matter is really nearing completion. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 9th November 1943, p. 68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


682 


682 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


115 

* Rules Concerning “Out of Class” Allottees in 
New Delhi 

49. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state whether it is a fact 
that before the introduction of the revised rules for allotment 
of residences in New Delhi during the war, persons who were 
allotted quarters were allowed as a concession to remain in 
occupation of those quarters after they became out of class, when 
no accommodation of the class to which they were entitled was 
available ? 

(b) If the answer to (a) is in the affirmative, what are the 
reasons for penalising the same occupants by the introduction 
of the proviso below rule 7 (2) (b) by relegating them to a junior 
position by treating the dates on which they became out of class 
as the dates of their posting ? 

(c) Is it not a fact that by the operation of the proviso referred 
to in (b) above, the persons remain longer in occupation of the 
lower class of quarters and thus great hardship is caused to 
persons who are entitled to those quarters under revised rule 4 
by compelling them to wait longer than it would be necessary 
had the proviso not been in operation ? 

(d) Does the Honourable Member propose to reconsider, and 
to remove the grievances of all concerned by deleting the proviso 
below rule 7 (b) under lists II and III. 

(e) Does the Honourable Member realise that by the 
introduction of the new policy viz., determination of seniority 
as regards the claim for quarters by the total length of service, 
practically all new entrants to whatever class of quarters they 
were entitled will have to go without quarters and be put to 
great hardship ? 

(f) With a view to redressing their grievance, does he propose 
to consider the feasibility of amending the rule so as to allow 
the counting of seniority from the date of posting in the case 
of new entrants who have not been allotted any quarter so far 
and in the case of others from the date on which they became 
out of class ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 9th November 1943, pp. 
68- 69. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


683 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 683 

(g) If the amendments suggested were accepted, will they be 
given immediate effect? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The penalising arises more from the shortage of 
accommodation than from the proviso to rule 7(2)xx(b). 

(c) Yes, but this cannot be helped under the existing 
circumstances. 

(d) No. Nothing can remove the grievances unless there is 
increased accommodation at the disposal of Government, which 
does not seem to be possible so long as the war lasts. 

(e) I do not consider that this is the case, but so long as the 
accommodation available is short of requirements, whatever 
rules are made, some persons are bound to be put to hardship. 

(f) This is already provided for in the rules. 

(g) Does not arise. 


116 

* Supply of Foodgrains to Employees of the 
Labour Department in Bengal at Concession 

Rates 

5. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state the different classes of employees 
under the control of his Department and employed in Bengal 
that are in the enjoyment of a concession under which foodgrains 
are supplied to them at controlled or reduced prices ? 

(b) What is the total number of such employees and what 
quantities of rice, wheat and other foodgrains have been supplied 
to them at controlled or reduced prices, month by month, since 
January last ? 

(c) Who are charged in Bengal with the duty of furnishing 
supplies for the benefit of these employees and what is the 
approximate extent of the stocks that they had to maintain 
from time to time to enable them to discharge their obligation, 
and through what agencies in Bengal have these stocks been 
acquired, and at what prices on an average, month by month ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 9th November 1943, p. 81. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


684 


684 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The attention 
of the Honourable Member is invited to reply given by the 
Honourable the Food Member to starred question No. 55 on 
the 9th November 1943. 


117 

* Certain Irregularities in the Working of the 
Payment of Wages Act 

130. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to state the number of irregularities 
detected by the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour, during the years 1939-40 and 1940-41, in the 
working of the Payment of Wages Act ? If there is an increase 
during the latter year, what steps do Government propose to 
take besides reporting to Railway administrations concerned to 
remedy this ? If none, why ? 

(b) Will the Honourable Member please give a reference to the 
specific provision of the Payment of Wages Act, or rules framed 
thereunder, sanctioning the course of reporting irregularities 
to Railway administration instead of to the authorities set up 
under Section 15 of the Act ? 

(c) If there is no such provision, why is not action taken 
under Section 15(3) of the Payment of Wages Act by Labour 
Inspectors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The number of 
irregularities detected during 1939-40 and 1940-41 were 3,012 
and 4,158, respectively, Railway Administrations have recently 
been directed to take suitable steps to obviate the recurrence 
of these irregularities. If the irregularities continue to increase, 
the question of making formal applications under Section 15 
of the Act will be considered. Government does not consider 
it necessary to proceed formality under the provisions of that 
Section when satisfactory settlement in the individual cases can 
be otherwise achieved. 

(b) There is no such provision in the Payment of Wages Act 
or the rules framed thereunder. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, 
pp. 230-31. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


685 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 685 

(c) The provisions of Section 15(3) are not mandatory and there 
is nothing in the Act to prevent an Inspector from making reports 
to Railway Administration and getting any claims settled amicably. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Have these Inspectors enough power 
to make recommendations ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask if these irregularities are found 
on the Company-managed railways or even on the State-managed 
railways ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 


118 

* Activities of the Conciliation Officer (Railways) 

131. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to refer to his reply to Mr. N. M. 
Joshi in regard to starred question No. 147 asked by me on the 
19th February, 1943, stating that he would consider extending 
the field of activities of the Conciliation Officer (Railways), and 
state whether any action has been taken in the matter ? If so, is 
it proposed to make a brief statement on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question is still 
under consideration and I am not at present in a position to make 
any statement. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : What is delaying the consideration 
so much ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said that the matter 
is under consideration. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Why is it taking so long ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think it 
has taken a long time. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : When will it reach the stage 
of active consideration ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The stage of 
consideration is now complete. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Since when has the matter been 
under consideration ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, p. 231. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


686 


686 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : For a long time and 
particularly since the time when Mr. Joshi asked his question. 

119 

institution of Engineers 

136. Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the Institution of Engineers is an examining body 
whose diploma of A.M.I.E. is recognised by the Government of 
India as being equivalent to degree standard in Engineering ; 

(b) whether the Government (Central or Provincial) financially 
help this Institution ; if so, the amount of aid granted ; 

(c) whether it is not a fact that the Institution has for its 
patrons and Honorary Members, Their Excellencies the Viceroy 
and the Provincial Governors ; 

(d) whether Government are aware that this Institution has 
obtained the Royal Charter; 

(e) whether it is a fact that sister Institutions in England, 
e.g., the Institute of Mechanical Engineers, the Institute of 
Civil Engineers, the Institute of Electrical Engineers, have not 
yet recognised the examinations conducted by the Institute of 
Engineers, India ; and 

(f) if the Government of India propose to move His Majesty’s 
Government to request these British institutions to accord 
recognition to this Indian Institution ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The Central Government do not render any financial help 
to the Institution, but I have no information whether Provincial 
Governments do so or not. 

(c) His Excellency the Viceroy and provincial Governors are 
Honorary Members of the Institution. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) Government have no information. 

(f) It is for the Indian Institution itself to raise the question, 
if necessary. I would, therefore, suggest to my Honourable friend 
that he addresses that Institution in the matter. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 131h November 1943, 
pp. 233-34. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


687 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 687 

120 

* Constructing a Large Hotel for Indian Clerks 
in New Delhi 

@ 145. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether Government have 
considered the advisability of constructing a large several 
storeyed building in New Delhi in the form of a big hotel in 
order to provide lodging and boarding facilities for Indian clerks 
who are otherwise put to considerable difficulties in obtaining 
these at present ? 

(b) Is it a fact that many buildings have been constructed 
for the accommodation of European single non-Commissioned 
Officers, etc., and that these are being run as hostels ? 

(c) Are Government prepared to provide similar facilities for 
the Indian single clerks ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
are considering the possibility of erecting a hostel for clerks. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Government have already provided chummries of Orthodox 
and Un-orthodox types for Indian single clerks and they are 
considering whether there will be an adequate demand to justify 
the erection of a hostel. 


121 

fDelay in Attending to the Complaints Made to 
Minto Road and Havelock Square Enquiry 
Offices, New Delhi 

@ 147. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether Government are aware 
that complaints made to the Enquiry Offices at Minto Road 
and Havelock Square regarding repairs, etc., to orthodox clerks 
quarters in those neighbourhoods are attended to generally after 
considerable delay ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, 
pp. 242-43. 
t Ibid., pp. 243-44. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 688 

688 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Are Government aware — 

(i) that some of these complaints are not attended to at all; 
and 

(ii) that letters sent on the subj ect to the Executive Engineer, 
Construction III Division, or to other authorities in ‘B’ 
Division, remain unacknowledged and without any action 
being taken on them? 

(c) Are Government prepared to issue instructions to the authorities 
concerned to acknowledge all letters sent to them, and to take appropriate 
action thereon ? If not, why not ? 

(d) Are Government aware — 

(i) that a lot of inconvenience is being caused to their tenants 
by the irregular method adopted by the contractors 
regarding whitewashing, etc.; 

(ii) that they send men round to the quarters and the tenants 
are asked to keep their rooms clear of furniture on a 
certain day, and then while-washing labour is not sent 
for several days later; and 

(iii) that when white-washing is finished the cleaning of doors 
and glass panes is not done at once, and the tenants are 
unable to arrange their houses for several days ? 

(c) Are Government prepared to take action to redress these 
grievances of their tenants ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) (i) No. 

(ii) Action on letters received by Executive Engineers is taken at 
once and necessity is not felt of acknowledging all letters. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) (i), (ii) and (iii) No. 

(e) Yes, Government intend issuing instructions to Executive 
Engineers to make frequent personal inspections. 

122 

* Newly-Constructed E-Type Orthodox Quarters 
in the Open Space Between Baird Square East 
and Irwin Road in New Delhi 

@148. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Is the Honourable the Labour 
Member aware that a number of E-Type orthodox quarters have been 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, p. 244. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


689 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 689 

constructed in the open space lying between Baird Square, East and 
Irwin Road in New Delhi ? 

(b) Is he aware — 

(i) that this area now looks very much like a congested 
portion of the city containing small gallies and lanes ; 
and 

(ii) that the present officials of the Central Public Works 
Department have totally ignored the original idea of 
the layout of New Delhi, and have made the said area 
very congested ? 

(c) Is it a fact that it is proposed to construct more E-type 
orthodox quarters ? 

(d) Are Government prepared to consider the advisability of 
constructing new quarters in such a manner that the “Clerks’ 
residential areas” do not become more congested than they are at 
present, and that provision is made for lawns and open spaces near 
these quarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) (i) and (ii) No. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Government have always acted in this manner. 

123 

* Desirability of Closing Certain Passages in 
Havelock and Baird Squares New Delhi 

@149. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that all the squares of 
D-type orthodox clerks quarters in the D.I.Z. Area of New Delhi had 
their four corners open as passage ? 

(b) Is it a fact that these passages were closed later ? 

(c) Was one of the reasons to protect the lawns in front of the 
quarters in those squares ? 

(d) Are Government aware — 

(i) that in Havelock and Baird Squares, B and C-type of 
quarters, there are passages after every two quarters 
except at the corners ; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, 
pp. 244-45. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


690 


690 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) that coolies and labourers use these passages 
regularly, and cross the lawns at different places 
with the result that the lawns in these two squares 
are disfigured by foot tracks ? 

(e) Are Government prepared to have these passages closed 
and grass relaid on these tracks ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) Yes. 

(b) No. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Government will examine the suggestion. 

124 

* Growing of More Vegetables in Orthodox 
Quarters in New Delhi 

@150. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) With reference to the general 
appeal of Government to grow more food and vegetables, will 
the Honourable Member for Labour please state whether the 
Government of India staff living in New Delhi at orthodox type 
of quarters can grow vegetables in large quantities ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the courtyards of D-type particularly, 
and of E, C and B-type orthodox quarters generally, are very 
small in size, and cannot be used to produce any large quantity 
of vegetables, etc. ? 

(c) Are Government prepared to allot some extra land outside 
their quarters to such members of their orthodox staff who may 
ask for it for the purpose of growing vegetables, etc., and to have 
such land duly enclosed ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Vegetables may 
be grown in small quantities for the domestic consumption of 
the staff occupying these quarters. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. The proposal if accepted would soon result in 
destruction of lawns. Fencing is expensive and cannot be provided 
by Government, and it is unlikely that the staff living in these 
quarters will be able to make adequate use of such extra land. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, p. 245. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


691 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 691 

125 

* Commissioned Officers in Civil Pioneer Force, 
United Provinces 

29. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) the total number of commissioned officers (different 
ranks) so far recruited in the Civil Pioneer Force, United 
Provinces ; 

(b) how many of them are Hindus, Muslims and members 
of the Scheduled Castes; 

(c) how many of these commissioned officers have been 
promoted to higher ranks ; 

(d) if any scheduled caste commissioned officer has so far 
been promoted to the higher rank ; and 

(e) if the answer to (d) be in the negative, if Government 
propose to make such promotion now ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) 

Twentyfive officers of commissioned rank have been appointed. 
The ranks and communities of the officers are — 



Muslims 

Scheduled 

Castes 


Others 

Commandants 



2 

(One Christian). 

Captains 



2 

(One Christian). 

Lieutenants 



7 

(Two Christians). 

2nd Lieutenants 

4 

3 

7 



(c) Two Commandants and two Captains were appointed in 
those ranks on first commission. Seven 2nd Lieutenants have 
been promoted to the posts of Lieutenants. 

(d) No. 

(f) Promotion to higher rank can only be made 
within the authorised establishment of those ranks as 
vacancies become available. Subject to the authority of 
the Central Government, the power to make promotions 
is entrusted to the provincial Government. Except to 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, pp. 
24849. Na 4635— 44a 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


692 


692 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

prevent positive injustice it is not considered desirable to 
interfere with the discretion of the Provincial Government in this 
matter, particularly as regards the higher posts. Promotions are 
regulated by two considerations (1) Efficiency and (2) Seniority. 
Since efficiency of the Unit must depend on the efficiency of its 
officers, efficiency must be the basis of promotion. But in case 
where efficiency is equal, seniority of service in the Force is also 
taken into account in making promotions. 

126 

* Counting of Services of Commissioned Officers 
in Civil Pioneer Force as War Services 

30. Mr. Piare Lull Kureel : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the services of the commissioned officers in the 
Civil Pioneer Force will be counted as war services ; if 
not, why not; and 

(b) if the answer to (a) above be in the negative, if 
Government propose to revise their decision ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. (b) Does 
not arise. 


127 

* Beveridge Report for Post War 
Social Security 

229. Khan Bahadur Mian Ghulam Kadir Muhammad 
Shahban : Will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased 
to state : 

(a) whether Government have considered the Beveridge 
Report for post-war social security ; 

(b) whether they have any social security plan in view for 
India after the cessation of hostilites ; 

(c) whether, if the matter has not yet engaged their 
attention, they will take it up now with a view to 
evolving a plan similar to what is known as “Beveridge 
Plan” for this country ; and 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 13th November 1943, p. 249. 
*Ibid., 17th November 1943, pp. 410-11. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


693 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 693 

(d) on what lines, if any, the Post-War Reconstruction 
Committee is working ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is not for 

the Government of India to consider the Beveridge Report 
submitted to the Government in the United Kingdom. The 
Government of India are, however, aware of the Report. 

(b) and (c). I would invite the attention of the Honourable 
Member to the resolution on this subject passed at the 
last meeting in September, 1943,. of the Tripartite Labour 
Conference. Copies of the resolution are placed on the table 
of the house. The Government of India is giving active 
consideration to the question of implementing the resolution. 

(d) I would invite the Honourable Member’s attention to 
the statement laid on the table of the Council of State on 
the 4th August, 1943, by the Honourable Sir Jwala Prasad 
Srivastava in reply to question No. 74 by the Honourable 
Pandit H. N. Kunzru. 

Resolution passed at the Tripartite Plenary labour Conference 
held at New Delhi on the 6th and 7th September, 1943. 

This Tripartite Labour Conference recommends that with 
a view to provide adequate materials on which to plan a 
policy of social security for labour the Central Government 
in co-operation with the Governments of the Provinces 
of British India, the Indian States and the Chamber of 
Princes should immediately set up machinery to investigate 
questions of wages and earnings, employment and housing 
and social conditions generally, and that as soon as possible 
after receipt of the required statistics and data the Central 
Government should appoint a mixed Committee to formulate 
plans of social security. 


128 

* Neglect of Lawns in Front of Orthodox Clerks’ 
Quarters in D.I.Z. Area, New Delhi 

232. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that the lawns in front of 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, p. 412. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


694 


694 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

orthodox clerks’ quarters in the D.I.Z. area of New Delhi are 
not properly maintained ? 

(b) Is it a fact that most of the ground is covered with dried 
up stunted grass ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the roads bordering these lawns have 
almost in all cases lost their alignment, and that some portions 
of the road are covered with grass, while in other cases the grass 
has completely disappeared and is covered by bajri and soil ? 

(d) Is it a fact that there are malis regularly employed by 
the Horticultural Division to look after these lawns ? 

(e) Is the Honourable Member aware that these malis water 
the lawns only once or twice a month and do not pay any 
attention to anything else ? 

(f) Are Government prepared to take action to see that these 
lawns are properly maintained ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) No. 

(c) No. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) The malis not only water the lawns but also keep them 
in proper order. 

(f) The question does not arise, but Government will be 
prepared to enquire into any bonafide complaints on this subject. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Has the Honourable Member simply 
given the reply on the note prepared by the Department or has 
he taken pains to see the conditions of these quarters to satisfy 
himself whether the allegations made in the question are correct 
or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to suppose that the information supplied to me is not correct. 

129 

* Operation of the Payment of Wages Act on East 
Indian Railway 

236. Nawab Siddique Ali Khan (on behalf of Qazi Muhammad 
Ahmad Kazmi): Will the Honourable the Labour Member be 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, p. 414. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


695 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 695 

pleased to state : 

(a) the number of cases of contravention of the Payment of 
Wages Act (Act IV of 1936), detected on the East Indian 
Railway during each of the years 1941, 1942 and upto 
the 15th October, 1943 ; 

(b) the number of applications made to the authority appointed 
under section 15(1) of the Payment of Wages Act by the 
Inspectors for offences committed by the East Indian 
Railway authorities since the Act was brought into force 
in 1937; and 

(c) the number of cases in which penalties were imposed under 
section 20 against the East Indian Railway Officers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The number of 
cases of contraventions of the Payment of Wages Act on the East 
Indian Railway were 334 during 1941-42, 481 during 1942-43 and 
123 from 1st April to 15th October 1943. 

(b) Nil. 

(c) Nil. 


130 

* Operation of the Payment of Wages Act on East 
Indian Railway 

237. Nawab Siddique Ali Khan (on behalf of Qazi Muhammad 
Ahmad Kazmi): (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member please 
state if it is or it is not a fact that the Inspectors of Railway Labour 
have to obtain prior sanction, from the Supervisor of Railway Labour 
for any action they may intend to take against offenders under the 
Payment of Wages Act ? 

(b) If the reply to (a) above be in the affirmative, what is the 
number of instances when such permission was sought and sanction 
accorded relating to cases of contravention of the Payment of Wages 
Act on the East Indian Railway year by year from 1937 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is only the 
Supervisor of Railway Labour and his Deputy who have been 
appointed Inspectors under Section 14 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936, any formal action under the Act has therefore necessarily 
to be taken by these two officers and the question of taking their 
prior sanction does not arise. 

(b) In view of the reply to part (a), this does not arise. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, p. 414. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


696 


696 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

131 

* Operation of the Payment of Wages Act on East 
Indian Railway 

238. Nawab Siddique AH Khan (on behalf of Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi): (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state if it is or it is not a fact that lack of effective 
and proper supervision of the conduct of the Payment of wages 
Act is responsible for such frequent contravention of the Payment 
of Wages Act on the East Indian Railway ? 

(b) Do Government propose to consider the advisability 
of making changes in the existing machinery with a view to 
affording proper and effective check on such contraventions of 
the Payment of wages Act by the Railway officers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) What the 
Honourable Member suggests is not a fact. The very fact that 
such a large number of irregularities are brought to light every 
year and rectified at the instance of the Supervisor of Railway 
Labour proves the effectiveness of the Machinery which now 
exists for this purpose. 

(b) Does not arise. 


132 

@ Representation from Mr. V. G. Balwaik re 
War Bonus to Workers 

239. Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state : 

(a) if he has received a representation from Mr. V. G. Balwaik, 
President, Central Provinces and Berar Provincial Workers’ 
Federation, Nagpur, in the month of October, 1943, in connection 
with war bonus to workers ; 

(b) if Government have arrived at any decision regarding the 
condition attached to the additional war bonus by the Empress and 
Model mills, viz., the Government of India to decide whether more 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, 
pp. 414-15. 

@ Ibid,., p. 415. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


697 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 697 

than two months’ wages as war bonus can be treated as 
expenditure on which the company will have to pay no tax ; if 
so, what their decision is; and 

(c) if he is aware of the decision of the Working Committee 
of the Central Provinces and Berar Textile Workers’ Federation 
to go on strike from the 15th November, 1943, if the mill-owners 
in the Province will not pay this additional or second instalment 
of the war bonus by the 14th November 1943 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) No. The general question of limitation of bonuses admissible 
as revenue expenditure is under consideration and it will not be 
expedient to give further details at the present stage. 

(c) Yes. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : May I know the reasons why 
it would not be possible to arrive at a conclusion at an earlier 
date and give details ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We are doing our 
best to arrive at a conclusion as early as possible. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : What time it will take, because 
the withdrawal of the strike has been made under my instructions 
that the Government of India will decide this question and the 
strike had better be postponed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to 
give any detail. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether the Government of 
India is aware that there is very great discontent among the 
textile workers of Central Provinces on account of the fact that 
the Government of India have not decided this question early ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information on the point. 


133 

* Students Admitted to Dhanbad School of Mines 

242. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of students admitted to the Dhanbad School 
of Mines, and the number of Muslims therein during 
1941, 1942 and 943 ; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, p. 416. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


698 


698 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) whether any quota is fixed for the admission of 
Muslims ; and 

(c) the total number of Muslims who applied for admission 
during the last three years ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 24 students 
were admitted during each of the years 1941, 1942 and 1943. 
No Muslim student was admitted in 1941 and 1942. In 1943 
two were admitted but one did not join the School. 

(b) No; and 

(c) 34. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : What is the reason for the 
non-admission of Muslim students ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is because 
they do not qualify themselves at the entrance examination. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : As for academic qualifications 
I can prove that there are any number of Muslims who are fit 
to join that institution. But is it not a fact that scholarships 
are not given to Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say ; 
I shall want notice of that. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Is it a fact that 
last year qualified Muslims applied but they were rejected 
outright ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. If I may 

explain to the Honourable member, the method of admission 
to the school is that first of all 50 per cent, of the places are 
filled as a result of an entrance examination which is open 
to all students. After that a certain quota is filled for the 
purpose of representing each province according to a quota 
that has been fixed. After that the balance of students is 
taken purely on the basis of merit. At this school there is no 
reservation with regard to any particular community at all. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


699 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 699 

134 

* Drop in the Output of Coal 

250. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to refer to his statement in reply to starred question 
No. 349, asked by me in the Legislative Assembly on the 20th 
March, 1943, to the effect that the drop in the production of 
coal was so slight that no detailed enquiry had been held into 
its cause, and state whether it is a fact that there has been a 
considerable drop in the output of coal both in British India and 
in the Indian States since January last ? 

(b) If the answer to (a) be in the affirmative, is the Honourable 
Member in a position to indicate the extent of such drop, month 
by month, ever since it was noticed ? 

(c) Was any warning given about the threatened coal shortage 
by any trade organisation or any individual member of the trade 
to the knowledge of Government ? If so, when did such warning 
come to the knowledge of Government for the first time, and 
what steps, if any, were taken thereupon ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Compared 
with the corresponding month of last year, the output of coal 
in British India and Indian States has shown a decrease during 
1943. During the first 5 months of the year the drop was slight; 
but from June onwards it has become more considerable. 

(b) 1940 was the peak year for coal production. Since then 
production has fallen slightly year by year. The fall assumed 
serious proportion from June 1943. Compared with the 
corresponding months of 1942, the output in June, July and 
August of this year fell by about 353,000 tons each month, while 
September showed a decrease of 299,000 tons. 

(c) A warning was given by an individual member of the 
trade in August 1943. Government were already well aware of 
the situation by that time and were actively considering remedial 
measures. The following are some of the principal steps that 
have been taken to improve the situation. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, 
pp. 421-22. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


700 


700 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(1) More wagons have been provided to take away coal, 
particularly in the Bengal and Bihar fields. 

(2) Efforts are being made to ensure the prompter delivery 
of colliery stores and machinery. 

(3) Women have, since August, been permitted to work 
underground in the Central Provinces and Berar 
coalfields. 

(4) Action has been taken to prevent interference with 
colliery labour from military activities in the coal fields. 

(5) Schemes are under preparation to provide a greater 
quantity of consumer goods for collieries and in particular 
of food, and arrangements are being made to ensure an 
adequate ration at concession rates to the miners. 

(6) Welfare officers are about to be appointed in the Bengal 
and Bihar coalfields to promote the health and general 
welfare of miners. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Is the Honourable Member in a position 
to indicate the principal factors that contributed to this coal 
shortage ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, the principal 
factor that contributed to the shortage of coal is undoubtedly 
the shortage of labour. That was due to the fact that labour was 
drawn away from coal fields by the ‘Grow More Food’ campaign 
and by the military works that were started near about the area 
where the coal mines are situated. 

135 

* The Coal Trade Conference at Delhi 

251. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state whether the principal object of the Conference 
of representatives of coal trade and other interests, that was held 
in Delhi on the 23rd October last under his chairmanship, was 
to consider the question of increasing the output of coal ? If so, 
what were the circumstances that led to the decision to hold the 
conference, and the result of the discussions thereat ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, 
pp. 422-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


701 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 701 

(b) Has the present effort to increase the output of coal 
been influenced in any degree by the necessity of stimulating 
an increased export of coal from India for war purposes or 
otherwise ? 

(c) Is it a fact that in a letter issued by the department of 
Labour to the invitees at the Conference, mention was made of 
the persistent and increasing fall in the output of coal coupled 
with the increasing demand for Indian coal, both inside and 
outside India, which was stated to have caused the Central 
Government acute anxiety ? When was such anxiety first caused 
to the Government of India and due to what circumstances, 
and what action has been taken ever since for the purpose of 
improving the situation, and with what result ? 

(d) Is the internal supply of coal in the country likely to 
be affected in any manner by any policy that Government may 
have in view with the object of stimulating the export of coal 
on Government or private account? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, Government 
believed that one of the principal reasons for the decline in 
output was shortage of labour. If this shortage could be made 
good, the fall in production would be arrested and an increase 
to the target figures would become probable. Government were 
anxious to secure the full co-operation of employers in any 
measures they proposed for this purpose. The principal result 
of the discussions was an agreement that in Bengal and Bihar 
the Employers’ Associations should initiate schemes on uniform 
lines for the supply of foodgrains and other commodities to 
their labour and the Government of India should assist the 
Associations in giving effect to such schemes. 

(b) An increase in output of coal is necessary to meet the 
internal requirements of Indian industry as these have increased 
and output has diminished. 

(c) Yes. Since the beginning of the War, Government have 
been anxious to maintain the output of coal at its maximum. 
The peak year for coal production was 1940. There was a 
very slight fall in 1941 on the 1940 figures and a further 
slight drop in 1942. It seems more than likely that the 
1943 figures will show a further drop on the 1942 figures. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


702 


702 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

From about June of this year, it became plain that output was 
not going to be sufficient to meet the increased demands for 
coal being made by essential consumers such as War Industries, 
railways and for military projects of the first importance. Supplies 
of coal for all consumers have accordingly been rationed. In order 
to meet these rationed demands, and such outside demands as 
it might feel necessary to meet, Government have to ensure that 
25.65 million tons of coal per annum will be made available for 
consumption. This is a larger quantity than has ever been made 
available before; and measures to increase production have, 
therefore, become of the utmost urgency. 

As regards the action that has been taken to improve the 
situation, the Honourable Member is referred to the answer given 
to part (c) of his starred question No. 15. It is too early yet to 
assess the results of these and other measures. 

(d) No. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Is it a fact that in order to 
increase the output of coal production, female labour has been 
employed underground in coal mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said so. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : If it is so, will the Honourable 
Member say how long female labour will be employed in these 
mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Well, while the 
emergency lasts. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Will the Honourable Member 
tell me what precautions have been taken to look after these 
female labour employed underground in the mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We are contemplating 
measures and if my honourable friend will table a question some 
time in the next Session, I will give him some information. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: Has there been any suggestion from His 
Majesty’s Government for the purpose of stimulating export of 
coal? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
on the point. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Next question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


703 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 703 

136 

* Appointments of Managers of Government of 
India Presses, New Delhi and Calcutta 

253. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) whether he is aware that for the recent appointment 
of Managers of the Government of India Presses, New 
Delhi and Calcutta, the claims of the senior-most Muslim 
assistant Managers were overlooked ; if so, the reason 
therefor; 

(b) whether it is a fact that the Manager of the Government 
of India Press, New Delhi, refused to relieve a Muslim 
clerk recently selected for a clerical job in the office of the 
controller of Printing and Stationery, while he relieved a 
number of non-Muslim clerks selected for clerical posts in 
the Controller’s Office, Assembly Department and Supply 
Department; 

(c) whether it is a fact that the Assistant Manager of the 
Government of India Press, New Delhi, orderedthe transfer 
of six Muslim piece-composition of the Lino Section ; if so, 
the reasons for such wholesale transfer of Muslims from 
this Section ; 

(d) whether it is a fact that the post of a correction checker in 
the Government of India Press, New Delhi, was recently 
filled by the officiating Manager by the appointment of a 
junior new- scale man, overlooking the claims of the senior 
incumbent in the old scale ; if so, why; 

(e) whether the Managers and Assistant Managers of 
Government Presses are empowered to make appointments 
and promotions and order transfers and declare certain 
posts selection posts ; if so, whether any rules have been 
laid down for their guidance in these matters; 

(f) whether the Honourable Member proposes to institute 
an enquiry to find out whether these rules are strictly 
observed by these officers in all cases ; and 

(g) inviewofthefrequentandincreasingcomplaintsaboutarbitrary 
and unjust actions in these matters by the authorities of the 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, pp. 
424-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


704 


704 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government of India Presses, whether the Honourable Member 
proposes to consider the advisability of constituting an independent 
committee with powers mentioned in (e) above ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(6) No. 

(c) Yes. This was done in the normal course of sectional interchange 
which takes place every 3 months to allow each worker periods of 
easy and strenuous work. Three non-Muslim piece compositors 
were also transferred along with the Muslims and 2 Muslim piece 
compositors brought on to the Lino Section. 

(i d ) Yes. The post of Correction Checker being a selection post, 
the best man available was selected on merit. 

(e) Managers of the Government of India Presses are empowered 
to appoint and promote men to certain classes of posts in accordance 
with the rules laid down in the Departmental Handbook. They are 
not competent to declare any post as selection post. 

(/) and (g). No specific irregularities of the nature mentioned 
above have so far occurred necessitating the action suggested. 

Mr. H. A. Sathar II. Essak Sait: With reference to part (d) 
my Honourable friend admitted that the claims of a Muslim were 
overlooked for certain reasons. Is he aware that the Muslim whose 
claims were overlooked had worked for 22 years ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am prepared to accept 
that from my Honourable friend, although I have no information. 

Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait : Then he said that the answers 
to (a) and (b) were in the negative. Will he take it from me that 
with regard to (a) the appointments have been made this year. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that. 


137 

* Trade Unions Supplied with Government 
Publications, etc. 

35. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state: 

(a) the names of the Trade Unions, both registered and unregistered, 
separately, whose objects arc not confined to one province ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1943, 17th November 1943, 
pp. 438-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


705 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 705 

( b ) the names of the Trade Unions, both registered and 
unregistered, separately, who are supplied official 
publications free of cost; 

(c) the names of the Trade Unions, both registered and 
unregistered separately, who were invited to take part 
in the Tripartite Labour Conference and Committees ; 
and 

(d) the reasons for the differential treatment, if any, in the 
subject matters referred to in parts (b) and (c) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A list of 
registered trade unions, whose objects arc not confined to one 
province, compiled from materials readily available is attached. 
Particulars regarding unregistered trade unions are not available. 

( b ) I presume the Honourable Member is referring only to 
unions whose objects are not confined to one province. 

Copies of certain bulletins, annual reports, etc., have been 
furnished free of cost, on request, to the two All-India Associations 
of workers, namely the All-India Trade Union Congress and the 
Indian Federation of Labour. No official publication is supplied 
free of cost to any individual trade union as such. 

(c) The constitution of the Tripartite Labour Conference and 
the Standing Labour Committee provides for the nomination of 
workers’ representatives in the following manner: 

(i) For the Labour Conference — 

11 representatives of employees, of whom 4 will be 
nominated by Government in agreement with the All- 
India Trade Union Congress, 4 will be nominated by 
Government in agreement with the Indian Federation 
of Labour, and 3 will be nominated by Government as 
representatives of other employees interests. 

(ii) For the Standing Labour Committee — 

5 representatives of employees, 4 of whom will be nominated 
by the Labour Member in agreement with the two All-India 
Associations of workers and the fifth nominated independently 
by the Labour Member. 

The nominations to the Conference and the Committees have 
been in accordance with their constitution and there has been no 
question of any differential treatment between different unions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


706 


706 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


(d) It will be clear from the replies to (b) and (c) that no 
differential treatment has in fact occurred. 

Central Trade Union registered in the various Provinces 

Printing Presses — 

1. Government of India Press Workers Union. 

Seamen — 

2. Indian Merchants Navy Officers Asssociation, Bombay. 
Miscellaneous — 

3. The All-India Telegraph Line Staff Union, Lahore. 

4. The Indian Sugar Industry Employees Association, 
Lucknow. 

5. Indian Sugar Mills Association, Calcutta. 

6. Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta. 

7. Imperial Bank of India, Indian Staff Association, Calcutta. 

8. Central Council of Tobacco Manufacturing Workers Union. 

9. All-India Telegraph Workmen’s Union, Lahore. 

10. The Indian Southern Provinces Sugar Marketing Board, 
Madras. 

Railway and Transport — 

11. N. W. Rly. Junior Clerks Association. 

12. Bengal Assam Rail Road Workers’ Union. 

13. Assam Bengal Rly. Employees Association. 

14. E. I. Railway Employees Association, Calcutta. 

15. Bengal and Assam Railway Employees Association. 

16. B. N. R. Employees Union, Calcutta. 

17. B. N. Rly. Indian Labour Union, Kharagpur. 

18. N. W. Rly. Employees Union, Karachi. 

19. G. I. P. Railwaymen’s Union, Bombay. 

20. G. I. P. Railway Accounts Staff Union, Bombay. 

21. B. B. & C. I. Railway Employees Association, Ahmedabad. 

22. B. B. & C. I. Railwaymen’s Union, Bombay. 

23. National Union of Railwaymen of India & Burma, 
Bombay. 

24. B. B. & C. I. Railway Employees Union, Bombay. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


707 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 707 

25. G. I. P. Railway Contractors & Licenced Coolies Union, 
Bhusawal. 

26. N. W. Railway Accounts Union, Lahore. 

27. N. W. Railway Union, Lahore. 

28. E. I. Railwaymen’s Union, Lucknow. 

29. Railway Workers Association, Moradabad. 

30. E. I. Railway Guards’ Association, Lucknow. 

31. Railway Workmen’s Union of India, Allahabad. 

32. B. N. Railwaymen’s Association, Gorakhpur. 

33. E. B. Railway Workers’ Union. 

34. Association of Accountants, E. I. Railway. 

35. Association of Accountants, N. W. Railway, Lahore. 

36. All-India Railway Mechanical Workers’ Federal Union, 
Lahore. 

37. Delhi Sonipat Bus Service Union, Sonipat. 

38. Ittehad Motor Union, Panipat. 

39. N. W. Railway Guards Association, Lahore. 

40. Federated Union of the N. W. Railway Workers, Lahore. 

41. Union of the E. I. Railway Ticket Checking staff, Calcutta. 

42. E. I. Railway Joint Hands Union, Hooghly. 

43. All-India Railwaymen’s Union, Nagpur. 

44. United Union of N. W. R. Workers, Lahore. 

45. Delhi-Garmuktesar Motor Association. 

46. East Indian Railway Muslim Employees Association, 
Lucknow. 

47. S. S. Light Railway Employees Union, Saharanpur. 

48. B. N. W. Railway Workers Association, Gorakhpur. 

49. E. I. Railway Workers Association, Calcutta. 

50. The Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway Employees’ 
Union, Perambur, Madras. 

51. The South Indian Railway Labour Union, Golden Rock, 
Trichinopoly. 

52 . The South Indian Railway Employees Association, Villupuram . 

53. The All-India Railwaymen’s Federation, Mylapore, Madras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


708 


708 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

138 

* Communal Composition in the Office of 
the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and 
Supervisor of Railway Labour 

1. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) how many office clerks there are in the office of the 
Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway labour ; 

(b) how many Inspectors of Railway Labour have been 
appointed temporarily or permanently from December, 
1942, upto the second week of February, 1944; and 

(c) out of these appointments, how many were recruited 
from — 

(i) depressed classes, 

(ii) caste Hindus, 

(iii) Muslims, and 

(iv) members of other communities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Eleven including 
a Stenographer. 

(b) Five temporary Inspectors only have been appointed from 
December, 1942, upto January, 1944. 

(c) (i) Three. 

(ii) and (iv) None, (iii) Two. 

139 

@ Muslim Inspectors of Railway Labour 

2. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state the number of 
persons who served temporarily as Inspectors of Railway Labour 
and who were trained hands at the time of the first appointment 
of Mr. Jadhav, Conciliation Officer (Railways) ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, pp. 
24-25. @ Ibid., p. 25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


709 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 709 

( b ) How many of these Inspectors were Muslims, and how 
many of the Muslims who had served temporarily as Inspectors 
were given chance of appointment to permanent or quasi- 
permanent vacancies ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Two. 

( b ) Both were Muslims. One has secured appointment 
elsewhere and the other at present officiating as an Inspector 
of Railway Labour. 


140 

* Depressed Class Appointments of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour 

3. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please stale if it is true that 
five Inspectors of Railway labour posted respectively at Dacca, 
Tatanagar, Ajmer, Asansol and Jalpainguri went on deputation 
to the Central Civil Supplies Department or as Civilian Labour 
Welfare Officers, in the military Department ? 

(b) Is it true that all these five long standing officiating 
vacancies which will continue up to the duration of the War, 
were filled up by five depressed class Hindu Inspectors who have 
been appointed arbitrarily by the Conciliation Officer (Railways) 
and Supervisor of Railway Labour, superseding the claims of two 
Muslims who have served temporarily for more than six months 
and who arc trained hands ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, but all 
deputations were not to the Civil Supplies Department or as 
Civilian Labour Welfare Officers. 

(b) No, as will be clear from the reply to part (c) of question 
No. 1 of the same member. 


141 

@ Depressed Class Appointments of Inspectors 
of Railway Labour 

4. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state if it is a fact that five long standing 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, p. 25. 
@ Ibid. p. 25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


710 


710 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

officiating vacancies of Inspectors of Railways labour occurred 
because of the deputation of two Muslims, viz., Mr. A. 
Hamid and Mr. A. Karim, one Sikh, Mr. T. Singh, and two 
caste Hindus ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is true that 
the vacancies arose because of the deputations. 


142 


* Depressed Class Appointments of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour 

5. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state if it is a fact 
that five depressed class appointments of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour were made without any advertisement and 
without selection by the Selection Board ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. Only three 
Scheduled Class candidates were appointed. Recruitment 
was not made by advertisement or by a Selection Board. 


143 


@ Depressed Class Appointments of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour 

6. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will 

the Honourable the Labour Member please state if the 
Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of Railway 
Labour was justified in appointment of all the five new 
depressed class Inspectors without any selection ? Are they 
from amongst relatives of his own province of Bombay ? 

(6) Was the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor 
of Railway Labour justified in appointing his relations and 
his own community people as clerks and Inspectors ? Is 
the Honourable Member aware that there were qualified 
depressed class candidates from other provinces also ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, p. 25. 
@ Ibid., pp. 25-26. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


711 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 711 

(c) Why did not consider the claims of those who once 
served creditably in officiating vacancies as Inspectors ? 

(d) Why did the Supervisor of Railway Labour appoint 
Inspectors without consulting the Selection Board ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (c) and 
(d). I would refer to my reply to the previous question. The 
candidates appointed are not related to the Conciliation Officer 
(Railways) and Supervisor of Railway Labour. 

(b) I have given the information relating to Inspectors. As 
regards clerks out of eleven only one belongs to the Scheduled 
Caste whom the present Conciliation Officer (Railways) has 
appointed. 


144 


*Depressed Class Appointments of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour 

7. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : Is the 

Honourable Member for Labour prepared to consider the 
desirability of filling up the five vacancies of Inspectors of 
Railway Labour by forming a Selection Board so that the 
legitimate claims of all communities may not be jeopardized ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question 
of filling of vacancies in the grade of Inspectors is under 
examination of Government. 


145 


@ Bengalee Inspectors in the Office of the 
Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour 

8. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state how many Bengalee Inspectors 
there are in the office of the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, p. 26. 
@ Ibid. p. 26. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


712 


712 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Supervisor of Railway Labour ? If there is only one Bengalee, 
why are not more Bengalees appointed ? 

( b ) Is it not a fact that there arc sufficient number of qualified 
Bengalees, both amongst Hindus and Muslims, who are awaiting 
chances ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Two. 

( b ) There may be sufficient and suitable Bengalees available 
for appointment but the presumption behind the question that 
the appointments arc made with any reference to the province 
of a candidate is not correct. 


146 


* Qualifications of Mr. D. G. Jadhav, Conciliation 
Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour 

9. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member state if it is true that Mr. D. 
G. Jadhav is at present the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and 
Supervisor of Railway Labour, Government of India ? If so, 
what are his qualifications ? Was he in Government service or 
in Railway service before ? 

(b) Will the Honourable Member please state if it is a fact 
that Mr. Adur Rahman Puri, the Head Clerk of the Office of 
the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of Railway 
Labour has been degraded to the post of an Inspector ? If so, 
what are the reasons ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. Mr. D. G. 
Jadhav at present holds the post. Mr. Jadhav was an elected 
member of the Bombay Legislative Assembly prior to his present 
appointment. Besides being an elected member of the Backward 
Class Board, Bombay, he had served on many Select Committees, 
Development Boards, Advisory Committees and was an arbitrator 
of Co-operative Societies in the District of East Khandcsh. He 
is a B.A., L.L.B., having graduated in 1934 and taken his law 
degree in 1940. He has not been in Government or Railway 
Service before. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, p. 26. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


713 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 713 

(b) The Honourable Member is presumably referring to 
Mr. Abdul Hamid Puri. He is reverted to his substantive 
post of an Inspector on expiry of his tenure of appointment 
as Head Clerk. 


147 

* Conciliation Officers (Railways) and Supervisors 
of Railway Labour 

10. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state who were 
the Conciliation Officers (Railways) and Supervisors of Railway 
labour since its creation ? 

(b) Does he consider it desirable to post an I.C.S. Officer 
or otherwise an experienced officer as Conciliation Officer 
(Railways) and Supervisor of Railway Labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The combined 
post of Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour was held only by Mr. Khaleeli, I.C.S., before 
Mr. Jhadev was appointed to it. 

(b) I do not consider it necessary that the post should be 
held only by an I.C.S. Officer or some other person who has 
had experience as an Officer of Government. 

148 

@ Output, etc. of Coal in British India and 
the States 

19. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the output of coal in British India and in the States, 
separately, for the years 1941, 1942 and 1943 ; 

(b) the stocks of coal in British India and in the States as 
on the 31st December of 1941, 1942 and 1943, and 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. 1 of 1944, 7th February 1944, pp. 26-27. 
@ Ibid., pp. 37-38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


714 


714 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) the despatches of coal, including the colliery consumption, 
from collieries in British India and in the States during 
the years 1941, 1942 and 1943 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The output of 
coal in British India and the States during 1941 and 1942 was : 

1941 1942 

British India ... 26,088,600 25,949,800 

States ... 3,260,400 3,385,100 

(b) Stocks of coal in British India on the 31st December 
1941, were 2,767,500 tons. Stocks on 31st December 1942, were 
estimated by the C.I.M. to have been 2,521,600 tons. The figures 
reported by collieries were found to be greatly exaggerated when 
they were checked by the C.I.M. Stock figures of States are not 
available. 

(c) The despatches of coal including the colliery consumption 
from collieries in British India during the years 1941 and 1942 
were 24,257,700 tons and 22,695,800 tons respectively. The 
despatches of coal excluding colliery consumption from collieries 
in the States during 1941 and 1942 were 3,243,200 tons and 
3,370,500 tons, respectively. Figures of colliery consumption in 
the States are not available. 

It is not in the public interest to disclose figures for 1943 
at present. 


149 

* Coal Position 

20. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state to what extent the present output of coal 
is below the requirements of the country ? 

(b) Is it a fact that recently the Department of the Chief 
Inspector of Mines measured the stocks of the different collieries 
as reported to him by the respective collieries, and found a large 
shortage ? If so, what was the quantity of shortage, and how 
was it explained ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is not in the 

public interest to disclose to what extent the present output of 
coal is below the requirements of the country. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I, 7th February 1944, p. 38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


715 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 715 

(b) Coal Stocks were checked at the end of May 1943, 
and a shortage of over 2 million tons was found. During 
1942 a number of collieries had given fictitious figures of 
raising probably in order to obtain a better wagon allotment. 
Proceedings have been taken against a number of collieries for 
submitting incorrect returns. Periodical checks are now made. 


150 


* The Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) 
Amendment Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) Act, 1939. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 

the Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) Act, 1939.” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


151 


@ Lifting of Ban on Employment of Women on 
Underground Work in Coal Mines 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
next motion is in the name of Mrs. Renuka Ray. She wishes 
to discuss the question of permission given to women to work 
underground in the coal mines at Jharia and other neighbouring 
areas. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
The only point I would like to submit is that the matter 
which is sought to be raised on this adjournment motion 
cannot be said to be a matter of recent occurrence. The 
original notifications under which the prohibitions were 
lifted are two; one is dated the 2nd August 1943, and the 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 7th February 1944, p. 55. 
@ Ibid. p. 93. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


716 


716 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

other is dated the 181h August 1943. The notification dated the 
24th November 1943, is merely a continuation of the notifications 
to which I have already referred and which are dated August 
1943. There has been a Session of the Legislature after the 
August notifications were issued. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : What 
was the notification ? Permitting women to work underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. I would also 
like to say that I do not wish to take my stand on these formal 
objections to the motion, and if the House desires to have this 
matter discussed I am prepared to give in. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi (Nominated Non- Official): May I say a 
word on this point ? Although the Government of India may 
have issued their notifications before the last Session of the 
Assembly, actual effect was given to them in the most important 
coal mining areas only recently. I therefore feel that the subject 
is of importance and of recent occurrence. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The 
notifications of August did not refer to Jharia and other 
neighbouring areas ? 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : No. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Were 
these areas excluded from the notifications? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. We have 
proceeded stage by stage. The first intention of the Government 
of India to lift this prohibition was dated the 2nd August 1943. 
That applied to C. P. and Berar mines. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray (Nominated Non -Official): May I point 
out that the notifications of the 2nd and 18th August 1943 
were protested against, but Government took no notice of the 
protests. In any case I have only brought up Jharia and other 
neighbouring areas and notifications relating to them came out 
after the last Session of the legislature. 

Mr. President-(The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : That 
being so and as the Honourable Member in charge has no 
objection to the motion being discussed, the motion will be taken 
up at 4 o’clock. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


717 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 717 

152 

* Conservation of Coal in India 

80. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Has the attention of the Honourable 
Member for Labour been drawn to the observations on the question 
of conservation of coal in India made by Dr. H. K. Sen, Director, 
Indian Lac Research Institute, Namkum, Ranchi, and Chairman 
of the Fuel Research Committee of the Board of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, in the course of certain lectures delivered 
in December, 1943, at the Patna University ? 

(b) Is it a fact that this question has from time to time been 
raised for the consideration of Government by different experts ? 
If so, what action has so far been taken by Government in this 
matter ? 

(c) To what extent and in what manner has the larger 
utilisation of low grade coal, particularly on the part of the 
Railways, as suggested by Dr. Sen in his aforesaid lectures, been 
carried out or is proposed to be carried out in future. 

(d) Are these questions being taken up for immediate 
consideration in view particularly of difficulties of the present 
coal position in the country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) No. 

(b) Yes. 

(i) In 1939 the Government of India passed the Coal Mines 
Stowing Act. The Slowing Board has, by assistance given 
to voluntary stowing achieved considerable success in the 
conservation of high quality coal. 

(ii) Under certain regulations under the Indian Coal Mines 
Regulations passed in 1939 restrictions were imposed on the 
dimension of workings which, apart from their safety value, have 
led to the conservation of coal. 

(c) Expert Combustion Engineers have been attached 
to the office of the Controller of Coal Distribution, one of 
whose duties will be to ensure that industries that can 
consume a lower grade of coal are not supplied with a higher 
grade. The assistance of Provincial Governments has been 
invited in conducting a survey of coal consuming factories 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. I of 1944, 10th February 1944, pp. 
203-4. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


718 


718 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

through the agency of Boiler Inspectors in consultation with 
Combustion Engineers. Government attach importance to a 
vigorous fuel economy campaign and this is already receiving the 
attention of the Coal Commissioner. Low grade coal is supplied 
to the maximum extent possible for the various services against 
Railway demands. 

(d) These questions are constantly under the attention of 
Government. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I think the Honourable Member said that 
his attention has not been drawn to the observations to which 
I refer. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My attention has 
not been drawn to the lectures to which the Honourable Member 
refers. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : But they were reported in the press. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: They might have 
been. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: But is it not expected that the Honourable 
Member should take some notice of such important observations ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not everything 
that appears in newspapers. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: But the gentleman holds rather a 
responsible position. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I would like the 
Honourable Member to send me a copy. I have not seen it. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : That is rather a pity. May I know whether 
in connection with the present coal drive he will see to it that 
as much as possible, and as high a proportion as possible, of 
the low grade coal is utilised for the purpose ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have already said 
that Government have undertaken measures in that direction. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I was wanting the Honourable Member’s 
assurance in connection with the present coal drive. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly. 

Mr. Hooseinbhoy A. Lalljee : May I ask how many experts 
have been employed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


719 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 719 


153 

* Coal Position 

82. Sir F. E. James : Will the Honourable Member for Labour 
be pleased to state: 

(a) the latest position regarding coal production in India, 
and whether there has been any increase or reduction 
in raisings since the 1st December 1943; and, if so, to 
what extent; 

(b) If he is aware that a number of colliery are not working 
at all or not working to full capacity; 

(c) what steps, with a special reference to the provision 
of labour, foodgrains, mechanisation and taxation 
adjustments; 

(d) what steps are being taken; 

(i) to deal with recalcitrant colliery owners who 
are deliberately refraining from producing the 
maximum possible; and 

(ii) to ensure the efficient distribution of coal, and to 
prevent its going into the black market, and 

(e) whether Railway collieries are working to full capacity; 
and if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Coal production 
has recently shown some improvement. Raisings in December 1943, 
showed an increase of over 20 per cent over November. January 
figures are not yet available; but it is believed that there has been 
a still further increase. 

(b) Government are not aware of any mines which can be safely 
and economically worked and which have been closed down. A 
number of mines have not been able to work to full capacity due 
to shortage of labour or machinery or to their workings having 
become flooded during the last monsoon. 

(c) (i) A Government labour force up to 10,000 men is being 
established in the Bengal and Bihar coalfields initially for work on 
quarrying or loading coal. It is hoped that after some experience it will 
work underground. The first 1,000 men have already arrived. A force 
of 1,000 men have also been provided temporarily by the military for 
coal loading. Government labour has also been provided for railway 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 10th February 1944, pp. 
205-7. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


720 


720 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

collieries and for the Singareni collieries in Hyderabad. Steps 
are also being taken to prevent colliery workers being employed 
on other works in the coalfields. 

(ii) The mining associations have agreed to provide foodgrains 
to their labour at the rate of 6 seers to the rupee. The Government 
of India are arranging with Provincial Governments to provide 
foodgrains for miners and their dependants in certain quantities. 
In addition, wages together with dearness allowance have 
been raised to 50 per cent above their 1939 level. Further, the 
Government of India are encouraging all collieries to introduce 
a production bonus based either on attendance or on out-put, 
and it is understood that many collieries have already introduced 
such a bonus. 

(iii) Every effort is being made to obtain machinery from 
abroad. Government is prepared to allow depreciation both for 
Excess Profits Tax and Income-tax on new coal cutting machinery 
now to be purchased at an annual rate of 50 per cent on the 
written down value of such machinery. The trade have been asked 
whether they will accept these terms and if so, to send details 
of the machinery they require. Their reactions arc awaited. 

(iv) A proposal to encourage production by granting bonuses 
on increased out-put free of Excess Profits Tax is under discussion 
with the trade. 

(v) Steps are also being taken to provide consumer goods, 
standard cloth and medical stores in adequate quantities. 

(d) (i) Government are not aware of any colliery owner who 
is deliberately refraining from producing the maximum possible. 
In order, however, to prevent any such possibility, a scheme is 
under consideration and is being discussed with the trade by 
the Coal Commissioner, whereby a target figure of production 
will be fixed for each colliery. It is proposed under the scheme 
that where a mine owner fails to produce the target tonnage, 
the Coal Commissioner will, unless he is satisfied that there is 
some good reason for such default, issue a formal warning to the 
mine owner that in the event of persistent default, Government 
will requisition his mines and may, if circumstances so require, 
acquire the mines outright. 

(ii) The distribution of coal is made by the Controller of Coal 
Distribution working under the direction of the War Transport 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


721 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 721 

Department in accordance with a rationing scheme approved by 
the War Resources Committee of Council. All coal despatches 
are made against licenses or priority certificates issued from 
the Controller of Coal Distribution’s office. These are based on 
the quotas fixed for each industry within the general rationing 
instructions and in line with the recommendations made by the 
Departments concerned with the various industries. Detailed day- 
to-day instructions are issued to each colliery as to the consignee 
against whom they should load. The actual loading on the part of 
the collieries receives a check at the weighment depot stations. 
The returns compiled by the depot stations are further scrutinised 
by the allotment offices. Inspectors working under the Railways 
and the Controller’s organisation make frequent checks of actual 
booking at stations of arrival and at destination stations to 
ensure that collieries have booked the wagons to the consignee 
for whom the wagon has been allotted in accordance with the 
priority certificate, and that at the destination stations the wagon 
is delivered to the proper consignee and not allowed to go into the 
open market. Several cases of coal having been sold in the black 
market have been detected and prosecutions have been launched. 

(e) Every possible step is being taken to develop the capacity 
of the Railway collieries to their full extent as quickly as 
circumstances permit. Whilst considerable progress has been made 
I am not yet in a position to state that all Railway Collieries are 
being worked to their full capacity. Present difficulties are due to : 

(i) shortage of labour, 

(ii) unavoidable delay in the introduction of mechanical plant, 

(iii) want of line capacity to move the increased output. 

All these difficulties are expected to be overcome shortly. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : In reply to part (b), the 
Honourable Member said about the collieries which are not 
working to full capacity. How many of them are represented by 
European companies ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to give 
any answer to that at this stage. I do not think we can have any 
information as to which are not working to full capacity and which 
of them are European-owned and which Indian-owned. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Will the Honourable Member 
be pleased to make an inquiry and inform this House during this 
session before the Railway Budget comes in ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


722 


722 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I do not think I can 
undertake to make such an inquiry. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Is the Honourable Member in a position to 
give the information asked for by Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan, 
not with reference to the nationality of the owning interest but 
as to whether all the collieries, big and small, are doing the work 
properly, and whether the Honourable Member’s scheme is intended 
to apply to the smaller collieries as much as to the larger ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is intended to apply 
to all collieries and with regard to the first part of the question 
put by my Honourable friend all I can say is that I am prepared 
to undertake an inquiry which will help in producing more coal. 
I do not want to hold any assize enquiry over the coal mines. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask, whenever the Honourable 
Member makes a statement that the wages of the miners have 
been increased by 50 per cent, he will also state at the same 
time that the cost of living in the colliery areas has increased 
three times the pre-war cost of living index, in order to avoid 
misunderstanding regarding the statement which he makes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I believe that this 
is a direction to me and not a question. 

Nawabzada Muhammad Liaquat Ali Khan : Is any quantity 
of coal exported from India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: No, except to Ceylon. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: Is it a fact that the Honourable Member had 
stated that women miners are not compelled to go underground 
and if he has made such a statement, may I ask how he reconciles 
that fact with the statement which he has just now made that 
the Government of India are taking steps to refuse employment 
to miners elsewhere ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not see any 

contradiction. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : In reply to part(c) of the 
question about the taxation adjustment, the Honourable Member 
has not explained what was the demand of the colliery owners — 
whether they were unwilling to pay the E. P. T. and whether they 
have wanted exemption from the Payment of E. P. T. On what 
ground do they want to be exempted from E. P. T. ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


723 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 723 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : On the ground 
that coal was a wasting asset. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani: May I know the 
quantity of coal exported to Ceylon ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have 
notice of that question. 


154 

* Publication of Certain Annual Reports 
Concerning Labour on Railways 

43. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state if the following reports have 
since been issued ? If not, why not, and when are they likely 
to be issued ? 

(i) Annual report on the working of the Payment of Wages 
Act, IV of 1936, by the Conciliation Officer (Railways) 
and Supervisor of Railway Labour, Calcutta; and 

(ii) Annual report on the working of the Hours of 
Employment Regulations on the Indian Railways 
during the year 1941-42 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The last reports 
published were for the year 1940-41. Printing of future reports 
has been temporarily discontinued due to acute shortage of 
paper. 


155 

@ The Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) 
Amendment Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Mr. President, in view of the desire expressed by some 
Honourable Members of the House that they would like to 
have some more time to consider the Bill. I do not propose 
to make the motion for consideration of the Bill which is put 
down against my name. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 10th February 1944, p. 210. 
@Ibid., p. 211. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


724 


724 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

156 

*Administrative Officers Promoted as 
Commissioned Officers in Civil Pioneer Force 
in Provinces 

111. Mr. G. Rangiah Naidu: Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) the number of Administrative Officers promoted as 
Commissioned Officers in the Civil Pioneer Force 
in various Provinces in 1941, 1942 and 1943; if not, 
why not; 

(b) if there is any subsequent law passed to restrict 
the Civil Pioneer Force Officers to apply for 
Commissioned Officers’ posts in the army; 

(c) the number of Commissioned and Administrative 
Officers recruited from among the Hindus such 
as Non-Brahmins, Backward and Scheduled 
Communities, Christians, Mahomedans and Anglo- 
Indians; 

(d) the rate of daily rations of the Pioneer and that of 
the Administrative Officers, separately; and 

(e) how many clerks who were working in the Civil 
Pioneer Force Department, were promoted as 
Administrative Officers in 1941, 1942 and 1943; if 
not, why not? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (c) and 
(c) With regard to these parts, three statements giving the 
required information separately are placed on the table of 
the House. 

These refer to 1942 and 1943; the Civil Pioneer Force 
had not been raised in 1941. 

(b) No, but if an officer undertakes service in the Civil 
Pioneer Force he is under an obligation to serve in the force 
so long as his services are required — vide Civil Pioneer Force 
Ordinance, Section 9. At present no officer can be released. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, pp. 
281-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


725 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 725 

(d) Prior to 1st March 1943, no free ration was admissible 
to Administrative Officers; since then the concession has been 
extended to them at the same rate allowed to Civil Pioneers, 
namely, at a cost of Rs. 15 per mensem per head. Of late owing 
to fluctuations in prices of foodstuffs it has not been possible to 
maintain the rate. The Provincial Government have, therefore, 
been authorised to purchase rations on the approved scale at a 
cost not greater than the prevailing market rates provided the 
purchase is made by the Provincial authorities themselves. 

STATEMENT 
Part (a) 



1942 , 


Central Provinces and Berar 

1 

1943 J 

f 6 


1942 , 


Orissa 

1943 J 

f 2 


1942 i 


Madras 

1 

1943 - 1 

f 1 

Bombay 

Nil 


Punjab 

1942 



1943 

3 

United Provinces 

1942 



1943 

1 

Bihar 

1942 



1943 

2 

Bengal 

1942 

3 


1943 

11 

North West Frontier Province 

1942 

1 


1943 

2 


Total ... 31 


It should be noted that the two classes of Officers are of quite separate status. If a 
candidate is accepted as an Administrative Officer, the Provincial Governments are 
under no obligation to elevate him to Commissioned Officer grade. In certain cases, 
however, Administrative Officers, who have proved their worth, have been granted 
Commissions as 2nd Lieutenants when vacancies occurred. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


726 


726 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


STATEMENT 
Part (c) 


Province 


Non- Brah- Back- Sche- Mus- Chris- Anglo 

Brah- mins ward duled lims tians Indians 

mins Classes Castes 


C. P. and Berar : 

Commissioned Officers 
Administrative Officers 
Orissa : 

Commissioned Officers 
Administrative Officers 
Madras : 

Commissioned Officers 
Administrative Officers 
Bombay : 

Commissioned Officers 
Administrative Officers 
Punjab'. 

Commissioned Officers 
Administrative Officers 
United Provinces : 


5 

8 

18 

34 


2 

4 

11 

8 


7 15* 


13 

9 


Commissioned Officers 

15 

4 

5 

2 

1 

Administrative Officers 

7 

2 

4 

1 


Bihar: 






Commissioned Officers 

17 

2 

5 

2 


Administrative Officers 






Bengal : 






Commissioned Officers 

31 

17 

56 

7 


Administrative Officers 






North West Frontier Province : 






Commissioned Officers 



19 



Administrative Officers 

1 


7 



TOTAL 

161 25 3 

39 

135 

32 

1 


* Includes both. 






STATEMENT 






Part (e) 


1942 

\ 


Central Provinces and Berar 



1943 

/ 


Orissa 



1942 


Nil 

2 

Madras 



1943 


1 




1942 

1 


Bombay 



1943 

/ 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 111 

L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 727 


Punjab 

1942 



1943 

3 

United Provinces 

1942 

Nil 

Bihar 

1943 

1 


1942 

2 

Bengal 

1943 

11 


1942 


North West Frontier Province 

1943 

1 


Total ... 24 


Clerks in the Civil Pioneer Force are on a relatively low rate of pay consequently 
not many of them are suitable for promotion to Administrative Officer. 

Mr. G. Rangiah Naidu : Is it not a fact that in the beginning 
of the war these Administrative Officers were allowed to apply 
for posts of Commissioned Officers if and when vacancies arose ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information on the point. 


157 

*Accommodation for Women 
Government Servants 

112. Sir F. E. James : Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) if there is a Labour Department rule to the effect that 
no Government servant earning less than Rs. 600 per 
month is entitled to accommodation in a Government 
hostel, hotel or other residence in Delhi or New Delhi 
classified as “first class accommodation”; 

(b) whether this rule applies to women Government 
servants; 

(c) if the answer to (b) is in the affirmative, if any variation 
of the rule is made in the case of women Government 
servants who live away from their homes and for whom 
the available accommodation is not suitable, or who, 
though not drawing more than Rs. 600 per month, are 
filling posts whose permanent male incumbents draw 
more than that amount; 

(d) the composition of the Accommodation Advisory Committee; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, p. 283. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


728 


728 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) if this Committee is empowered to authorise departures 
from the above rule in suitable cases; and 

(f) in how many cases this Committee has relaxed the rule 
in respect of women Government servants ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. 

(d) (i) Lt. General T. J. Hutton, C.B., M.C. 

(ii) The Honourable Mr. H. C. Prior, C.S.I., C.I.E., I.C.S. 

(iii) The Honourable Mr. E. Conran-Smith, C.S.I., CLE., I.C.S. 

(iv) Mr. G. Mackworth-Young, C.I.E., I.C.S. 

(e) No, the Committee can only make recommendations to His 
Excellency the Governor-General. 

(f) In view of the answer to (e) above, this does not arise. 

Sir F. E. James : My Honourable friend is doubtless aware of 
the hardship which the rigid application of this rule inflicts upon 
a number of perfectly good, hard-working and deserving women in 
Government service ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am aware of that. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask if the Government of India propose 
to introduce rationing of accommodation in view of the difficulty felt 
by several people ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I can give no answer 
at this stage. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : May I ask when was this 
Accommodation Advisory Committee appointed and who appointed it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
available at this stage. 


158 

Introduction of Women Labour in Coal Mines 

114. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that the 
Honourable Member has re-introduced women labour in coal mines ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, pp. 
285-86. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


729 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 729 

(b) Is it a fact that women labour in coal mines in India was 
abolished under popular pressure ? 

(c) Is it a fact that Mr. Amery, Secretary of State for India, 
evaded the question put to him recently in the House of Commons, 
as to whether women labourers were paid the same wages as men, 
and whether they were working under ground ? 

(d) Does the Honourable Member propose to make a statement 
on the two points referred to in (c) above ? 

(e) Is it a fact that man labour for coal mines is available 
in India ? If so, why is not that labour being utilized instead of 
women labour ? 

(f) Is it a fact that the women are employed because they work 
harder and are satisfied with little, though their health suffers and 
their families are broken ? If not, what are the special reasons to 
re-engage women instead of men ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Women labourers 
are now allowed to work underground in coal mines in the Central 
Provinces and Berar, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 

(b) It has been for many years the deliberate policy of the 
Government of India that women labour should not be allowed 
to be employed underground in coal mines in India. Provision to 
this end was made in the Indian Mines Act, 1923. In 1929 women 
began to be excluded from underground workings and the process 
was complete in 1937. 

(c) I have no information. 

(d) No. I made a statement on these two points in answering the 
adjournment motion moved by Mrs. Renuka Ray on 8th February. 

(c) Women have been allowed to work underground owing to 
the severe shortage of male labour. As soon as there is an assured 
male labour force sufficient to raise the quantity of coal required 
by Government, Government will consider reimposing the ban on 
the employment of women underground. Government are taking 
immediate steps to import male labour into Bengal and Bihar 
coalfields. 

(f) No. As stated in answer to (e) women have been allowed 
underground in certain coalfields because sufficient men were not 
available. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: With reference to part (b), may I 
know if it is a fact that labour of women was abolished under 
public pressure ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


730 


730 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot answer 
that question, because I do not know. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: May I know if before lifting the ban 
on women labour, the public was consulted or if the Government 
removed that ban suo motu ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government 
consulted the interests concerned. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Did they object to it? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No objection. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: With reference to part (c), does the 
Honourable Member say that he has no information whether 
women are paid equal wages with men ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The point of the 
question was whether the Secretary of State evaded the question. 
I said I have no information on the point. Women are paid the 
same wages as men. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: As regards equal payment of wages, is the 
Honourable Member aware that for men and women who work 
underground, wages are fixed on the basis of joint work of both ? 
How then does he say that men and women are paid equal wages ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If it is brought to 
the attention of the Government that methods are adopted by 
which this rule is evaded, the Government will certainly take 
action in the matter. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: Will the Honourable Member enquire 
whether there is a proper method by which they can find out 
whether men and women miners are paid equal wages ? My own 
information is that men and women are paid for joint work and, 
therefore, it is impossible to find out whether the wages are equal, 
because both of them get joint payment. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to go 
into that. I can assure the Honourable Member that Government 
are contemplating about the appointment of Inspectors whose 
duty it will be to see that the welfare measures which have been 
announced by the Government are carried out. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : In view of the fact that trade unions both 
in this country as well as Great Britain are interested in this 
question of women working underground, will the Honourable 
Member publish a sort of report on the present conditions of 
women working underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I will consider the 
suggestion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


731 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 731 

159 

* Centres for Training War Technicians 

120. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang: (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to lay on the table a statement 
mentioning the names of the centres for training war technicians, 
and the number of trainees permitted for each centre ? 

(b) How many centres have been opened in connection with : 

(i) Government institutions; 

(ii) Railway workshops; and 

(iii) private institutions ? 

(c) How many of these private institutions belong to the 
Hindus, and how many to the Mussalmans ? 

(d) What is the number of trainees sanctioned for each of 
these categories ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement® 
is laid on the table. 

(b) (i) 125 [including centres belonging to Indian States (25), 
Municipal Corporations (4), Municipal Committees (4), District 
Boards (5)]. (ii) 26. (iii) 119. 

(c) and (d). The private training centres are attached to 
industrial concerns, technical institutions, etc., and in many 
cases are managed by limited companies, Board of Trustees, etc. 
In such cases it is not possible to say without detailed inquiries 
whether they are predominantly Hindu or Muslim owned. There 
are seven training centres with 763 seats, which are clearly 
owned by Muslims, and 27 centres with 5,184 seats which are 
clearly owned by Hindus. 


160 

f Deputy Directors, Senior Regional 
Inspectors, Regional Inspectors and 
Technical Inspectors 

121. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang: (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state the number of Deputy Directors, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, pp. 
290-91. 

@ Statement is omitted. — Ed. 

t Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, p. 297. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


732 


732 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Senior Regional Inspectors, Regional Inspectors and Technical 
Inspectors ? 

(b) How many of these are Mussalmans ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) The numbers 


are as follows : 

Deputy Directors of Training ... 2 

Senior Regional Inspectors of Technical Training 7 

Regional Inspectors of Technical Training ... 15 

Technical Inspectors ... 8 


The fifteen Regional Inspectors include seven, who are 
part-time and four who are honorary officers. The 8 Technical 
Inspectors include three part-time officers. 

(b) None. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : None of these are Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said so. 

161 

* Bevin Boys sent to England 
for Training 

122. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang: (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state how many Bevin Boys have 
already been sent to England for training ? 

(b) How many of these are Mussalmans ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 563 . 

(b) 110. 


162 

@ Chairmen of National Service 
Labour Tribunals 

123. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang: (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the total number of Chairmen 
of National Service Labour Tribunals ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 16th February 1944, p. 297. 
@ Ibid., p. 297. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


733 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 733 

(b) How many of these are Mussalmans ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Ten. Of these 
four are whole-time Chairmen; and the remaining six are part- 
time Chairmen who hold other whole-time appointments either 
under the Central or the Provincial Government. 

(b) One. 


163 

* Qualifications and Duties of 
Coal Commissioner 

142. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please refer to his reply given in the Legislative 
Assembly on the 17th November 1943, to question No. 250, that 
“the principal factor that contributed to the shortage of coal is 
undoubtedly the shortage of labour”, and state why it was deemed 
necessary by Government to appoint a Coal Commissioner to 
help to increase coal raising when the primary cause of shortage, 
according to his above-mentioned reply, was shortage of labour ? 

(b) What will be the duties of the Coal Commissioner, and what 
are the qualifications of the person appointed ? Are Government 
satisfied that no Indian of the requisite qualifications is available ? 

(c) What will be the official relations of the Coal Commissioner 
with the Labour Department, the Railway Department and any 
other Department of the Government, respectively ? 

(d) What emoluments will the coal Commissioner be entitled to ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member for War Transport has agreed to answer the question 
on the 24th February 1944. 


164 

@ Measures for Increasing Coal Output 

273. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the measures adopted to increase the output of 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 21st February 1944, p. 345. 
@ Ibid., Vol. II of 1944, 1st March 1944, p. 719. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


734 


734 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

coal to meet the bare necessities like train service and maintenance 
of indigenous industries ? 

(b) Is it a fact that service in the mines (coal) is highly 
injurious to health of the miners ? 

(c) Is it a fact that no special amenities are offered to coal 
miners to attract efficient and skilled workers to the service ? 

(d) Is it a fact that miners and their families are housed in 
insufficient and insanitary surroundings ? 

(e) Is it a fact that no medical aid and facilities for education 
of children are available in the coal mining areas ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I would refer 
the Honourable member to my reply to Sir F. E. James starred 
question No. 82 on 10th February, which gives the principal 
measures which Government have adopted to increase the output 
of coal. 

(b) No. Mining is a dangerous occupation but not necessarily 
injurious to health. 

(c) No. Coal miners have been offered food at concession 
rates and Government are taking steps to increase the supply of 
consumer goods in the coal fields, it is proposed to increase the 
amenities offered to coal miners by measures taken under the 
new Coal mines Labour welfare Fund Ordinance. 

(d) In the Jharia and Raniganj coalfields housing consists of 
pucca buildings built in accordance with specifications laid down 
by the Jharia and Asansol Mines Boards of Health. In other 
coalfields the housing is arranged at the miners’ discretion for 
the resident labour which is usually very small. Government 
are, however, not satisfied with the present arrangements for 
housing and sanitation in coalfields and schemes to improve 
these are being prepared under the Coal mines Labour welfare 
Fund Ordinance. 

(e) Medical aid and educational facilities which at present 
exist are not very satisfactory. Schemes to improve these facilities 
are being prepared under the Coal mines Labour welfare Fund 
Ordinance. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Will the Government of India make some 
report to the Legislature on the conditions in coal mines with 
regard to housing and other conditions and also the improvements 
made by Government, and place that report before the House ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


735 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 735 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is nothing 
to report upon, so far as I can see. We have just begun the work 
and if after some time this Ordinance has been in operation my 
Honourable friend wants to have a report I shall be quite prepared 
to consider the matter. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : The House is greatly interested in this matter 
and would like to have information about the conditions there and 
the improvements made. Will they therefore, make a report to the 
House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have answered that 
already. 


165 

* The Factories (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the factories 
Act, 1934. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The question 
is: 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend the 

factories Act, 1934.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

166 

@ Scheduled Castes Subjected to 
Forced Labour and Begar 

Rao Bahadur N. Siva Raj : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state : 

(a) whether protection and welfare of agricultural labour is 
the function of the Labour department of the Government 
of India ; 

(b) whether he is aware of the resolution passed at the annual 
Session of the All-India Scheduled Castes Federation held at 
Cawnpore on the 29th and 30th January, 1944, condemning 
the system of begar forced labour prevalent all over India 
and of which the Schedued Castes are the only victims; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944,3rd March 1944, p. 798. 
@ Ibid., 7th March 1944, pp. 903-4. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


736 


736 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) what action Government propose to take to stop the system 
of begar; and 

(d) whether the Government of India propose to appoint a 
Committee to investigate into the system, with a view to 
abolishing the same by law ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The subject falls 
under the Labour department, among departments of the Government 
of India; the general subject is one included in the list of concurrent 
subjects in part II of list III of the Seventh- Schedule to the Government 
of India act, 1935. 

(b) No formal communication has been received from the All-India, 
Scheduled Castes Federation. 

(c) Government of India has not considered the question so far. 

(d) The suggestion will be considered in due course. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Is the Honourable Member aware 
that in the Central Provinces and berar this begar, has been abolished ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
on the point. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : May I know if it is not a fact that His Excellency 
the Crown Representative and his agents have been impressing upon 
the state administrations that this sort of forced labour should be 
discontinued, and that this has led to very beneficial results in certain 
parts of the country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am glad to have the 
information. 

Dr. Sir Zia uddin Ahmad : May I know whether the Honourable 
Member is aware of the fact that in the United Provices, out of what 
they call the cultivators, 35 per cent are village labourers and they do 
not get any benefit on account of high prices. The cultivators do not 
get them in kind. They arc paid in money and they find it exceedingly 
difficult 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : What is the question ? 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : The question is whether the 
Honourable Member is aware of this fact that the cultivators 

President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The Honourable 
Member has made a long speech. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: I want to know whether the 
Honourable Member is aware of it and what action do the Government 
propose to take. That is the question. 

(No answer) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


737 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 737 

167 


* Extension of Activities of the Conciliation 
Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour 

394. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to state if any decision has 
been taken in the matter of extension of activities of the 
Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of Railway 
Labour, to Railways other than those with headquarters at 
Calcutta, as said in reply to my starred question No. 131, 
asked on the 13th November last? if not, when is it likely 
to be taken ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A decision on 
the question has been postponed pending consideration of 
wider proposals regarding the machinery for settlement of 
trade disputes in central undertakings generally. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Will that take place after the 
war is over or will it be introduced now ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is not an 
inference which is justified by the answer I have given. 


168 


@ Scheduled Caste Commissioned Officers 
in the United Provinces Civil 
Pioneer Force 

415. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel: With reference to his 
answer to starred question No. Ill regarding Commissioned 
Officers in the Civil Pioneer Force, asked by Mr. G. 
Rangiah Naidu on the 15th February, 1944, will the 
Honourable Member for Labour be pleased to state the 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 14th March 1944, pp. 1024-25. 
@ Ibid., p. 1036. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


738 


738 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

names of the scheduled Caste commissioned Officers in the 
United Provinces Civil Pioneer Force ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A statement is laid 
on the table of the House. 

Statement showing particulars of Scheduled Caste candidates 
appointed as Commissioned Officers in the United Provinces 
Civil Pioneer Force Units. 


Name of Scheduled Castes 

Date and 

Present 

Total No. 

No. of 

Officer 

Rank of 

Rank 

of Officers 

Scheduled 


first 


appointed 

Caste 


appointment 



Officers 


appointed. 


1. Nand Lai Kureel 

19-5-43 

2nd 

Lieut 

2nd 

Lieut. 

28 

4 

2. S. K. Mulick 

3-7-43 

do. 

do. 



3. K. B. Bhale Rao 

19-11-43 

do. 

do. 




4. Kshetra Pal Singh Sagar 29-1-44 do. do. 


169 

* Communal Composition of Civil Pioneer 
Force Clerks 

416. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) the total number of clerks in the Civil Pioneer Force 
in various Provinces; and 

(b) how many of these clerks are Hindus, Muslims, 
Scheduled castes, Christians and anglo Indians, 
separately in various provinces ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Many units are 
in a war area and others are with the army at outstations and 
that, therefore, it is not possible in these circumstances to collect 
the information asked for. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 16th March 1944, p. 1037. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


739 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 739 

170 

* Disparity between Unorthodox and Orthodox 
Quarters in New Delhi 

493. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour please state : 

(a) whether the plinth and ground area, including outhouses 
and garden, is much larger in the case of unorthodox clerks’ 
quarters than in the corresponding type of orthodox clerks’ 
quarters (especially in the Minto Road Area), so much so that, 
while the tenants of unorthodox quarters raise a good crop of 
vegetables, lay flower beds, rear poultry, can keep milch, cattle 
and have badminton or tennis ground, there is not enough open 
space in orthodox quarters even to lay charpois for an average 
family during summer, and that the roofs of the “D” and “E” 
orthodox types are so low that they become heated very quickly 
during summer and cannot be occupied; 

(b) whether the quality of materials, viz., timber, bolts, 
etc., used in the construction of an unorthodox quarter and the 
furniture supplied therein are much superior to those used in the 
orthodox type of quarters, the workmanship also being superior; 

(c) whether the following special amenities and fittings provided 
in unorthodox quarters are absent in orthodox quarters : — 

(i) gardens and shrubs, 

(ii) servants’ quarters, 

(iii) iron grates in fireplaces, 

(iv) wall almirahs, 

(v) fittings for curtains and rings for hanging chicks, 

(vi) wash basin in bath rooms, 

(vii) unfiltered water connection in compound, and 

(viii) Venetian window shutters in the “D” and “E” orthodox 
quarters; 

(d) whether no cattle sheds are allowed to be constructed in 
orthodox quarters below the category “B” while they are allowed 
in unorthodox quarters; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, pp. 1217-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


740 


740 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(e) whether in the Public Works Department Enquiry Offices, 
more prompt attention is given to complaints from unorthodox 
quarters and preference is also shown to unorthodox quarters 
in the matter of annual repairs and general maintenance, etc.; 

(f) whether the cost of maintenance of an unorthodox 
quarter is much more than that of an orthodox quarter, and 
that, while return on capital in the case of an unorthodox 
quarter is comparatively negligible, the orthodox quarters 
provide adequate revenue to Government; 

(g) if the reply to (a) be in the affirmative, the reasons 
for discriminating between unorthodox and orthodox types of 
quarters in regard to amenities referred to and for charging 
rent on the same basis, i.e., ten per cent for both types; and 

(h) whether Government are prepared to amend their 
Fundamental Rules so as to make them conform to strict 
business principles ; if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) The answer 
to first part of the question is in affirmative and to the latter 
in the negative. 

(b) No. 

(c) yes so far as items No. (i), (iii) , (iv), (v), (vi) and (viii) 
are concerned. A room for servant exists in other than D and E 
orthodox quarters and unfiltered water connection is provided 
in the open compound outside the orthodox quarters. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) No. 

(f) The answer to the first part of the question is in the 
affirmative. As regards the second part, the position is as 
follows : 

Government servants occupying quarter of both the types 
pay standard rent or 10 per cent, of their pay, whichever is 
less, but the standard rents of orthodox quarters being lower, 
a larger number of occupants pay the standard rent. 

(g) The amenities provided in the two types of quarters are 
in accordance with the standard designs which were prepared 
to suit the orthodox and unorthodox styles of living. Rent is 
charged according to rules. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


741 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 741 

(h) No. Government provide accommodation at concessional 
rates as laid down in the rules, which cannot be varied to suit the 
varying circumstances of officers. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I know if it is a part of the rule to 
provide water in the compound of the orthodox quarters and in the 
case of the unorthodox quarters only in the quarter itself? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That must be so. 

171 

* Promotion of Qualified Copyholders and 
Revisers as Readers in Government of 
India Presses 

501. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : (a) With reference 
to the reply to part (d) of starred question No. 231 put by Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi, on the 25th February 1944, regarding 
promotion of Copyholders and Revisers as Readers in the Government 
of India Press, will the Honourable the Labour Member kindly state 
whether the ‘ anomaly’ is due to the fact that departmental men 
passing in earlier dates do not get any preference whatsoever over 
those who pass in the second chance in subsequent examinations ? 

(b) Is he aware that those who pass the examination earlier stand 
distinctly higher in order of merit and efficiency and experience in 
Readers’ posts ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the present anomaly and the hardship that 
existed before the promulgation of the existing rule can not be 
removed unless the date of passing is accepted as a citerion for 
determining the position of the candidates for Readers’ posts ? 

(d) Do Government propose to promote the candidates to readers’ 
posts on the basis of seniority cum efficiency, i.e., according to 
seniority but in order of the dates of passing the examination ? If 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) No. The earlier passing of the examination does not necessarily 
mean higher merit. 

(c) There is no anomaly in the case of persons who qualify at the 
Readership examination in the first or second chance. As regards men 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, pp. 1224-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


742 


742 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

who qualify in the third chance, certain anomalies have arisen 
and the question of removing them is now under consideration, 
as stated in reply to part (d) of Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi’s 
question No. 231. 

(d) The Readership examination is a qualifying examination and 
every candidate is permitted to avail of two chances. Government 
do not propose to regulate promotion in order of the dates of 
passing the examination. 


172 

* Biharis as Assistant Geologists 

@ 504. Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) if it is not a fact that in the Department of Geological 
Survey of India vacancies are fillled on the basis of quota fixed 
for each Province; 

(b) the quota fixed for Bihar for the posts of Assistant Geologists ; 

(c) how many Biharis are working at present as Assistant 
Geologists or in a higher capacity ; and 

(d) the quotas for different Provinces ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) Information is being collected and will be laid on the table 
of the House. 

(d) Does not arise. 


173 

f Promotion of Qualified Copyholders and 
Revisers as Readers in Government of 
India Presses 

@ 506. Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall: Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state: 

(a) whether it is a fact that the case of amending the rule 
regarding the promotion of qualified Copyholders and 
Revisers as Reders in Government of India Presses is 
under consideration; 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, p. 1226. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent, 
t Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, p. 1226. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


743 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 743 

(b) whether it is a fact that the views of all the Government 
of India Presses, their Works Committees and Workers’ 
Union which were invited, are also under examination; 

(c) whether it is a fact that some qualified Copyholders who 
passed the Readership Examination in the year 1936, 
according to the present rules, have been superseded 
by those who qualified, after four years (in 1940); and 

(d) whether it is a fact that these men who passed 
the examination at a sufficiently earlier date, were 
superseded by those who qualified after a long period ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. Attention 
is invited to the reply given on the 25th February 1944, to Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi’s question No. 231. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) and (d). No. As the Rules in force till 1940 required re- 
qualifying, no supersession was involved. 

174 

* Transfer of Languages Section of Bureau of 
Public Information to Lahore 

140. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali: (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state the area of the space allotted 
to the Languages Section (excluding officers) in Lahore, and the 
total strength of the staff accommodated therein ? Do Government 
consider this adequate for the efficiency of the staff? Was not 
even this much space available in Delhi ? 

(b) Are Government aware that the lavatory has been 
provided for the staff and the improvised urinal has no drainage 
arrangement ? 

(c) What is the strength of the staff belonging to the Brureau 
of Public Information which has been transferred from Delhi 
to Lahore ? Of them how many were provided with quarters in 
Delhi, and how may in Lahore ? How many of them have so far 
surrendered their quarters in Lahore on grounds of inadequate 
accommodation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) An area of 4,587 Sq. 
ft. was allotted to this office. The ministerial staff consist of 48 persons. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, p. 1227. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


744 


744 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
Second part — Yes. 

Third part — No. 

(b) The answer to the first half of the question is in the 


affirmative and to the second half in the negative. 

(c) Strength of the staff that moved from Delhi ... 35 

Number of the Staff provided with quarters in Delhi ... 7 

Number of the Staff provided with quarters in Lahore ... 18 

Number of the Staff that surrendered accommodation in 5 
Lahore on grounds of inadequacy. 


175 


* Delays at Sales Office of 
Manager of Publications, Delhi 

141. Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state if it is a fact that a person has to wait 
for hours for publications at the counter of the Sales Office of 
the office of the Manager of Publications, Old Bihar ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The reply is in 
the negative. 


176 


@ Election of Members to the 
Standing Committee for the 
Labour Department 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir I move : 

“That this Assembly do proceed to elect, in such manner as 
the Honourable the president may direct, five non-official Members 
to serve on the Standing Committee to advise on subjects, with 
which the Labour Department is concerned.” 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 17th March 1944, p. 1227. 
@ Ibid., p. 1235. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


745 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 745 

177 

* Scheme for Control of Price and Distribution 
of Coal, etc. 

577. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will the 
Honourable Member for Labour please stale if it is a fact that a 
scheme for control of distribution and price control of coal and 
for encouragement of increase of output has been made ? If so, 
will the Honourable Member be pleased to state and lay on the 
table as well a statement giving detail of the policy forming the 
background of this scheme ? 

(b) Is it a scheme which does away with the middlemen 
between colliery owners and actual consumers ? If so, what are 
the advantages accruing in consequence of the scheme, and 
the disadvantages created by the scheme to the present coal 
suppliers ? 

(c) Why should a bonus be paid to collieries for excess raising 
of coal, or why should a commission of 0-4-0 be paid by collieries 
and consumers to any middleman when collieries can supply to 
consumers directly ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. A 
statement® regarding the scheme, is placed on the table. The 
scheme consists of five parts : (a) an estimation of the monthly 
output of each colliery, (b) the formation of a Coal Control 
Board to advise Government on the working of the scheme, (c) 
the distribution of all output by Government at fixed prices, 

(d) the encouragement of production by the grant of bonuses 
on increased output free of Excess Profits Tax, and (c) control 
of mining operations. The intention behind the scheme is (i) to 
ensure that all the coal available is properly distributed at fair 
prices to the consumers who require it and (ii) to afford every 
encouragement to the maximum production of coal. 

(b) No. The second part of the question docs not arise. 

(c) The bonus is paid to encourage production. The amount 
of the commission has not been fixed. It will be fixed by the 
Government of India. A middleman will only be employed it 
a colliery and consumers mutually agree that he should be 
employed. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944,22nd March 1944, p. 1393. 
@ Statement omitted. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


746 


746 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


178 


* Levy of Cess on Coal for Bonus 
Fund Purposes 

@ 578. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : Will 

the Honourable Member for Labour please state whether it 
is a fact that cess will be levied on coal for creating a fund 
to meet the bonus to be paid to collieries ? Is it not a double 
tax on consumers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The answer to 
the first part is that that is the intention. As regards the 
second point the imposition of the cess would mean in all 
probability a tax on consumers — but the bonus is itself for 
the benefit of consumers as tending to increase the production 
of coal which at present is insufficient for consumer’s needs. 


179 


f Deduction from Overtime of Muslim Employees 
of the Government of India Press, New Delhi, for 

Friday Prayers 

587. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon (on behalf of Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi): (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact 
that one hour is deducted from the Overtime of the Muslim 
employees of the Government of India Press, New Delhi, who 
go on Friday to offer Friday Congregation Prayers ? 

(b) Is it a fact that previously no deduction was made for 
this one hour? 

(c) Have Government considered the advisability of 
resuming the old practice or in the alternative to consider 
that one hour as a part of the casual leave or leave on 
average pay ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 22nd March 1944, p. 1395. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent, 
f Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 22nd March 1944, pp. 1398-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


747 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 747 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Prior to 1931, no deduction was made, but this practice 
was irregular and was abolished. 

(c) In view of the reply to part (b), the other questions 
do not arise. Under the Indian factories Act, an employee is 
entitled to overtime for the hours worked in excess of the normal 
working hours fixed under the Act. In calculating overtime, 
prayer intervals are deducted from the total hours worked by 
the employee. 

Seth Yusoof Abdoola Haroon : Does the Honourable 
Member know that this trouble has arisen because the 
Government of India have advanced the time by one hour? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think so. 

Seth Yusoof Abdoola Haroon : Docs the Honourable 
Member suggest that prayer time can be changed because 
Government have changed their time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not a question 
of prayer time being changed. The question relates to whether 
prayer time should be allowed as overtime work. 


180 


* Wages in the Government of India Press, 

New Delhi, for work on Sundays and 
Other Holidays 

588. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon (on behalf of Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi) : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that 
on the instructions of the Manager of the Government of India 
Press, New Delhi, employees come on Sundays and other 
festival holidays to cope with the urgent work of Government 
but after the day’s work they are given only four hours’ wages, 
but previously twelve hours’ wages used to be paid to them ? 

(b) Have Government considered the advisability of resuming 
the old practice of paying twelve hours’ charges to those who receive 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 22nd March 1944, p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


748 


748 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regular pay after working for eight hours on closed days, or at 
least increase four hours to eight hours ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The reply to 
the first part of the question is in the affirmative. As regards 
the second part, in accordance with the Indian Factories Act, 
men working on Sundays are allowed, in lieu of a compensatory 
holiday, an extra payment for 4 hours’ work, that is, their day’s 
pay plus and additional 50 per cent. For attendance on other 
closed holidays, an additional 25 per cent, of their day’s pay is 
allowed. Twelve hours’ extra wages (that is, a day’s pay plus 
150 per cent.) instead of the 4 hours’ permissible were paid by 
mistake some years ago. 

(b) No. 


181 

* Non-Supply of Stools to Lino-Machine Coolies 

589. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon (on behalf of Qazi 
Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi): (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to slate if it is a fact that the coolies 
who are working Lino Machine, are not provided with stools and 
they have to keep standing throughout the day and that they 
submitted applications, but no attention has been paid to them ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the work of Barmen is taken from the 
Coolies and that the posts of Barmen have been abolished ? 

(c) Have Government considered the advisability of removing 
these grievances of the coolies ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The coolies 
working Lino Type Machines do not really work standing. They 
are required to release obstructions in the distributor bar of 
the Lino machines, for which purpose they have to climb on 
Lino machines for attending to them. A stool would, therefore, 
be useless for the purpose of their duty. For resting labourers 
usually sit on the floor. 

(b) and (c). There arc no posts of Barmen in the Government 
of India Presses and no such post ever existed in the New Delhi 
Press. The questions do not, therefore, arise. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 22nd March 1944, p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


749 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 749 

182 


* Labour Adviser to the 
Labour Department 

@ 627. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state if the post of Labour Adviser to the 
Labour Department is a new creation ? If so, why is it created ? 

(b) If it is an already existing post, who was the last 
incumbent, and on what salary ? 

(c) Is it a fact that Mr. B. L. Waters has been appointed 
Labour adviser to the Labour Department of the Central 
Government ? What is his salary and overseas allowance and 
allowances, if any ? 

(d) Is it a war measure that necessitated the appointment 
of Mr. Waters ? What was he drawing as salary in the British 
Ministry of Labour and National Service ? 

(e) Has he any previous experience of Indian conditions ? If 
so, under what Head of the Government of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
post of Labour Adviser was created in December 1942. It was 
held by Mr. D. T. Jack till June 1943 and is now held by Mr. 
B. L. Waters. Mr. Jack’s salary was Rs. 2,750 a month. 

The Labour Adviser is to advise on all important matters 
of labour legislation and administration, and in particular the 
manner in which labour problems that are under consideration or 
which may arise, have been or are being dealt with in England. 

(c) Yes. Mr. Waters draws a salary of Rs. 2,000 p.m. He is 
not paid any overseas of other monthly allowance. 

(d) Yes. At the time of his appointment to his present 
post, Mr. Waters was drawing a salary of £880 in the scale of 
£850 — 30 — 1,000 per annum in the British Ministry of Labour 
and National Service. 

(e) No, Sir. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, pp. 
1559-60. 

@ The question hour for today having been dispensed with, answers to these questions 
were, in pursuance of convention, laid on the table of the House . — Ed. of D. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


750 


750 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

183 

* Want of Light in certain North Block Clerks’ 
Lavatories 

629. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) With reference to his answer 
to starred question No. 432, dated the 30th March, 1943, will 
the Honourable the Labour Member please state whether he is 
aware that the clerks’ lavatory adjacent to the officers’ lavatory 
on the first floor of the North Block facing the north-western 
court-yard has been without a light for more than a year ? 

(b) Is he aware that there is a clerks’ lavatory facing the 
southwestern inner court-yard of the North Block, the frontage 
of which is now closed due to formation of some rooms, and 
there is a narrow dark passage leading to this lavatory, and 
that this lavatory has hardly ever had a light during the last 
one year or more ? 

(c) If an inspection is made of the other clerks’ lavatories 
in the North Block, or in other buildings of the Government of 
India, is the Honourable Member aware that he will find mostly 
the same unsatisfactory state of affiars, although apparently the 
C.P.W.D. authorities have informed him that such is not the case ? 

(d) Is the Honourable Member prepared to pay surprise visits 
to some of these lavatories, without informing the C.P.W.D. 
authorities, say, once in six months or so, in order to judge 
the veracity of the statements made to him by the C.P.W.D. 
authorities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (b) and (c). 
Yes, I am aware of the unsatisfactory state of lighting in some 
of the clerks’ lavatories in the North Block of the Secretariat 
buildings. The position is as follows: 

Electric bulbs are invariably provided in clerks’ lavatories. 
Replacements are provided as usual and all possible 
means are adopted to ensure their safety. Despite the fact 
that locks are used, the bulbs are very often stolen. The 
records show that since October last about 48 bulbs with 
an equal number of bulb locks awere replaced in six clerks 
labvatories in the North Block, out of which only 2 or 3 bulbs 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, p. 1561. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


751 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 751 

are intact while the rest have been stolen. In the ordinary 
course, only 15 to 16 bulbs should have been supplied during 
this period on all points (taking the average life of a bulb at 
1000 hours). As the provision of lamp locks has not prevented 
thefts, the Electrical Engineer is arranging to provide a special 
type of fittings to electric points in these lavatories. It is hoped 
that this arrangement will prevent thefts and improve lighting 
in the clerks’ lavatories. 

(d) In view of the measures that are now proposed to be 
taken, I do not consider surprise visits by me necessary. 

184 

* Lawns in front of Orthodox Clerks’ Quarters 
in D.I.Z. Area, New Delhi 

630. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) With reference to his answer 
to starred question No. 232, dated the 171h November, 1943, 
will the Honourable the Labour Member please state whether 
he is aware that the C.P.W.D. Administration have supplied him 
with wrong information about the lawns in front of the orthodox 
clerks’ quarters in the D.I.Z. Area of New Delhi ? 

(b) If the reply to (a) be in the negative, is he prepared to 
inspect some of these lawns without taking any P. W.D. officials 
with him and find out the correctness or otherwise of the 
information supplied to this House through him by the C.P.W.D. 
Administration ? 

(c) If the reply to part (b) be in the negative, will the 
Honourable Member please state : 

(i) whether in every case beyond the outer wall of the 
quarters, there is a road on the other side of which the 
laws begin ; 

(ii) whether it is a fact that the edge of these lawns runs 
parallel to the walls of the quarters, i.e., in a straight 
line as far as the quarters were built in a straight line 
or follows any turn, etc., but always running parallel, 
in a regular manner, to the walls of the quarters ; 

(iii) whether this straight alignment of the edges of the lawns is 
still maintained ; if so, the width of the said roads, viz., between 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, p. 1561. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


752 


752 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the quarters and the lawns, as originally fixed and laid 
on, and their width at the corners or in front of most 
of the quarters in the Baird Square, Havelock Square, 
etc.; 

(iv) whether any officer of the C.P.W.D. himself visited all 
the squares, etc., in order to see the condition of the 
lawns; if so, who was that officer; or whether the matter 
was left in the hands of some petty subordinates; and 

(v) whether the Honourable member is prepared to issue 
instructions to the C.P.W.D. officers to inspect the places 
about which complaints are brought to light, personally 
and invite half a dozen or so tenants of each locality and 
find out their grievances, if any, taking their signatures 
on a report on the matters in question ? If not, why 
not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). No. I 
have no reason to believe that the information furnished to me 
was incorrect. 

(c) (i) Yes, generally. 

(ii) The lawns usually run parallel to the walls of quarters. 

(iii) The alignment of the edges of the lawns is still maintained 
and the width of paths is about 8 feet. 

(iv) The Sub-Divisional officer goes round to see the lawns 
frequently and the Superintendent, Horticultural Operations, 
inspects them occasionally. 

(v) Complaints, when made, are attended to by the C.P.W.D. 
officers and no special instructions appear to be necessary. 

185 

* Copyholders and Revisers passing Readers’ 
Examination of Government of India Press, 

New Delhi 

646. Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that some Copyholders and Revisers who 
passed the Readership Examinationin the year 1942, in thethird 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, pp. 1567-68. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


753 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 753 

chance (grace chance), in the Government of India Press, 
New Delhi, were given to understand that if they would 
succeeded in examination they would remain junior to all 
qualified men who passed in the first and second chances ; 

(b) whether the existing rule was in force in the month of May, 
1942, when the examination was held in the Government 
of India Press, New Delhi ; and 

(c) whether the rule regarding the promotion of qualified 
Copyholders and Readers is going to be amended very 
shortly in such a way that those men who passed the 
examination in the third chance are now going to be 
declared senior to all ; if so, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) The attention of the Honourable Member is invited to the 
reply given to parts (d) and (f) of Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi’s 
starred question No. 231 and part (c) of Mr. Muhammad Hussain 
Choudhury’s question No. 501. 


186 

* High-handedness of Landlords in Delhi 

647. Mr. Kailash Biliari Lall : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) if the attention of Government has been drawn to the article 
published in the Hindi weekly named Vaishya Samachar 
of Delhi under the heading “Delhi me Makandaron ki 
Nadirshahi” in its issue of the 12th March, 1944 ; 

(b) if Government have ascertained that actually influential 
and rich houseowners, resort to such tyrannies as have 
been described in the article, in question, in alliance with 
the police officers ; 

(c) if it is a fact, that, as stated in the paper, the house rent 
in the Maliwars Mohalla in Old Delhi has gone so high 
as from Rs. 9 to Rs. 21/4/-; 

(d) if Government propose to get the allegations described in 
the paper equired into, and to take suitable steps to stop 
the high handedness of the manner alleged with regard 
to the question of house rent in Old Delhi; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, pp. 1571-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


754 


754 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(e) the difficulties in the way of Government in applying 
the same law to Old Delhi which regulates and controls 
the rent in New Delhi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Enquiries are 
being made of the local authorities and a reply will be laid on 
the table of the House at an early date. 

187 

* Representation of Scheduled Castes in Food 
Department 

648. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Food Member be pleased to state the communal representation 
including that of Scheduled Castes in the Gazetted and Non- 
Gazetted Staff of the Food Department and the Executive and 
Provincial organizations thereunder ? 

(b) Are Government satisfied with the present representation 
of Scheduled Castes in the Food Department ? If not, what 
practical steps do they propose to take in order to secure their 
due representation in the said Department? 

(c) Do Government propose to reduce the educational 
qualifications for the above Gazetted and Non-Gazetted posts in 
the case of Scheduled Castes ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Sir Jwala Prasad Srivastava : 


(a) I. Gazetted Posts : 

Europeans ... ... ... 22 

Anglo-Indians ... ... ... 1 

Hindus other than Scheduled Castes ... 60 

Muslims ... ... ... 22 

Other Minority Communities ... ... 8 

Scheduled Castes ... ... ... 1 

II. Non-Gazetted Posts : 

Europeans ... ... ... 3 

Anglo-Indians ... ... ... 3 

Hindus other than Scheduled Castes ... 445 

Muslims ... ... ... 149 

Other Minority Communities ... ... 52 

Scheduled Castes ... ... ... 1 


^Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, pp. 1571-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


755 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 755 

(b) The reply to the 1st part is in the negative. With regard to 
the second part, I would invite the Honourable Member’s attention 
to Home Department Resolution No. 23/5/42-Ests. (S), dated the 
11th August, 1943, under which 8 V 3 per cent of all vacancies to be 
filled by direct recruitment are to be reserved for Scheduled Caste 
candidates and certain concessions in regard to age limit and fees 
have been granted to such candidates. Vacancies are advertised 
in important newspapers for the information of all candidates. 

(c) No. According to the orders issued under the Home 
Department Resolution, to which I have referred, a minimum 
standard of qualifications has to be prescribed in all cases and 
the reservation of vacancies for members of Scheduled Castes is 
subject to this condition. 


188 

* Hardships suffered by Tenants in Old Delhi 
and Shahdara 

191. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali: (a) Is the Honourable 
Member for Labour aware of the hardships suffered by the tenants 
in Old Delhi and Shahdara ? 

(b) Are Government aware that some rich landlords have 
increased the rent by 150 per cent during the last two years and 
in spite of the applications of the Punjab Urban and Rural Act ? 

(c) Is it a fact that some landlords have cut off water connections 
and electric connections with a view to bring pressure on tenants 
to vacate the premises or increase the rent ? 

(d) Do Government propose to extend to Old Delhi and Shahdara 
the provisions of Rent Control Act lately applied for protection of 
New Delhi tenants ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, gnerally. 

(b) and (c). I am aware that increases in rent have taken 
place, but under the Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1941, 
these are matters for the decision of the courts. 

(d) There are administrative difficulties in the extension of the 
New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939, to the areas in question 
but the Government of India have other measures under consideration. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1944, 27th March 1944, pp. 1571-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


756 


756 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

189 

* Irregularities reported under Payment of 
Wages Act against East Indian Railway 

54. Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state the nature of irregularities 
reported by the Inspector under the Payment of Wages Act 
against the East Indian Railway since 1938, and the action 
taken thereon by the Government, by the Railway Board and 
by the Railway Administration, respectively ? If no action has 
been taken, what are the reasons therefor ? 

(b) Have any of these irregularities been repeated in reports 
from year to year ? 

(c) What action has been taken on the irregularities referred 
to in part (b) ? If not, why not ? 

(d) What are the reasons for not taking proceedings under 
the Payment of Wages Act against the Railway Administration 
for the repetition of irregularities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) 

Information is being obtained and will be placed on the table 
of the House in due course. 

(c) The irregularities detected were brought to the notice of 
Railway Administration for rectification. 

(d) Government does not consider it necessary to proceed 
formally under the Act when satisfactory settlement in individual 
cases can be otherwise achieved. 

190 

@ Technical Experts Recruited for 
Training of War Technicians 

222. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the number of technical experts 
recruited by the Government of India for the training of War 
Technicians ? What is their monthly emoluments including salary 
and other allowances ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 358. 
@ Ibid., 25th February 1944, p. 539. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


757 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 757 

(b) What is the total number of centres of War Technicians, 
and how many of these are in close association with Engineering 
Colleges and Railway Workshops ? 

(c) How many of these expert Instructors are posted in War 
Technician Centres associated with Engineering Colleges and 
Railway Workshops ? 

(d) Now that the Indians have already been trained, can these 
Instructors be more usefully employed elsewhere ? 

(e) Is it a fact that these expert Instructors have also been 
allotted a duty of inspecting other centres in addition to teaching 
work ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Apparently the 
reference is to British Specialist Instructors. 

100 British Specialist Instructors were recruited, of whom 
87 are now in service. Their emoluments range between Rs. 620 
and Rs. 872 per month with free furnished quarters or lodging 
allowance in lieu plus conveyance allowance in suitable cases. 

(b) total number of training centres under the technical 


Training Scheme 

270 

Centres in Engineering Colleges 

12 

Centres in Railway Workshops 

27 


(c) 10 in each. 

(d) In the opinion of Government they cannot be more usefully 
employed than in connection with the training of technicians. 

(e) Yes, in a few cases. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Has any centre been established 
in Karachi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I want notice. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Is it not a fact that these expert 
instructors who are deputed to centres associated with Engineering 
Colleges or workshops have got additional duties of inspecting 
centres which have been established outside these institutions. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, yes, in 
a few cases. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : May I know if these experts 
who are associated with Engineering Colleges are subject to the 
discipline of Government or are associated with other members 
of the staff of the college concerned ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


758 


758 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Are the Government aware of 
this fact that these experts who are associated with Engineering 
Colleges do not consider themselves to belong to the staff of the 
Engineering College and they do not consider that they are subject 
to the discipline to which members of the staff are subjected; 
are the Government aware of the fact that they spend a good 
deal of time in inspecting other institutions and they consider 
the teaching job to be unattractive, and they have no heart in 
their teaching work ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will enquire into 
what my Honourable friend has said. 

191 

* Strike in the Government of India Press 

230. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi: (a) Will the 

Honourable Member for Labour please state if it is or it is not a 
fact that as a result of great discontent among the employees of 
the Government Press, a strike took place on the 1st December, 
1942, which was pacified by the visits of the Labour Secretary 
and the Labour Welfare Officer, to whom the major grievances 
were given by the workers ? 

(b) What has been done by Government to remove their 
grievances especially about the following : 

(i) the grant of dearness allowance to the Press employees 
on the lines of Railway rates; 

(ii) the grant of casual leave to all the industrial employees; 

(iii) the levy of a uniform rate of five per cent house-rent on 
all the employees, irrespective of their date of occupation 
of Press quarters; 

(iv) the revision of the numerous existing grades of pay of 
the employees of the Binding Branch into one time-scale 
of pay, so as to afford a living wage; and 

(v) the grant of at least old scales of pay to all the employees 
of the Press ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 25th February 1944, p. 546. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


759 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 759 

(b) (i) and (iii) As the questions affected all services, the 
requests of the Press employees for separate treatment have 
not been acceded to. I may add that it was decided on the 
representation of the Press Workers that dearness allowance 
should not be included in calculating the rent payable by occupants 
of Government residences. 

(ii) and (iv) Both the questions are at present under 
consideration. Steps are being taken to expedite a decision on 
them. 

(v) This is not the opportune time to undertake a general 
revision of scales of pay. Such a revision can only be undertaken 
after the war in the light of post-war conditions. 

192 

* Promotion of Qualified Copyholders and 
Revisers as Readers in the Government of 
India Presses 

231. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that the case of amending the rule 
regarding the promotion of qualified copyholders and 
revisers as readers in the Government of India Presses, 
is pending consideration in the office of the Controller 
of Printing and Stationery, India, for more than l 1 / 
years; 

(b) whether it is a fact that the views of all the Government 
of India Presses, their Works Committees and Workers 
Unions, were invited by the Controller of Printing and 
Stationery on the subject; 

(c) whether it is a fact that the Controller of Printing and 
Stationery also suggested to postpone the Readership 
Examination for an indefinite period, i.e. till all the 
qualified men on the waiting list were absorbed as 
readers permanently; 

(d) whether it is a fact that some qualified copyholders and 
revisers with more than fifteen years’ service at credit 
have, according to the present rules, been rendered junior 
to those who have put in only four or five years’ service, 
though all qualified together in the same examination; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 25th February 1944, pp. 546-47. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


760 


760 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(e) whether it is a fact that some who passed the Readership 
Examination in the year 1936, in the first attempt, have 
become junior to those who qualified after four years 
(in 1940), in the second attempt; and 

(f) if the answers to parts (a) to (c) above be in the 
affirmative, whether the Honourable Member proposes 
to remove the anomalies of the rules, and to expedite 
the final decision of the case, so that the Readership 
Examination, due in May, 1944, in the Government 
of India Press, New Delhi, may not be postponed for 
want of decision; if not, what advantage is in view in 
keeping the decision in abeyance for so long ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (b) and (c) 
Yes. The delay in finalising the decision of Government on the 
points raised is due to the widely divergent views expressed by 
the different parties whose opinions were invited. 

(d) Certain anomalies involved in die application of the 
rules have been brought to the notice of Government. Proposals 
to remove them are at present under the consideration of 
Government. 

(c) The question does not arise. Appointments to the posts of 
readers are made by seniority and not by merit on the results 
of a qualifying examination. 

(f) As stated in reply to (d) above, proposals regarding the 
amendment of the rules on the subject have been received and 
are under examination. It is hoped to issue orders well before 
the next readership examination in the Government of India 
Press, New Delhi (due in May 1944) is held. 

193 

* Amendments to the New Delhi 
Rent Control Order 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether amendments to the New Delhi 
Rent Control Order announced on January 24th, 1944, arc applicable, 
retrospectively, as was stated by his Joint Secretary, Mr. Mozumdar, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1944, 28th February 1944, pp. 657-58 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


761 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 761 

at a Press Conference, the account of which was published in 
the New Delhi Statesman of January 27th ? 

(b) Is he aware that these amendments are interpreted by 
the Delhi courts to apply retrospectively ? 

(c) If the intention of Government was not to give these 
amendments retrospective effect, do they propose to issue a 
clarification of their intention, in view of the interpretation placed 
on them by the Delhi courts ? If not, why not ? 

(d) Is he aware that a copy of the Gazette Extraordinary, dated 
the 24th January, in which these amendments were announced 
was privately handed over by his office to Mr. Shiva Rao, New 
Delhi correspondent of the Hindu, at a time when copies were 
not available to the public, to enable Mr. Shiva Rao to take 
advantage of it, in case of ejectment which was pending in 
Delhi civil courts and judgment on which was to be announced 
on January 25th ? 

(e) Is he aware that his Joint Secretary, Mr. Mozumdar, 
has issued orders that house No. 7 Barakhamba Road in which 
Mr. Shiva Rao resides as a tenant, should be requisitioned, in case 
Mr. Shiva Rao was ejected in pursuance of the decree if given 
in favour of his landlord by the civil court ? If these allegations 
are correct, does the Honourable Member propose to institute an 
enquiry in the alleged partiality of the Government servants ? 

(f) Is it a fact that Mr. Mozumdar had issued orders that in 
the event of Mr. shiva Rao being ejected, he should be provided 
with a three-roomed hutment by Government ? Do Government 
propose to provide similar facilities to other journal in New 
Delhi ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No such 
Statement was made by Joint Secretary, Labour Department. 

(b) We have no information on the subject. 

(c) No. The interpretation of Statutes and Orders is a matter 
for the courts and not for Government. 

(d) No. The allegation is incorrect. 

(e) Yes, the order was passed because the house would, in the 
event mentioned, have fallen vacant and be available for use by 
Government. There is no question of Government requisitioning 
it for Mr. Shiva Rao. It is the policy of Government to requisition 
all available accommodation in Delhi that may fall vacant. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


762 


762 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(f) NO. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : What is the intention 
of Government ? Do they want to give it retrospective effect 
or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The legal 
intention is always for the Courts to interpret. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : The Courts will 
undoubtedly interpret, but what is the order of the 
Government ? Is it to have retrospective effect or is it only 
for the future ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is a matter 
which must be left to the Courts. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Is it not a fact that landlords in Delhi 
are harassing their tenants in order to profiteer and what 
steps are Government taking to stop it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information that the landlords are harassing, but we had a 
deputation from the tenants who placed before Government 
certain complaints and the amendment of the New Delhi 
Rent Control Order was made to meet some of the grievances. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : In this case the 
house owner is a retired Executive Engineer, Rai Bahadur 
Durgadas, who has a big family of 20 persons, whom he 
cannot accommodate anywhere else. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information on the point. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani: Is it the intention 
of the Government to clarify the effect of any order passed 
if the Court feels any ambiguity ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not follow 
the Honourable Member’s question. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : May I know whether 
the Government propose to issue any clarification of their 
order passed regarding the applicability of its retrospectiveness 
to the Court ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


763 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 763 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly, if 
there is any ambiguity it will be the duty of the Government 
to clarify it. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Is the order very clear or does 
it require any interpretation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I can supply a 
copy to my Honourable friend. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : My question is this : Is the 
order clear and unambiguous or liable to interpretations ? The 
Honourable member says that the Court will interpret it. The 
Court will undoubtedly do it but only in the latter case. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know 
what my Honourable friend wants to convey. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: My question is this. The 
Honourable Member said that order may be interpreted by the 
Court. But I say, is the order itself liable to interpretations, 
on which the Honourable Member says that it will be to the 
Court 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : That 
is an argument. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: I am putting the question. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Order, 
order. 


194 

* Employment of Women for Underground 
Work in Collieries 

701. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Is the Honourable Member for 
Labour aware that Mr. Sorensen described the recruiting of 
women to work in coal mines in India as “most serious and 
retrograde step” ? 

(b) Is it not a fact that the price of foodstuffs and other necessities 
of life have gone up four to five times the pre-war rates while wages 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1745. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


764 


764 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the majority of the collieries are now 50 per cent above the 
pre-war rates ? 

(c) Is it a fact that women are allowed to work in coal 
mines because the required number of men are not available 
for working in the mines ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that amenities for service in collieries 
are far below the requirements of workers, which forced the 
men workers to seek service elsewhere for pay and prospect 
far superior to those of collieries ? 

(e) Is it not a fact that women are prohibited from working 
in collieries and for services underground (i.e., mines other than 
coal) in the United Kingdom and the United States ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I have seen 
press notices to this effect. 

(b) I have no precise information regarding the rise in the 
cost of living in the coalfields compared with pre-war. Foodstuffs 
are provided for coalminers at concession rates. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) There is evidence that coalmining labour sought service 
on military works in the neighbourhood of collieries in preference 
to working in coalmines. As regards the amenities, I would 
refer the Honourable Member to part (c) of my reply to his 
question No. 273 on the 1st March, 1944. 

(c) Women are not allowed to work underground in the 
United Kingdom. Women are, however, employed in some 
surface work in collieries. I have no information regarding the 
United States. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether it is a fact that the 
price of rice in pre-war days was 12 seers to the rupee and 
the present price charged in the coal areas for miners is 6 
seers to the rupee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no precise 
information on the point. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


765 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 765 


195 

* Employment of Women for Underground Work 

in Collieries 

702. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether the shortage of coal is the reason 
for the Government of India to lift the ban on women working 
underground ? If so, have Government taken into consideration 
that the price of human life is more precious than the production 
of coal ? 

(b) Does the Honourable Member know that such permission 
would not be tolerated for a moment in England or elsewhere ? 

(c) Is it not a fact that decent conditions of life and adequate 
wages are not available for workers in the Indian collieries ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that scientific extraction of coal is not 
available in India as in the United Kingdom and the United 
States of America ? 

(e) Does the Honourable Member know that subsidence of 
earth and explosions of coal gas are more frequent in Indian 
collieries than elsewhere for want of adequate precautions and 
existence of primitive methods adopted in extraction of the ore ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The answer to 
both parts of the question is in the affirmative. 

(b) Women are not allowed underground in coalmines in 
Great Britain. I have no information regarding other countries. 

(c) As I stated in answer to the Honourable Member’s Question 
No. 274 on the 1st March, 1944, working conditions in mines 
have not been very satisfactory. Every effort is being made to 
see that conditions of life arc improved and that adequate wages 
are paid. 

(d) Mechanisation in Indian coal mines is not so far advanced 
as in the United Kingdom and the United States. 

(e) Collapses or subsidence are not more frequent in Indian 
mines than in other countries where the coal scams are near the 
surface. Gas explosions are not so frequent in Indian mines as 
in coalmines of most other countries. Safety precautions taken 
in this country compare favourable with those adopted in any 
other country. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, pp. 1745-46. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


766 


766 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


196 


* Closing of Openings in D.I.Z. Area Squares, 

New Delhi 

704. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the reasons for which openings on the 
corners and in the middle of the various squares in the D.I.Z. 
area in New Delhi were closed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The reason for 
closing the passages was to prevent people from committing 
nuisance on them. This action was taken at the suggestion 
of the Public Health Department. 

197 


@ Labour Unrest in Karachi Port Trust 

715. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : (a) Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state if his attention 
has been drawn to the memorandum issued by Kazi Mohamcd 
Mujtaba, General Secretary, Sind Provincial Trade Union 
Congress, under the heading “A few facts about the labour 
unrest in Karachi Port Trust” ? 

(b) Is it a fact that 2,384 workers of the Karachi Port 
Trust have demanded the appointment of an adjudicator to 
look into their demands ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Labour Welfare Officer of the 
Government of India had made certain recommendations 
after his visit to Karachi in July, 1943 ? 

(d) If the reply to the above is in the affirmative, what 
action have Government taken or propose to take in the 
matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member, for War Transport has agreed to answer this 
question. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1746. 
@ Ibid., p. 1751. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


767 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 767 

198 


* Proposed Conversion of Civil Pioneer Force 
into Auxiliary Pioneer Force 

717. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) whether Government intend to convert the Civil Pioneer 
Force into the Auxiliary Pioneer Force ; and 

(b) if the answer to part (a) be in the affirmative, when do 
Government propose to convert the Civil Pioneer Force into the 
Auxiliary Pioneer Force, whether during or after the War ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Does not arise. 


199 


@ Pay of Pioneers in Civil Pioneer Force 

718. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel: (a) Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour be pleased to state if it is a fact that the pay of a 
pioneer in the Civil Pioneer Force is Rs. 15 a month only? 

(b) Does the Honourable Member consider the present pay 
of a pioneer adequate under the present economic condition of 
the country ? 

(c) Do Government propose to increase the pay of the pioneers 
as they have done in case of soldiers in the Indian Army ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The basic 
rate of pay of a Pioneer in the Civil Pioneer Force is Rs. 15 a 
month. If he is serving in a war area where a similar allowance 
is admissible to members of the Defence Services, he is allowed 
batta at the rate of Rs. 3-8-0 per month. 

(b) Considering that a Pioneer in addition to his pay is 
provided with free rations, free accommodation, free uniform 
and equipment, the pay is adequate. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1752. 
@ Ibid. p. 1752. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


768 


768 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) The matter will be considered in respect of persons 
employed in a War Area. 


200 


* Non-Payment of Allowance to Tailors in Civil 
Pioneer Force 

719. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel : (a) Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour be pleased to state whether clerks, 
sweepers and washermen, attached to the Second Unit of 
the United Provinces Civil Pioneer Force get Rs. 5 each as 
allowance per month ? 

(b) If the answer to the part (a) above be in the affirmative, 
why is the same allowance not given in the case of tailors 
attached to the said Force ? 

(c) Docs the Honourable member propose to remedy the 
grievances of the tailors in this respect ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Owing to 
the difficulty of recruiting barbers, washermen and sweepers, 
Provincial Governments are allowed to grant those categories 
special trade allowance in accordance with the situation in 
the provinces in respect of each of the categories up to a 
maximum of Rs. 5 per month. It is open to the Provincial 
Governments to recommend a trade allowance in respect 
of categories other than those referred to above, including 
tailors. 

(b) No recommendation has been made by the Government 
of the United Provinces for any special allowance being 
granted to tailors. 

(c) The Government of India do not consider that any 
action is necessary. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1752. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


769 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 769 

201 

* Applications under Payment of Wages Act 
against Illegal Deductions, etc. by 
Railway Administrations 

222. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please slate the number of applications in each year 
presented by persons referred to in Section 15 (2) of the Payment 
of Wages Act, 1936, respectively, to the Authority since the 1st 
April, 1938, for directions against illegal deductions and delayed 
payment, respectively, by the Railway Administrations separately ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government have 
no information regarding the number of applications presented by 
railway employees under section 15 (2) of the Payment of Wages 
Act. The collection of the information required will involve an 
amount of labour which will not be justified by the results achieved. 

202 

@ Cases of Infringement of Hours of Work for 
Railway Employees not covered 
by Factories Act 

223. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the number of cases of infringement of 
the Hours of Work for employees on Railways not covered by the 
Factories Act since 1931, and the action taken thereon ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Information is being 
obtained and will be placed on the table of the House in due course. 

203 

f Functions and Duties of Central Electricity 
Board, etc. 

224. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the functions and duties of: 

(i) the Central Electricity Board, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1757. 
@ Ibid., p. 1757. 
t Ibid., p. 1757. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


770 


770 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Board, and 

(iii) the Central Electric Power Control Board ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (i) The Central Electricity 
Board is the authority set up under section 36-A of the Indian 
Electricity Act, 1910, for making rules under Section 37 of that Act. 

(ii) The Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Ltd., is a private 
company and acts as a Central Organisation in Delhi Province for 
the generation or purchase in bulk of electric energy and for its 
distribution to bulk consumers, i.e. those who undertake to consume 
or to pay for not less than 5,00,000 units per annum. 

(iii) The functions of the Central Electric Power Control Board are : 

(a) to advise the Government of India regarding any measure 
of control to be applied to the supply of electricity by any 
public electricity supply undertaking; 

(b) to administer such control, as may have been approved by 
the Government of India in the case of any public electric 
supply undertaking and, in particular, to issue permits 
for new supplies of electricity or for restriction of existing 
supplies in accordance with the general principles laid 
down by the Government of India; 

(c) to collect such information from public electricity supply 
undertakings as it considers necessary in order to be in a 
position to advise Government regarding the necessities of 
control and as to the areas in which surplus electric power 
is likely to be available; and 

(d) to collect such information as may be required to assist 
in co-ordinating the development and utilization of electric 
power on the best lines in furtherance of the general 
interests of the war effort and industrial development of 
India. 


204 

* Electricity Charges paid by Consumers in 
Shahdara, Delhi 

225. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state : 

(a) if it is a fact that (i) the Central Electricity Board, 

(ii) the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Board, and 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, pp. 1757-58. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


771 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 771 

(iii) the Central Electric Power Control Board have 
supervision, power and control on the supply of 
electric to Shahdara town; 

(b) if it is a fact that the Pitkeathly Report recommended 
a uniform charge for current consumption within the 
Province of Delhi; 

(c) if it is a fact that the licence granted to the Upper Jumna 
Valley Electricity Company, Limited, for distribution 
of current to Shahdara town was on a date before the 
Pitkeathly Report; if so, the reasons for not amending 
the licence on the recommendations of that Report 
and reducing the charges from annas-/6/- per unit to 
annas-/4/- per unit; and 

(d) whether Government propose to give the licence for 
distribution to a company whose service will be less 
expensive by inviting tenders; if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Assuming that 
the Honourable Member’s reference to the supervision, power 
and control on the supply of electricity to Shahdara town, is 
in regard to the conditions and rates of supply, the authorities 
mentioned are not responsible in the matter. 

(b) No. 

(c) First Part — Yes. Second Part — The Report did not 
recommend that the licence be amended. 

(d) Until such time as it is found possible to give a supply of 
energy to the Shahdara licensee from the Central Power House 
in Delhi, the rates which the Shahdara licensee is charging (and 
which are within the terms of his licence) cannot be regarded 
as excessive, and there can be no question of giving a second 
distribution licence to any person for this area. 

205 

* Electricity Charges paid by Consumers in 
Shahdara, Delhi 

226. Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ali : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state : 

(a) if it is a fact that the Upper Jumna Valley Electricity 
Company, Limited, pays the United Provinces 
Government for the supply at annas -/2/6 per unit; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 30th March 1944, p. 1758. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK SJ+YS 1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 111 

772 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) if it is a fact that the said Company charges the 
consumers of Shahdara town at annas -/ 6/- per unit; 

(c) at what rate the Company calculate the operating 
charges; and 

(d) the number of consumers in each year from 1939, 
together with the amount of expenditure in each year 
for the maintenance of services by the said Company ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) Yes. 

(c) Government have no information. 

(d) A statement giving the number of consumers is appended. 
The expression “expenditure for the maintenance of services” is 
not sufficiently definite to enable any figures to be given. 


Number of consumers 


Year ending 31st March 1939 ... ... 114 

Year ending 31st March 1940 ... ... 118 

Year ending 31st March 1941 ... ... 131 

Year ending 31st March 1942 ... ... 141 

Year ending 31st March 1943 ... ... 143 


206 

* The Factories (Second Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Factories Act, 1934 (Second Amendment). 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 

question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Factories Act, 1934 (Second Amendment).” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 3rd April 1944, p. 1870. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


773 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 773 

207 

* Closing of Arches between Quarters on Irwin 
Road, New Delhi 

771. Mr. Muhammed Azhar Ali: (a) Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member aware that sometime back some of the passengers 
(arches) in between the Government quarters situated on the 
Irwin Road, New Delhi, were closed for vehicular traffic, etc.? 

(b) Is the Honourable Member aware that some of these 
have been closed by erecting small pillars of cements and others 
by putting up a revolving iron bar gate fixed in a ‘V’ type of 
structures ? 

(c) What is the object and utility of putting up these iron 
bar gates when ‘V’ type of structures can easily block the way 
for vehicular traffic ? 

(d) Is the Honourable Member further aware that children 
while playing get hurt — sometimes very seriously — by these iron 
bar gates ? 

(e) Does the Honourable Member propose to consider the 
desirability of getting these iron gates removed immediately and 
have them utilized in some other way ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) To stop cycle traffic. 

(d) No. 

(e) Government will be prepared to consider the suggestion 
of the Honourable Member. 


208 

@ Absence of Muslim Officers in Central 
Stationery Office 

773. Mr. Muhammad Nauman : (a) Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member aware that none of the officers in the Central 
Stationery Office is a Muslim ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, p. 1914. 
@Ibid., p. 1915. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


774 


774 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is it also a fact that a new post of Assistant Controller, 
Stationery, has been recently sanctioned and has not yet been 
filled up ? If so, does the Honourable Member propose to reserve 
it for a Muslim ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The answer to the first part of the question is in the 
affirmative. The answer to the second part is that the post would 
be filled according to the communal representation rules. 

209 

* Desirability of Posting a Technical Officer 
to the Office of Controller of 
Printing and Stationery 

774. Mr. Muhammad Nauman : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please say: 

(a) whether it is a fact that the work in the Government 
of India Presses is of a technical nature; 

(b) Whether it is also a fact that none of the officers at the 
headquarters’ office of the Controller of Printing and 
Stationery is an officer drawn from the technical side; 
and 

(c) if the replies to parts (a) and (b) are in the affirmative, 
whether he proposes to consider the desirability of 
posting a technical officer to the Controller’s Office ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, mostly. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No, because detailed technical supervision and scrutiny 
of printing work is not necessary in his office. 

210 

@ Government Contribution to Indian Labour 
Federation 

776. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: (a) Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state whether it is a fact that his Department makes 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, p. 1915. 
@ Ibid., pp. 1915-16. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


775 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 775 

a monthly contribution of Rs. 13,000 to the Indian Labour 
Federation through Mr. M. N. Roy. If so, for what purpose ? If 
the amount of contribution is more or less than this figure, will 
the Honourable Member please state the correct figure ? 

(b) Have any accounts been rendered for the money so 
contributed to the Indian Labour Federation ? If not, why not ? 

(c) If the reply to first portion of part (b) above be in the 
affirmative, will the Honourable Member please lay on the table 
of the House copies of such statements received for the last six 
months ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) A monthly grant 
of Rs. 13,000 is made to the Indian Federation of Labour for 
doing propaganda to keep up the morale of industrial labour. 

(b) Yes, Sir. 

(c) No. The accounts are subject to the same scrutiny as all 
public accounts and no useful purpose would be served by placing 
them on the table. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Is he authorised to distribute that 
money to other persons for the purpose of propaganda ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not given to 
him; the grant is made to the Indian Federation of Labour. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: That means, the person who is in 
charge of the Federation. Can he distribute that money to other 
people asking them to go and do propaganda ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
as to how the money will be distributed. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Will the Honourable Member 
enquire into it because accounts have to be made ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The accounts are 
audited as all other public accounts are. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Does the Honourable Member 
know how this amount is shown to have been distributed ? Is 
it shown by the audit? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information, but the accounts are scrutinised in the same way 
as all other public accounts. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Have the Federation made any 
rule and submitted the same to the Government, regulating the 
manner in which this grant should be spent ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


776 


776 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
on that. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Will the Honourable Member make 
an enquiry into it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If the Honourable 
Member will care to put a question, I will make enquiries. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : I do not know how accounts will 
be audited if there are no rules for distribution. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure that the 
public accounts officer must satisfy himself, that there are some 
rules according to which the money is spent. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : Are there any other associations which 
are getting money like this ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that question. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : There ought to be some rules by 
means of which it can be ensured that Mr. Roy does not spend the 
whole money on his friends. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I had no idea that the 
Honourable Member had any justification to presume that there 
were no rules. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : That is the impression which one 
gets, because Government showed ignorance. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government have not 
shown ignorance. My answer was that the accounts are subject to 
the same scrutiny as other public accounts are. 

Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari : Has the Honourable Member 
satisfied himself that this is the only organisation that will help 
the Government to keep up the morale of labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information. 
I must have notice of that question. 

211 

* Ejectment Cases in Delhi Courts 

@782. Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq Piracha : (a) Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the number of 
ejectment cases filed in Delhi Court since the extension of Punjab Rent 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, pp. 1919-20. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


111 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 777 

Restriction Act to Delhi Province ? How many have been disposed 
of and how many are still pending in Courts ? 

(b) Is he aware that immediately after enforcement of the 
Punjab Rent Restriction Act in Delhi Municipal Area, landlords 
asked a number of tenants to vacate residential houses and flats 
for landlords’ own occupation ? Are Government aware that a 
large majority of such claims was false and the houses were let 
to the same or other parties on payment of Nazrana ? 

(c) Will he be pleased to give instructions for enacting Control 
Orders throughout Delhi Province providing that no residential 
house or flat should be vacated so long as the tenant pays or is 
willing to pay controlled rent ? 

(d) Is he aware that landlords in Delhi generally refuse to 
carry out repairs to their property since the enforcement of 
Control Orders ? If so, will he be pleased to state what steps he 
proposes to take to penalise the landlords for refusing to attend 
to their property ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The number 
of suits instituted upto the 28th of March 1944 was 1,444. Of 
these 888 had been disposed of and 556 were pending. 

(b) Yes. I understand that the local authorities have received 
complaints to this effect. 

(c) Government have certain measures under consideration. 

(d) The local authorities have received some complaints and 
the matter is under consideration. 

212 

* Publication of Railway Labour Supervisor’s 
Annual Report 

262. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: With reference to the 
Honourable the Labour Member’s reply to unstarred question 
No. 43, asked on the 10th February, 1943, in regard to the 
publication of Railway Labour Supervisor’s annual report, will 
the Honourable Member ensure the publication of brief reports 
by way of press communiques for the information of interests 
concerned ? If not, why not ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, pp. 1924-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


778 


778 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member presumably refers to the unstarred question No. 43, 
asked on the 10th February 1944. 

The question of issuing Press Communiques on the annual 
reports of the Supervisor of Railway Labour, is under consideration 
of the Government. 


213 


* Maintenance of Roads within Shahdara, Delhi 

263. Mr. G. Rangiah Naidu: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the authority (Municipal Committee 
or Central Public Works Department) responsible for the 
maintenance in good order of roads within the Shahdara Town, 
Delhi Province ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The Notified Area 
Committee, Shahdara, is responsible for the maintenance of 
roads within the Shahdara Town. 


214 


@ Applications under the Payment of Wages Act 
against Illegal Deductions, etc., on East Indian 
and North Western Railways 

266. Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the number of applications from Railway 
employees for direction under the Payment of Wages Act, for the 
refund of deductions and for the payment of delayed wages made 
since March 1938, against the East Indian and North Western 
Railway Administrations, respectively, together with the result 
of the disposal of those applications. If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Attention of 
the Honourable Member is invited to the reply given to Mr. 
Muhammad Azhar Ali’s unstarred question No. 222 on 30th 
March 1944. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1944, 4th April 1944, p. 1925. 
@ Ibid., p. 1925. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


779 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 779 

215 

* Government Contribution to Indian Labour 
Federation 

31. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: (a) With reference to the reply 
to my starred question No. 776 given on the 4th April, 1944, 
will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state 
whether the sum of Rs. 13,000 given monthly to the Indian 
Labour Federation has been distributed amongst the President, 
Vice-Presidents and other office-bearers of the Federation ? If 
so, in what proportion ? 

(b) Has the Honourable Member looked into the audited 
accounts of the Federation to find out how this money has been 
utilized ? If not, why not ? If so, does he propose to place the 
audited accounts on the table of the House from the date the 
subsidy of Rs. 13,000 a month was paid up to this day ? 

(c) Is it a fact that this question came up before the 
International Labour Conference, which met at Philadelphia in 
the form of the comparative representative character of the Indian 
Labour Federation and the All-India Trade Union Congress, 
and what was the decision of the Conference ? What has been 
decided for the future representation of the Indian Labour on the 
International Labour Conference to be given to an organization 
not living on subsidy ? 

(d) Have all the funds paid to the Indian Labour Federation 
been spent on the object for which they were given ? If so, will 
he give a brief account of the activities of the Federation in this 
respect ? If any part thereof has not been used for the purpose for 
which it was granted, will the Honourable Member please take 
steps to have that much portion refunded to the Government ? 
If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The grant is 
made to the Indian Federation of Labour as an organisation and 
is not distributed among its several office bearers. 

(b) and (d) (First part) Government are not concerned with 
the accounts of the Federation, but with the manner in which the 
Government contribution has been spent by the Federation. They are 
satisfied that although full and regular accounts are not available for 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 2nd November 1944, pp. 
111-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


780 


780 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the earlier period of the grant, this expenditure has achieved the 
objects, for which it was sanctioned. With effect from the 1st June 
1944 the accounts will be prepared in the Federation’s office by a 
qualified accountant, and these will be available to audit in the 
ordinary way. 

(c) The grant was mentioned in an objection by the All-India 
Trade Union Congress made to the International Labour Office 
as regards the credentials of the workers’ representatives in the 
Indian delegation. The Credentials Committee, in its report which 
was adopted by the Conference, asked the Conference to regard 
the Workers’ delegate of India and his advisers at that session of 
the Conference as duly accredited. The Committee’s report did not 
mention the grant but stated as follows : 

“It does not doubt that the Government of India will continue 
its endeavours to make provision for the representation of both 
organisations in an appropriate manner at future sessions of the 
Conference and ventures to hope that the two organisations will 
reach an agreement, which will secure the effective participation 
in the International Labour Organisation of representatives of all 
sections of the Indian Trade Union movement. The Committee 
understands that, failing such an agreement, the Indian Workers’ 
delegate to the next session of the Conference will be appointed 
in agreement with the All-India Trade Union Congress.” 

(d) (Second part) The monthly grant is spent on publications 
of printed literature, oral propaganda, visual publicity and the 
disseminating of reassuring news. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know the object 
for which the grant has been given ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The answer will be 
found in my answer to part (d) (second part). It states that the 
grant is spent on publication of printed literature, oral propaganda, 
visual publicity and the disseminating of reassuring news about war. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Are the Government 
satisfied that the money given by them has been spent on those 
items alone ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, they are satisfied. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar: May I know if the 
Government are aware that part of this money has been spent 
on anti-Congress propaganda ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


781 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 781 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They have no information. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will they inquire into the 
matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have stated in my 
answer that with effect from the 1st of June, 1944, the accounts will 
be prepared in the Federation’s Office by a qualified accountant and 
these will be available to audit in the ordinary way. 

Sardar Mangal Singh : May I know whether this payment is 
made monthly or yearly ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information on 
this point in front of me. I suppose it is made monthly. 

Sardar Mangal Singh : Is it paid to the Secretary or the President ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: To some responsible officer 
of the organisation concerned. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know what is the 
subject of this propaganda and the subjects of the publications issued ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is pro-war propaganda 
and pro -war literature. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : Will the Honourable Member be prepared 
to place the audited accounts on the table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : When it is audited, it 
will be placed on the table and will be available to the Members in the 
ordinary way. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : What is the period covered for which 
there have been no accounts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : F or the earlier period; we 
have not got the exact accounts but we have now made arrangements 
that the accounts will be kept by an officer of the Audit Department. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: What was the amount ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to give the 
figure. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Who is responsible for not keeping these 
accounts in the earlier period — the Honourable Member himself or the 
Government or they ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not followed the 
question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


782 


782 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr Lalchand Navalrai: The Honourable Member said that 
for some period no accounts were kept. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I have not said that 
no accounts were kept. What I said was : 

They are satisfied that, although full and regular accounts 
are not available for the earlier period of the grant, the money 
has been spent in the manner in which the Government desired 
it should be spent. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Is the Government satisfied that 
the money has been spent properly ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to believe to the contrary. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: It is not a question of the Honourable 
Member believing to the contrary. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is arguing. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : What evidence has the Honourable 
Member got for thinking that the money has been spent properly ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to believe to the contrary. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: My question was different. How is 
the Honourable Member able to believe one way or the other ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to believe that the amount was not spent regularly. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I know if it is only to the satisfaction 
of the Honourable Member himself or does he take into account 
that the public has to be satisfied how the money has been spent 
/ How has the Honourable Member satisfied the public ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know how 
I could satisfy the public but the Government which paid the 
money is satisfied. 

Sardar Sant Singh : It is the tax payers’ money that the 
Government is paying out. How is the Government going to 
satisfy the taxpayer that the money has been legitimately spent ? 

(No Answer) 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Was the Finance Member 
satisfied with the correctness of accounts ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


783 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 783 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That question might 
be addressed to the Honourable the Finance Member. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Who is the Secretary and who is 
the President of this Labour Federation ? Are they paid some 
salary or money from this fund ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It does not arise. 
If the Honourable Member will give notice, I will find out the 
information for him. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I raise a point 
of order ? Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad asked whether the Finance 
Member was satisfied and the Labour Member replied that 
the question might be addressed to the Finance Member. The 
Member in charge ought to know whether the Finance Member 
was satisfied or not. He must give the reply. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : He has 
given the reply. I cannot ask the Honourable Member to reply 
in a particular way. 


216 


* Government Contribution to Indian Labour 
Federation 

32. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: (a) With reference to the reply 
to my starred question No. 776 given on the 41h April 1944, 
will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state 
whether his attention has been drawn to a statement made by 
the President, Indian Labour Federation at Bombay in December 
last, at the 1st Annual Session of the Federation, that it was 
blackest lie that they were receiving Rs. 13,000 per month from 
the Government ? 

(b) Has the Honourable Member’s attention been also drawn 
to a statement made by Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, President of the 
Indian Labour Federation on his departure for Philadephia to 
attend the International Labour Conference meeting, denying 
the fact of Rs. 13,000 of the Government’s subsidy ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 2nd November 1944, p. 111. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


784 


784 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Is it also a fact that this statement was made in reply to 
the Honourable the Labour Member’s statement in the House on 
the 4th April 1944, confirming the fact that a sum of Rs. 13,000 
was being given to the Indian Labour Federation ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the subsidy of Rs. 13,000 is secretly 
paid to Mr. M. N. Roy ? If so, why is it paid to this particular 
individual and not to the Indian Labour Federation ? 

(e) Will the Honourable Member please make a brief statement 
as to the measures taken by the Indian Labour Federation 
during the period it has been in receipt of the monthly subsidy to 
achieve the object, e.g., to assist the Government in maintaining 
the labour morale ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a), (b) and (c) 

Government’s attention has been drawn to the statements referred 
to. From the very beginning the arrangement has been with the 
Indian Federation of Labour and not with any individual. The 
attention of the Federation was drawn to Mr. Mehta’s statements 
and in reply the Federation has reaffirmed the fact that the 
arrangement is with the Federation. 

(d) As already stated in reply to the preceding question, the 
grant is publicly made to the Indian Federation of Labour and 
not personally to Mr. M. N. Roy. 

(e) The attention of the Honourable Member is invited to my 
reply to the second part of part (d) of the preceding question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: The Honourable Member has stated 
in his reply that the money was given and Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, 
before he went to Philadephia, made a statement that the money 
was not given. How does the Honourable Member reconcile this 
inconsistency ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not for me to 

reconcile the two statements. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Is the Honourable Member correct 
or not in having made the statement ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not for me to 

answer that question. 

Sardar Sant Singh : May I know who is telling this blackest 
lie, either the Federation or the Government of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is free to draw any conclusions that he likes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


785 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 785 

217 

* Removal after the War of Temporary Buildings 
Constructed in New Delhi 

50. Sir F. E. James : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if he is aware : 

(i) that Lord Linlithgow in reply to the farewell address 
presented by the New Delhi Municipal Committee on 
the 16th October 1943, made the following statement: 

You express anxiety about the removal after the war of 
the many temporary buildings which must be admitted 
to mar the beauty of the city. As I announced in my 
recent- speech to the Houses of the Legislature it is the 
definite policy of the Government of India to remove 
those buildings as soon as possible. It is the intention 
that all the temporary buildings that have been 
constructed for use as offices and hostels, etc., in the 
neighbourhood of the Secretariat, in the Irwin Stadium, 
near the Willingdon aerodrome, in the neighbourhood of 
Connaught Circus and in various blocks, which under 
the New Delhi Development Scheme had been allotted 
for other purposes, will be removed as soon as possible 
after the cessation of hostilities. 

(ii) that His Excellency Lord Wavell in reply to the 
welcome address presented by the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee on the 30th October 1943, made the following 
statement: 

I can assure you that Her Excellency and I are at one 
with you in the matter of the removal after the war 
of temporary buildings. You will recollect that Lord 
Linlithgow gave you an assurance on behalf of the 
Government of India. 

(b) To what buildings do the intentions of the Government 
of India as announced by Lord Linlithgow now apply, in view of 
the construction programme undertaken, since October, 1943 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 2nd November 1944, pp. 
128-29. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


786 


786 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) To all buildings that are of temporary construction and that 
will interfere with the future development of Delhi. It does not 
apply to the Lodi Road Officers bungalows constructed in 1941 or 
to most of the clerks quarters constructed recently. In particular 
it does not refer to the large block of clerks quarters under 
construction to the south of Lodi Road behind the observatory. 

Sir F. E. James: May I know, Sir, who will decide whether 
the temporary buildings now being constructed will or will not 
interfere with the development of Delhi ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Obviously the 
Government of India. 

Sir F. E. James : May I also enquire if those buildings which 
he has referred to in his answer, which arc not included in the 
term ‘temporary’ buildings, are, in fact, being constructed on a 
permanent basis and at a standard of quality which will justify 
their being retained as permanent buildings ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: May I know from the Honourable 
Member whether he considers that all the palatial buildings 
which have been built for Americans also mar the beauty of the 
city ? Are they temporary, and will they be removed after the 
cessation of hostilities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That does not arise 
out of this question. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: It does. These buildings — such as 
those built near the Council House — also mar the beauty of the 
city. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question did 
not refer to the buildings built for American troops. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: All these buildings arc being 
constructed by Government 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question does 
not refer to the buildings built for American troops. Therefore 
the question does not arise. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : Next 
question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


787 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 787 

218 


* Government Contribution to Associations other 
than Indian Labour Federation 

59. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) With reference to starred 
question No. 776 of the 4th April 1944, regarding monthly 
grant of Rs. 13,000 to the Indian Federation of Labour, will 
the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to give a reply 
to my supplementary question as to whether there are other 
Associations which are getting money like the said Federation ? 

(b) What is the Government control over this money to see 
that it is being utilised for public purposes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) No other 
labour Association has received financial assistance from 
Government for this purpose. The letter in which assistance 
from Government in the matter of propaganda for maintaining 
morale of labour was offered, was addressed both to the All- 
India Trade Union Congress and the Indian Federation of 
Labour. In their reply the All-India Trade Union Congress 
did not ask for any assistance. 

(b) I would refer the Honourable Member to the replies 
already given to questions put by Mr. Lalchand Navalrai. 


219 


@ Unconstitutional Conduct of Government in 
Appointing Adjudicator in Trade Dispute 
between Shahdara (Delhi) Saharanpur 
Light Railway and its Employees, etc. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
The next motion stands in the name of Mr. Dam. He 
wishes to discuss “the unconstitutional conduct of the 
Central Government in the appointment of the adjudicator 
in the trade dispute between the Administration of 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 2nd November 1944, p. 134. 
@ Ibid., 3rd November 1944, p. 218. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


788 


788 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Shahdara (Delhi) Saharanpur Light Railway and its employees 
and further failure of the Central Government in not extending the 
order on the award of the said Adjudicator to the employees on 
the East Indian Railway by making cheap grains available at the 
rates charged by the North Western Railway as made available to 
the employees on the Shahdara (Delhi) Saharanpur Light Railway”. 

What is the exact complaint ? Docs he want that there must 
be some sort of allowances which have been awarded elsewhere ? 

Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam (Surma Valley cum Shillong: Non- 
Muhammadan): Sir, the rule says that both parties to the dispute 
should apply for a reference to the court. That was done and the 
privileges that were extended to the employees of the North Western 
Railway were not extended to the employees of the East Indian 
Railway as regards the cheap grains that were made available to 
them. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : You want 
the same privileges to be extended to the employees of the East 
Indian Railway. 

Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : Yes, Sir. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I oppose the motion and I must say that my Honourable friend is 
considerably mis-informed as to the facts and the circumstances. 
This adjudication took place under Rule 81 A. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The only 
question before the House is whether the motion is in order. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am stating the facts. 
This adjudication took place under Rule 81A of the Defence of India 
Rules and the power to appoint an Adjudicator completely vests in 
the Government of India. Therefore there is nothing unconstitutional 
in the Government of India appointing an Adjudicator to settle 
this dispute particularly when the dispute covered a railway which 
runs in two provinces, namely, the United Provinces and Delhi 
and no single Provincial Government was entitled to appoint an 
Adjudicator. Therefore, I submit there is nothing unconstitutional 
in the action taken. 

With regard to the second part, my submission is that my Honourable 
friend is considerably misinformed on the point because the award of 
the Adjudicator did not exclude any dispute with regard to the other 
Railway. It was certainly not open to the Government to extend the 
provisions of the award to a railway which was not the subject-matter 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


789 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 789 

of the dispute at all. The dispute concerned only the Shahdara 
(Delhi) Saharanpur Light Railway and not the East Indian Railway. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): There was 
no such demand on behalf of the employees of the East Indian 
Railway ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly not, Sir. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The facts 
stated by the Honourable Member for Labour show that there is 
no justification for this motion. Therefore, it is disallowed. 

220 

* Expenditure on Buildings in Delhi 

@ 132. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state how much money have the Government 
of India spent on buildings — permanent and temporary — in Delhi ? 

(b) How much was provided by (i)loan, (ii) revenue, and (iii) 
by land and lease arrangements ? 

(c) What would happen to these buildings after the war ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The total cost of 
permanent and temporary, office and residential accommodation, 
constructed since 1939, is Rs. 6.38 crores. 

(b) The information asked for is not readily available. 

(c) Permanent buildings will be retained after the war. As 
regards temporary buildings, it is the intention of Government to 
demolish them as soon as practicable after the war, as and when 
the sites are required for the development of Delhi. 

221 

f Demolition of Temporary Buildings 

@133. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Has the Honourable the 
Labour Member suggested to his Department that the buildings 
will be constructed in a manner that they may be pulled down 
soon after the war which will involve additional expenditure of 
the money ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, p. 319. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner having exhausted his quota, 
f Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, pp. 319-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


790 


790 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Are the Government contemplating to demolish temporary 
buildings ? What would be the cost of demolition and what would 
be the manner in which these buildings will be pulled down ? 

The Honourable Dr. B, R. Ambedkar : (a) No. The primary 
object of the buildings is to meet war requirements and they have 
been constructed in a manner and on sites most suitable to meet 
such requirements. This has involved in most cases temporary 
construction on sites which will be required for other purposes 
after the war. The actual order of demolition of the buildings 
must depend on the programme laid down for the utilisation of 
the sites and the development of Delhi. 

(b) Yes. It is not possible at present to estimate the cost of 
demolition and to lay down the manner in which the buildings 
will be pulled down. 


222 

* Accommodation Constructed in 
Delhi and New Delhi 

@ 135. Sir F. E. James : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) for how many officers and staff (i) office, and (ii) 
residential accommodation has been constructed in Delhi 
and New Delhi by the Central Public Works Department 
since the beginning of the War; 

(b) the total cost of (i) the temporary, and (ii) the permanent 
accommodation so erected; 

(c) what temporary office and residential accommodation 
is now under construction and at what estimated cost; 

(d) whether any further temporary construction is under 
consideration, and, if so, for what purpose; and 

(e) what plans are being made for the removal of the 
temporary constructions after the war, and for the 
disposal and utilisation of the materials employed in 
their erection ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Since the beginning 
of the war the construction of office accommodation to the extent of 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, pp. 321-22 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


791 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 791 


12,24,516 sq. ft. and roofed residential accommodation for 969 
officers and 745 clerks has been completed. These figures do not 
include accommodation provided for the Far Eastern Bureau of the 
British Ministry of Information, the South East Asia Command 
and the U.S.A. Forces. Information regarding the number of 
officers and staff for whom the office accommodation has been 
constructed is not readily available. 

(b) The total costs of office and residential accommodation, 
constructed since 1939, are (i) Rs. 5.29 crores for temporary 
accommodation and (ii) Rs. 1.09 crores for permanent 
accommodation. 

(c) A statement containing the required information and 
also information regarding permanent accommodation under 
construction is placed on the table of the House. 

(d) No further proposal has as yet been approved. 

(e) It has been decided to remove the temporary buildings 
as soon as possible after the War. The question of the disposal 
and utilisation of the materials is under consideration. 

Statement of temporary and permanent office and 
residential accommodation now under construction 
and their estimated cost 


Description of accommodation 

I-Temporary — 

1. Additional residential accommodation for G.H.Q. Signals 
Officers. 

2. 1000 Single Clerks Quarters at Kitchener Road 

3. Accommodation for 367 clerks at Asmara and Masawa Lines 
(by alteration of existing temporary buildings). 

4. 68 married clerks’ and 224 single clerks’ quarters in Tibbia 
College, Hostel Compound. 

5. Accommodation for 200 single officers in existing Government 
Hostels. 

6. Hostel for 160 married officers on King Edward Road 

7. Office accommodation of 3,05,043 sq. ft. 

I-Permanent — 

1. 50 ‘D’ type and 168 ‘E‘ type clerks’ quarters on Railway 
land near Minto Road. 

2. 2,468 clerks’ quarters on Lodhi Road 

3. 228 married clerks’ quarters in 12 acres of land in Karol Bagh 

4. 8 ‘E’ type clerks’ quarters in Aram Bagh 

5. Three-storeyed flats for 120 clerks on Chitra Gupta Road 


Estimated 
cost Rs. 


Not readily 
available. 
23,41,000 


21,00,000 

7,80,000 


Not readily 
available. 
39,65,559 

23,67,386 

2,94,00,000 

32.00. 000 
80,000 

15.00. 000 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


792 


792 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


223 

* Creation of Central Technical Power Board 

139. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member for Labour 
be pleased to state : 

(a) whether Government have any plans for the creation of a 
Central Technical Power Board; 

(b) whether it is a fact that the Chairmanship of this Board 
has been offered to a former employee of the British Firm of 
Messrs. Merz and Melellan and that one of the two seals on 
the Board has been filled by an American Engineer; 

(c) whether his attention has been drawn to reports that 
Government are considering the appointment of Messrs. Merz 
and Melellan, and the American Bond and Share Company 
as consulting engineers; and, if so, whether they are true. 

(d) whether these two American and British firms, respectively, 
have acquired any interest in the erection or operation of 
electrical undertakings in India so far, and what they are; 

(e) whether it is a fact that a Committee of leading Power 
Engineers appointed by Government early this year have 
reported that India would require electrical plant to the value 
of Rs. 400 crores, and that Government have accepted this 
recommendation; and 

(f) whether Government would publish full details of the 
recommendations of the above-mentioned Committee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes, but in the case of the former he has for the last three years 
and nine months been in the service of the Government of India as 
Electrical Commissioner. 

(c) Government have seen certain press reports to this effect but 
they are not correct as they have not yet taken into consideration the 
question of appointing consulting engineers. 

(d) In so far as Messrs. Merz and Melellan are concerned, the reply 
is in the negative. Government, however, understand that the Electric 
Bond and Share Company of U.S.A. (and not the American Bond and 
Share Company) which is a holding company has substantial interest 
in the Tata Hydro Electric Agencies and the United Eastern Agencies 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, pp. 
325-26. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


793 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 793 

who are Managing Agents for the electric supply undertakings at 
Karachi, Broach, Nasik-Deolali and Poona. 

(e) No. 

(f) Steps are being taken to public the proceedings of the Conference . 

Mr. K. C. Neogy: When may we expect to see these 
recommendations ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think in about a week’s 
time. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : With reference to part (e) of the question, 
can the Honourable Member give us some idea of the figure, if it is not 
400 crores ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not got the facts 
before me. 


224 

* Government Contribution to Indian 
Labour Federation 

152. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state, in reference to the Labour Department’s letter No. 
L. 1882, dated the 3rd March 1942 in which Mr. M. N. Roy’s scheme 
for propaganda on the Labour Front, costing Rs. 13,000 per mensem 
was approved : 

(a) whether Government have satisfied themselves that the said 
moneys have been spent according to the scheme; 

(b) whether they have received any reports from Mr. M. N. Roy 
or his Labour Organisation on the manner of their utilisation; 

(c) whether Government have drawn any conclusions upon their 
work and reports, if so, what they are, and whether they will 
be placed on the table of the House; 

(d) whether there is any audit, and, if so, by whom; 

(e) whether the audit report at least be placed on the table of 
the House; 

(f) whether similar subsidies arc being granted to any other 
individuals or organisations; if so, what they are, and what 
sums are being thus granted, and with what effects; and 

(g) whether Government propose to continue these grants; and 

(h) whether these grants arc grants -in-aid and, if so, on what 
basis ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, pp. 
337-38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


794 


794 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) I would refer the 
Honourable Member to my reply to part (d) of question No. 31 put 
by Mr. Lalchand Navalrai. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) As already stated in reply to an earlier question, Government 
is satisfied that it has received adequate value for the money 
spent. The monthly grant is spent on the publication of printed 
literature, oral propaganda, visual publicity and the dissemination 
of reassuring news. 

(d) and (e) This expenditure like all other expenditure is subject 
to Government audit and any comments made will appear in the 
Audit Report. 

(f) No. 

(g) Yes, it is the intention to continue for the present the grant 
made to the Federation. 

(h) They are not grants-in-aid but represent payment for certain 
work carried out by the Association at Government’s request. 

225 

* Paucity of Muslims in the Eastern Zone of 
Central Works Department 

154. Khan Bahadur Shaikh FazI-i-Haq Piracha : (a) Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state if it is a 
fact that the Central Public Works Department has been bifurcated 
into Eastern and Western Zones ? 

(b) Is it a fact that there is under recruitment of Muslims in all 
grades of service in the Eastern Zone ? If so, have Government taken 
any steps to redress this grievance ? If so, what ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) In the case of Subordinates, there was an under recruitment 
of Muslims in the Eastern Zone and over recruitment of Muslims 
in the Western Zone, if these Zones are considered separate units. 
But there is no deficiency in the recruitment of Muslims in the 
Central Public Works Department considered as a whole. 

In the case of Temporary Engineers there was over recruitment of 
Muslims in the Western Zone, and under recruitment in the Eastern 
Zone due lo the fact that suitable Muslim candidates were not available 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 71h November 1944, p. 339. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


795 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 795 

in that Zone at the time the recruitment was made. This deficiency 
in the Eastern Zone will be made good gradually as suitable 
Muslims become available. • 

There is no deficiency of Muslims in any other grade either 
in the Eastern or in the Western Zone. 

226 

* Paper Annually supplied to Bureau of Public 
Information, etc. 

39. Bhai Parma Nand : Will the Honourable Member for 
Industries and Civil Supplies please state the quantity of paper 
supplied in each year since 1941 to (i) the Bureau of Public 
Information, (ii) the Counter-Propaganda Directorate, (iii) Film 
Publicity, (iv) External Publicity and (v) Foreign Publicity ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As the question 
concerns the Labour Department I am answering it. The 
information as far as readily available is given in the statement 
below: — 


Statement 


Indentor 

Tonnage 
consumed 
during 
1-443 to 
31-3-44 

Tonnage 
consumed 
during 
1-4-44 to 
31-8-44 

(i) Bureau of Public Information 

162 

55 

(ii) Counter Propaganda Directorate ... 

50 

23 

(iii) Film Publicity 

Not available 

1 

(iv) External Publicity 

18 

Nil 

(v) Foreign Publicity 

99 

17 


Note. — (1) The figures prior to 1st April 1944 in the case of Film Publicity and 1st 
April 1943 in the case of the rest arc not available. The figures relate to 
Financial Years. 


(2) The figure shown against item No. (iv) above represents the consumption 
by the British Ministry of Information. 

(3) The figures against items (iii) and (v) are in respect of the consumption of 
“Information Films of India” and “Publicity Officer (Foreign)” respectively. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 7th November 1944, p. 341. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


796 


796 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


227 

* Statistics re Unemployed Labour 

221. Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Will the Honourable 
Member for Labour please state : 

(a) if any statistics about unemployment labour in India 
is available; if so, what the number is, and how it is 
classified; 

(b) if no statistics are available, when the Government 
intend to collect the same and classify it according 
to industries and under the heads “educated” and 
“uneducated”; 

(c) if the Government arc aware that the United Nations 
arc taking steps to maintain a high level of employment 
in their countries; and if so, when and what steps this 
Government intend to take to keep pace with them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The answer to 
the first part is in the negative; the latter part does not arise. 

(b) Government at present collect statistics about employment 
in certain industries and they propose to take steps to improve 
and expedite such statistics. It is not however possible at present 
to collect statistics about unemployment. 

(c) Government are aware that some of United Nations are 
making plans to sustain a high level of employment even after 
the war. The reconstruction plans of the Government of India 
will also take into consideration the necessity of maintaining as 
high a level of employment as is available. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : May I ask if the Honourable 
Member is alert that in the post-war reconstruction he should 
see that every person in India should get an employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not follow 
the question. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour in the post-war scheme of reconstruction watch 
the interests of the labour and see that no person is out of 
employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That should be 
our ideal, I accept. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 10th November 1944, p. 546. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


797 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 797 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : What is the difficulty about the 
collection of statistics ? I thought I had said set this Department 
in motion by asking a question about statistics a year ago. May I 
ask if the work of the collection of statistics has not yet begun ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have just begun 
and I think we have made a good beginning. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : May I ask what had he been 
doing for the last one year ? When did he make a beginning ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We had many 
other things to do besides this. We have made a good beginning. 

Prof N. G. Ranga : May I ask if early steps be taken to 
initiate the gathering of statistics about unemployment in 
different industries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have already said 
that we have initiated the policy of collecting statistics. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : May I know if anything has 
been done in carrying out the promise made to me last time in 
collecting statistics ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have already said 
a beginning has been made. 


228 

* Employment of Women Underground 
in Mines 

239. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if it is a fact that the employment of 
women underground is against the Geneva Convention accepted 
by the Government of India ? 

(b) Is Government aware that no such employment has 
taken place in the United Kingdom in spite of the stress of war 
requirement ? 

(c) When did Government make this relaxation, and why ? 

(d) How long do Government expect to keep it open to employ 
women in coal mines ? 

(e) How many women are so employed ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 10th November 1944, 
pp. 559-61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


798 


798 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(f) What is the wage earned by women underground, and how 
does it compare with the earnings of women employed in other 
trades ? 

(g) What steps have Government taken to safeguard the health 
and morale of women underground in coal mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) August 1943 in the case of coalfields in Central Provinces 
and Berar, November 1943 in the case of Bengal and Bihar and 
December 1943 in the case of Orissa. Owing to severe shortage 
of male labour in these coalfields. 

(d) The Government are most anxious to re-impose the ban 
as soon as the production of coal reaches a figure which makes 
possible such re-imposition. 

(e) An accurate figure of the total number of women employed 
underground cannot be given as this figure varies from day to day. 
It is however estimated that about 16,000 women are at present 
employed underground in all coal mines in Bengal, Bihar, Central 
Provinces and Orissa. 

(f) Women employed underground are entitled to the same 
wages as men on similar work. The wages of women employed 
underground vary from annas 0-12-0 to annas 0-15-0 a day 
exclusive of the free rice concession. Up-to-date information in 
respect of wages of women in other trades is not readily available. 

(g) Women are not allowed to be employed underground in 
galleries which are less than 5V 2 feet in height. They are also 
entitled to the benefits of the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 
1941. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Act and 
rules made thereunder, three Inspectors have been appointed. In 
addition, three Welfare Officers have also been appointed and a 
Lady Welfare Officer for mines is being appointed. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Has the Honourable Member seen the 
report in the United Kingdom about women in coal mines in 
which it is stated that no woman should work with any clothing 
above the waist-line ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : In view of this fact that neither in the United 
Kingdom nor in the United Slates of America, nor in any country in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


799 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 799 

the British Commonwealth of Nations, are women employed 
underground in spite of the stress of war, will the Honourable 
Member say why he has been a party to this humiliating practice ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : On account of the 
shortage of coal. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: The Honourable Member stated that a 
woman is entitled to the same wage as a man and he said that 
a woman on an average gets twelve annas. I do not agree with 
your figure. In the coal-fields to the best of my knowledge a 
man and woman are paid jointly for joint production. How does 
the Government of India make sure what portion of the joint 
earning the man gives to the woman ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is easy to arrive 
at the figure by distributing the gang wages. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I again ask the Honourable Member 
how does he make sure that the woman gets the same wages 
as the man ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I said that a woman 
is entitled to the same wages as a man for the same work. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : How docs he make sure that the man 
gives to the woman half the wage and does not take more for 
himself and give loss to the woman. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know but I 
feel that the man and woman who work together arc husband and 
wife and I wonder whether they would be very much interested 
in exact mathematical distribution of their joint wages. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : In view of the fact that the Honourable 
Member stated that he did not know, may I ask the Government 
of India to withdraw the statement which they have made that 
a woman is entitled to equal wage with the man. Is not the 
Honourable Member proclaiming that the woman is getting equal 
wage with the man ? Unless he can make sure how the woman 
can get equal wage with the man, he is not entitled to make a 
statement which in my judgment, is misleading. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is only a 
quibble on the part of the Honourable Member. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask whether the 
Government according to the assurance given by them during the last 
Session have reviewed the position and satisfied themselves that it is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-07.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


1-10-2013/YS-17-11-2013 


800 


800 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

absolutely necessary for them to continue this cruel custom of 
employing women in mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government 
have been reviewing the position. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : May I know from the Honourable 
Member whether there is any restriction upon pregnant women 
going underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is very difficult 
to put any such restriction, because, as my Honourable friend is 
aware, it is extremely difficult to discover the state of pregnancy 
in many women. 

Sir Cowasjee Jehangir : Surely the Honourable Member 
realises that it is not such a difficult matter. It is done in other 
trades. Why can’t it be done here as well ? Why can’t a restriction 
be placed at least in theory, if not in practice, that no pregnant 
woman shall go underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I might assure my 
Honourable friend that the matter is under active consideration. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Have the Government 
made any arrangement for the care of infants and children of 
these women workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There has been 
established a Coal- miners’ Welfare Fund and the care of children 
will be one of the duties of this Fund. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : I want to know 
whether the Government have made any definite arrangement 
for the care of the infants and children of these women ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That is a statutory 
organisation and one of its obligatory duties would be to look 
after the infants and children of the women workers. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : May I know whether Government have 
taken effective steps to reduce the number of women working in 
the mines and increase the number of men to be employed there ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: That is also under 
consideration. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Arc any steps being taken ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Steps are being 
contemplated. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-1 1-2013 


801 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 801 

Dr. G. V. Deshmukh : Besides the statutory provision, do 
Government know of any arrangement that should be made to 
safeguard the welfare of these pregnant women and children ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure the 
Honourable Member will allow me to say that intelligence is 
not the monopoly of himself ? 

Dr. G. V. Deshmukh : Neither is it the monopoly of the 
Government. 


229 

* Shortage of Labour in Coal Mines 

240. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if it is a fact that shortage 
of labour in coal mines was due to higher wages offered by Army 
contractors for the construction of aerodromes, etc. ? 

(b) What were the wages in coal mines before the war, and 
what have been the wages during each of the five years of the 
war ? 

(c) Is it true that the falling off in the output of coal mines 
was due to the reluctance of coal mine-owners to pay proper 
wages, having regard to the rise in the cost of living ? 

(d) What steps have Government taken to deal with the 
situation created by (i) shortage of labour, and (ii) shortage of 
coal ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Employment of 
labour at higher rates by Army contractors was a contributory 
cause of the shortage of labour in collieries; 

(b) A statement® is laid on the Table of the House. 

(c) It is a fact that wages of colliery labour were not for long 
sufficiently adjusted to meet the increased cost of living. This 
was one factor in the falling off of the supply of labour. 

(d) I invite the attention of the Honourable Member to the replies 
given in the Legislative Assembly by the Honourable Member for 
Supply to parts (a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) of Mr. Neogy’s starred question 
No. 17. This describes the various steps taken by Government to deal 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 10th November 1944, p. 561. 
@ Statement not included here. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


802 


802 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with the situation created by the shortage of labour and the 
shortage of coal. 

The representatives of the industry also agreed at Dhanbad 
in December 1943 to increase the cash wages of colliery labour 
and grant concessions in the supply of foodstuffs. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What is the increase in wages that the 
employers are compelled to pay as compared with the prewar rates. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sorry I cannot 
give the figure but I have got a statement here which is pretty 
full and I am sure the Honourable Member will find what he 
wants there. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What steps have the Government taken 
to see that the women forced into the mines in this distressful 
manner get at least a little more pittance than women working 
in other trades above ground? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I can assure my 
Honourable friend that the wages in coal mines have increased 
by more than 50 per cent. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What steps have the Government taken 
to coerce the coal mine owners ? The Government pay for coal 
Rs. 9-8-0 now instead of Rs. 3-8-0 before the war. If you give 
so much more for coal, have you made any condition that this 
part of the extra will go to the women workers whom you have 
disgracefully forced into the mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think we have 
taken all the steps necessary. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : Is it not a fact that the Government of 
India are taking measures to prevent miners being employed by 
military contractors in order that the miners may be forced to 
go into mines for work at the risk of being starved ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That does not arise 
out of this question. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Do these 16,000 women possess any 
special qualification or skill so that they are thus forced to work 
in the mines, which qualifications could not be acquired by males 
in this country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are neither 
asked nor forced. They are only permitted to offer themselves for 
their traditional occupation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


803 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 803 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I know whether it is not a fact 
that the coal production today is less than the prewar period 
and whether this shortage of coal production is not due to 
the smallness of the wages paid to the miners ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is entitled to draw his own inference. 


230 


* Provincial Governments’ Contribution to 
Radical Democratic Party and 
Indian Labour Federation 

252. Sir Abdul Halim Ghuznavi : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether office bearers or any individual of the Radical 
Democratic Party or of the Indian Federation of 
Labour receive monetary help from the different 
Provincial Governments besides Rs. 13,000 per month 
from the Central Government; 

(b) whether he is aware that these two organisations 
receive a sum of Rs. 75,000 per month from the 
Government of the United Provinces; 

(c) The object of the Government in giving monetary help 
to these two organisations only; and 

(d) which the other labour organisations are which receive 
monetary help from the Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
has no information. The grant of Rs. 13,000 is made not to 
the Radical Democratic Party but to the Indian Federation 
of Labour and not to any individual member or office-bearer 
of the Federation. The letter in which assistance from 
Government was offered was addressed both to the All-India 
Trade Union Congress and the Indian Federation of Labour. 
In their reply the All-India Trade Union Congress did not 
ask for any assistance. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 10th November 1944, p. 568. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


804 


804 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) I am not aware of any grant made to the Federation by 
the Government of the United Provinces. 

(c) This Department is concerned only with the grant to 
the Indian Federation of Labour. The object of this grant is to 
enable the Federation to do propaganda to keep up the morale 
of industrial labour. 

(d) There are no other labour organisations receiving monetary 
help from the Central Government. 

231 

* Exploratory and Prospecting Licences 
to British and American Firms re 
Potential Oil Resources 

48. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to lay on the table a statement bringing 
up-to-date the information supplied in the statement that was 
laid on the table on the 2nd August, 1943, relating to mineral 
concessions (including exploratory and prospecting licences) 
granted to British and American firms in respect of potential 
oil resources in British India ? 

(b) Is it a fact that licences for carrying on geo-physical 
explorations have been granted by different Provincial 
Governments. If so, did the Provincial Governments concerned 
consult the Government of India before granting such licences ? 

(c) To which firms have these licences been granted; in respect 
of which areas, and what are their terms ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
is being collected and a statement will be laid on the table of 
the House in due course. 


232 

@ The Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
I do not propose to make the motion that stands in my name. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1944, 10th November 1944, p. 574. 
@ Ibid., 14th November 1944, p. 730. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


805 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 805 

233 

* Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Company 

419. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that the Delhi 
Electric Supply and Traction Company Limited, is a company 
incorporated outside India ? How long has this Company been 
operating in the Delhi Province and what is the area served by it ? 

(b) How many units of electricity did this Company use for 
traction purposes, how many units did it sell to consumers in 
its area of supply during the past twelve months or so, how 
many units out of its total supply did it generate from its own 
power station, and how many units did the Company buy from 
the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Limited ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Delhi Electric Supply and Traction 
Company Limited has not increased the supply of current from 
its generating station to any considerable extent for a number 
of years, and has been for some time, for all practical purposes, 
dependent upon the Government power station at present under 
the control of the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Limited ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority 
Limited is a company sponsored by Government and works on 
a no-profit basis ? 

(e) What is the price that the Delhi Electric Supply and 
Traction Company Limited pays per unit of electricity supplied 
by the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Limited, and 
what are the different rates at which the Delhi Electric Supply 
and Traction Company Limited sells electricity to its different 
classes of customers ? 

(f) Is it a fact that the Government have an option to purchase 
the Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Company Limited in 
February, 1947, when their present licence expires, provided a 
notice is served on the Company in February 1945 ? If so, has 
the question of exercising the option been considered as yet, and 
with what result ? 

(g) What is the amount that the Government will have to pay in case 
they decide to purchase this undertaking, and to what extent will the 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 15th November 1944, p. 780 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


806 


806 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

purchase enable the Government to utilise the sterling balance 
held to the credit of India in England ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. The 
Company’s licence runs from the 2nd March 1905 : The area of 
supply now includes; 

(i) the whole of the area in the jurisdiction of the Delhi 
Municipal Committee; 

(ii) the whole of the Delhi Civil Station Notified Area; 

(iii) the whole of the West Delhi Notified Area; and 

(iv) a tract of land in the jurisdiction of the Delhi District 
Board. 

(b) During war-time it is not in the public interest to supply 
the information. 

(c) Yes. The Company’s generating plant is now used more or 
less as a stand-by. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) A statement is laid on the table. 

(f) Yes. The question is now under the consideration of the 
Chief Commissioner, Delhi. 

(g) Under the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the price to be paid for the property 
of the licence, if the option of purchasing were exercised, would 
be its fair market value at the time of purchase of determined 
by arbitration. It is not possible to answer the second half of the 
question till the amount likely to be involved is known. 

STATEMENT 

The Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Co. Ltd., are charged 
at 69 anna per unit of electricity supplied in bulk by the Delhi 
Central Electric Power Authority Limited. 

Rates charged by the Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Co. Ltd. 

Lighting and fans — Three annas per unit less 3 pics discount 
per unit for prompt payment of bills. 

Domestic power, (Cooling, water heating, refrigerators, radiators 
and air conditioning) — One anna per unit nett. 

Battery charging — Two annas per unit less ten per cent discount 
for prompt payment of bills. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


807 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 807 

Industrial — 

A Consumer with connected load up to 75 K.V.A. 

Restricted hour supply — 1.1 anna per unit less a discount of 
.1 anna per unit for prompt payment of bills. 

Unrestricted hour supply — Rates as for Restricted hour supply 
and in addition a charge of Rs. 5 per H. P. per month less ten 
per cent discount for prompt payment of bills. 

Special rates are quoted. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Is the Honourable Member aware that 
a few years ago, the Delhi Municipal Committee applied for a 
licence for the purpose of enabling itself to supply electricity in 
the area concerned or at least part of it and that as a result of 
that application, an enquiry was held into the position of this 
company by a Committee over which perhaps Sir James Pitkeathly 
presided or the Electrical Adviser to the Government of Bengal, 
presided ? Is the Honourable Member in a position to give this 
House an idea about the comments made by this Committee or 
these individuals, in regard to the affairs of this company ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If the Honourable 
Member will put down a specific question, I shall certainly be 
glad to give the information. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Has the Honourable Member tried to 
ascertain the total amount of profits earned by this Company ? 
Has the attention of the Honourable Member been drawn to a 
statement in a recent article in the Hindustan Times in which 
it has been stated that the total profits earned by the company 
was already about five times its capital? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir, I have 
noticed. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Is the Honourable Member in a position 
to say whether that is a fact or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say 
anything about that now. If the Honourable Member wants 
information, he will give notice of a question. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With reference to part (b) May I know 
the proportion of units actually produced by this company to 
the units purchased by the company at cost price from the 
Government undertakings ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


808 


808 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have already 
answered that during war time, it is not in the public interest to 
give the information. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I know. Is the Honourable Member in a 
position to deny that it is a very small proportion of the units 
actually distributed by this company that is produced by it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That, I am afraid, 
will be circumventing the provisions of the Act which prohibits 
me from giving the information. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : I did not know that the Honourable Member 
was prevented even from giving the proportion. However, I give 
up that point. As regards the point that the matter is under 
consideration of the Chief Commissioner having regard to the 
important policy involved do Government propose to direct the Chief 
Commissioner in regard to coming to any particular conclusion, or 
do the Government of India merely propose to carry out, or rather 
endorse, the decision of the Chief Commissioner in this behalf? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government of 
India themselves are considering this matter. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With regard to part (f), having regard to 
the shortness of time during which notice is to be served, if at 
all, will the Government come to a very quick decision in the 
matter ? Will the Government be pleased to take this House into 
their confidence at the earliest possible opportunity in regard to 
this case ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I can assure my 
Honourable friend that Government will certainly come to its own 
conclusions before the time expires. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Having regard to the fact that this 
Legislature is virtually in the position of a Provincial Legislature 
so far as Delhi Province is concerned, does the Honourable Member 
propose to let this House have an opportunity to consider and 
discuss this matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall bear the 
Honourable Member’s suggestion in mind. 

Mr. R. R. Gupta : Do the Government propose to increase the 
capacity of the electric power house situated in New Delhi under 
the Government control ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That question does 
not arise. I cannot give an answer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


809 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 809 

234 

* Refusal of Facilities to All-India Womens 
Conference for Studying the Condition of 
Women in Coal Mines 

579. Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) if it is a fact that the All-India Women’s Conference 
approached the Government for facilities to send an 
investigation Committee for an impartial studying of 
women in coal mines and that on the 3rd May, the 
Government of India informed the aforesaid organization 
that there was no objection against such investigation, 
and the time was not suitable at present; and 

(b) if it is a fact that subsequently on a request from the 
All-India Women’s Conference on the 26th May, the 
Government of India again refused the facilities and 
informed them that Government would let them know 
when the time was suitable and that upto now the 
All-India Women’s Conference has not heard from the 
Government; what the causes are which led to this 
course of action ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) the reply to the first part of the question is in the 
affirmative. The reasons were explained in the Government of 
India’s letters to the President of the Conference. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : May I know the reasons which led the 
Government to pass the order referred to in part (b) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The time was not 
suitable. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : What does the Government mean by saying 
that the time was not suitable ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think the word 
‘suitable’ is a very simple word. Everybody can understand it. I 
do not think I can further simplify it. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is it a fact that the Government allowed the 
Regge and the Health Survey Committees to go and investigate during 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, pp. 
1000 - 01 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


810 


810 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the same period ? Is it a fact that the All-India Women’s 
organisation has not been given similar permission till now ? If 
so, what is the basis for such differentiation ? Why is it that a 
responsible body like the All-India Women’s organisation who 
are interested in the welfare of women has not been allowed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are official 
bodies which were allowed. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Are not the Members of the Legislature 
on that Committee ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is arguing. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Why are women 
stopped from going into the mines and investigating ? Why should 
Government consider that the time is not suitable only in the 
case of Women’s organisation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member can draw his own inference. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether it is not a fact 
that Government do not consider the time suitable because 
the conditions in the mines are so bad that they do not like 
investigation being made by an impartial body ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member is at liberty to draw his own inferences. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Next 
question. 


235 

* Shortage of Labour in Coal Mines 
due to Malaria 

580. Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable the Labour 

Member please state: 

(a) if it is a fact that the shortage of labour in coal mines, 
particularly during the months of August and September 
was due to a large proportion of mining labour suffering 
from malaria and that no adequate treatment was 
possible due to the inadequate supply of quinine; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, pp. 

1001 - 02 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


811 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 811 

(b) if the Honourable Member is aware of the fact that 
mining labour is suffering so acutely from the effects of 
diseases and malnutrition that this has seriously affected 
their efficiency; if so, what steps taken to remedy this 
are ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The coal-mining 
labour is not immune to the seasonal incidence of malaria, but 
it is not correct to say that a large proportion of this labour 
suffered from the disease during August and September. The 
incidence of the disease per thousand of the average daily labour 
force employed in the Jharia Coalfield was 81 and 80 for the 
month of August in 1943 and 1944 respectively and 111 and 74 
for the month of September in 1943 and 1944 respectively. Every 
effort is made to provide adequate facilities for treatment and 
sufficient supplies of quinine and its substitutes. 

(b) It cannot be said that mining labour is suffering acutely 
from mal-nutrition. As regards their health all collieries employing 
30 persons or more are required to maintain a dispensary and 
distribute medicines through their doctors. Coal Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund has recently been set up from which measures for 
prevention of disease in the mining population and improvement 
of medical facilities will be financed. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With regard to the point about mal- 
nutrition, will the Honourable Member please make a statement 
as to whether it is not a fact and an admitted fact that apart 
from the shortage of labour in collieries, individual output of 
work has gone down due to malnutrition ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not certain 
about the facts mentioned by my Honourable friend. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member make 
an enquiry from the Honourable the Supply Member, who, I 
understand made a statement to this effect on a recent occasion 
when he met one of the Chambers of Commerce. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is no need for 
an enquiry as the Honourable Member seems to be in possession 
of the fact. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable Member convince 
himself about the truth of this position ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


812 


812 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, I know there 
has been some fall in production, but I understood it was entirely 
due to the fact that there was lack of machinery. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : As the Honourable Member has told 
us about dispensaries in the different mines, will he kindly 
investigate and find out what the medical facilities are and how 
far the dispensaries are working and giving medicines in the 
mines at Ranigunj and Jharia ? My information is that some 
of them cannot work because there are not enough medicines. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, it was 
because in the opinion of Government the facilities were not 
sufficient that Government established the coal Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund. 


236 

* Cases of Employment of Children on 
Underground Work in Mines 

581. Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) if he is aware of the fact that there are a growing number 
of cases of violation of the Act prohibiting children in 
underground work in mines ? 

(b) if the answer is in the affirmative, what the steps taken 
to ensure the enforcement of the Act are; and 

(c) if the answer is in the negative, will the Honourable 
Member kindly investigate the matter and take effective 
steps to put a stop to any such illegal practice that may 
prevail ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) Inspections are regularly made by the Officers of the 
Department of Mines to enforce the provisions of the Indian 
Mines Act regarding the prohibition of employment of children 
in mines and effective steps will be taken as a matter of course 
if any such illegal practice prevails anywhere. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1003. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


813 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 813 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is the Honourable Member aware that 
there is a growing number of cases of violation in some of the 
mines in Jharia and Ranigunj coalfields and that children of 
14 and 15 are signed up as adults and actually go down the mines ? 
And what does the Honourable Member propose to do about it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If the Honourable 
Member has any specific cases having reference to specific 
mines and will bring them to my notice, I will certainly take 
the matter up. 


237 

* Underground Work in Mines 
by Pregnant Women 

582. Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) if he is aware of the fact that pregnant women usually 
work underground in mines until the ninth month and 
again a fortnight after child birth, and that in mines 
where maternity benefits are not given they work even 
longer ? 

(b) the steps Government have taken to stop pregnant 
women from working underground; 

(c) if it is a fact that there have been a certain number 
of accidents to women working underground within the 
last year and there is no way of ascertaining how many 
of these accidents have occurred to pregnant women; 
and 

(d) if it is a fact that maternity benefits are given only 
in some mines; what steps Government intend to take 
to make maternity benefits compulsory for all women 
working in mining areas ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I am not 

aware of the basis for this allegation. Under section 3 of the 
Mines Maternity Benefit Act, employment of a woman for a 
period of four weeks following her confinement is prohibited. 
Further a woman is entitled to leave of absence for a period 
of one month before she expects to be delivered of a child. 
Inspections under this Act are regularly made by the Labour 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1003. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


814 


814 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Inspectors under the Chief Inspector of Mines, all of whom are 
doctors, with a view to enforcing the provisions of the Act and the 
rules made thereunder. 

(b) As already stated, pregnant women are entitled to leave of 
absence for a period of one month before the date of delivery; and 
the object of the employment of Labour Inspectors under the Chief 
Inspector of Mines is to make known to these women their rights 
under the Act and to assist them in securing the benefits of that Act. 

(c) Yes, but no information of any of these women being pregnant 
has been received. During enquiries following accidents, the evidence 
of the colliery doctor is invariably recorded and if a woman were 
pregnant her condition would be disclosed and recorded. 

(d) The Mines Maternity Benefit Act 1941 applies to all mines 
in British India except: 

(i) certain stone crushing plants forming part of mines in the 
province of Bombay; 

(ii) iron ore mines worked without mechanical power, the 
whole of the ore from which is supplied locally to village 
smelters and blacksmiths; and 

(iii) those mines in which excavation is being carried out 
for prospecting purposes only, provided not more than 
20 persons are employed in or about such excavation and 
subject to certain other conditions. 

It is not considered necessary to make maternity benefits 
compulsory in these small mines. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Have there actually been any cases 
of pregnant women having suffered ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, there have been 
some. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: When ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Since they started 
working. These accidents are often occurring in the coal mines. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable Member tell us 
whether the best way of preventing pregnant women from going 
down the mines would not be to restore the ban on women working 
underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I entirely agree, 
provided the circumstances were propitious. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


815 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 815 

238 

* Restoration of Ban on Women Working 
Underground in Coal Mines 

583. Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state : 

(a) when the Government of India intend to restore the 
ban on women working underground in coal mines in 
view of their former promise; and 

(b) how far the employment of women underground has 
increased coal raisings ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Government 
are most anxious to re-impose the ban as soon as production of 
coal reaches a figure which makes possible such re-imposition. 

(b) Coal raisings have increased appreciably as a result of 
the employment of women underground, but no exact figures 
can be given as other factors are in operation at the same time. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is the Honourable Member aware that 
a very infinitessimal proportion represents the increased raisings 
helped by women working underground and does he consider 
that the violation of an international code and moral convention 
is compensated by the increased raisings that is due to women 
working in the mines even from the point of view increased 
production ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My information 
is to the contrary. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : May I know what is the target 
of production aimed at by Government in order to restore this 
ban ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to say. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is the Honourable Member aware that 
the woman acts as loader underground and the man as cutter, 
and so the rate of progress of each tub is much slower because 
a woman cannot act as cutter, and the result is that the man 
has to rest, whereas the rate would be much faster 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member is making a speech. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1004. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


816 


816 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : I should like to know if the Labour Member 
does not consider that the rate of progress of the work per tub is 
much slower because women work as loaders and cannot work as 
cutters. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am glad to have that 
information, but I am passing no opinion either on the reliability of 
the statement or the feasibility of the suggestion. 

239 

* Post of Labour Welfare Officer for 
Government of India Presses 

586. Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the post of Labour Welfare Officer for the 
Government of India presses was advertised; if so, when 
and how; 

(b) whether any selection has been made; 

(c) whether it is a fact that the post was reserved for a Muslim; 

(d) the number of persons who have been appointed as Assistant 
Labour Welfare Officers during the last two years; and 

(e) what their academic qualifications are and how many of 
them are Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) One posts of 
Labour Welfare Officer for the Government of India Presses has 
been sanctioned and it was advertised by the Federal Public Service 
Commission in the approved newspapers in June last. Applications 
were due to reach the office of the Commission by the 10th July; 

(b) and (c) Yes. 

(d) One lady Assistant Welfare Adviser was appointed directly 
under Labour Department. 

(e) She is M.A., M. Litt., and is a Hindu. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga: Are these officers appointed for the Central 
Government Presses or also for the Provincial Government Presses ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : For the Central 
Government Presses. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, pp. 
1005-06. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


817 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 817 


240 

* Statistics re Private Newspaper Owners 
and Their Employees 

600. Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall : Will the Honourable Member for 
Labour be pleased to state : 

(a) if the Government have obtained any statistics about the 
number of private newspaper owners and the persons 
employed by them; and 

(b) if the answer to (a) be in the negative, do the Government 
propose to obtain the statistics with a view to afford relief 
to such employees with regard to (i) rules of leave, (ii) list of 
holidays, (iii) grades of salaries and (iv) dearness allowance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) The Labour Investigation Committee is collecting general 
information regarding the terms and conditions of employees in printing 
presses. The question as to what additional information should be 
collected and as to the feasibility of legislating to govern the conditions of 
employees of newspaper organisations will be considered in due course. 

Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall : May I know if Government can at least 
obtain the figures regarding Delhi Printing Press ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think it would be better 
to wait in order to know what the Labour Investigation Committee is 
doing in this matter. 

Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall : Delhi is a small area of which the 
Honourable Member can get 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : The Honourable 
Member is arguing. Next question. 

241 

@ Extensions of Service in Government of India 
Press, Aligarh 

601. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that extension after extension in service 
is allowed in many cases in the Government of India Press, 
Aligarh 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1013. 
@ Ibid. pp. 1013-14. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


818 


818 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) whether it is a fact that every year the Manager of 
that Press recommends a lot of cases of extension to 
the Controller of Printing and Stationery in India; 

(c) whether it is a fact that fully trained and qualified 
men are available in that Press to work in the places of 
these men whose extension has been recommended by 
the Manager and who are on the verge of retirement; 

(d) whether it is a fact that the claims of some of the 
qualified men for the posts of these retiring hands 
have been blocked due to these recommendations for 
extension in service; and 

(e) if the answers to (a) to (d) be in the affirmative, has 
the Honourable Member considered the advisability 
of issuing instructions to the effect that no further 
extension be granted in future under any circumstances ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) No. 

Only a few cases are recommended. 

(c) In some cases qualified men are available, in others not. 

(d) No. 

(e) Does not arise. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Do I understand that 
the answer to part (a) of the question is in the negative, and he 
has not been recommending any extensions whatsoever? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said, only a few 
cases are recommended. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Has the General Manager 
been granting any extensions, or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Manager has 
been granting extensions. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : May I know why these 
extensions are granted when qualified persons are available. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not prepared to 
admit that extensions are granted notwithstanding that qualified 
persons are available. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : I understood the 
Honourable Member to say that sometimes extensions are granted 
even when qualified persons are available. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


819 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 819 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, in a very few cases. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : May I know the reason 
for which extensions are granted to people even under those 
circumstances ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I understand that 
the general reason why these extensions are granted in the cases 
referred to by my Honourable friend are entirely governed by the 
fact that some people lose their pensions if they are not given a 
year or two’s extension. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Is that the only reason, or 
is there some other reason also ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not aware of 
any other reason. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Will the Honourable Member 
be pleased to enquire whether the extensions that were given in the 
cases referred to were solely for this reason or for some other reason ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have made enquiries 
and that is the information I have. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : May I know the names of 
persons included in those ‘few cases’ ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no names of 
persons, but I have a certain number of cases before me. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : What community do they 
belong to ? 

(No reply). 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Next question. 

242 

* Time Scale of Pay for Binders and 
Warehousemen of Government of India Press, 

New Delhi 

602. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that the Government of India has 
sanctioned the Time Scale of pay for which the Binders and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, pp. 
1014-15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


820 


820 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

warehousemen of the Government of India Press, New 
Delhi, had been representing; 

(b) whether it is a fact that these people have been 
representing their case for this purpose for the last 
fifteen years approximately; 

(c) whether it is a fact that some warehousemen who 
have been serving for the last fifteen and twenty years 
and whose pay is only Rs. 25 per month at present, 
are not benefited at all by this Time Scale of pay at 
present; 

(d) whether it is a fact that not a single increment has 
been sanctioned to any man, immediately; and 

(e) if the answers to (a) to (d) be in the affirmative, will the 
Honourable Member please consider the advisability 
of sanctioning at least one increment to all Binders 
and warehousemen just at the time of introducing 
the Time Scale of pay so that some immediate relief 
may be gained by these men who have been waiting 
for the last so many years ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes, for some time past. 

(c) Yes, but they will be benefited as soon as they earn 
their next increment. 

(d) Yes, because no increment has been yet earned since 
the 22nd June 1944 when the Time Scale came into force. 

(e) No action as proposed is necessary, as the men will 
earn their increments next year. 

Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : Will the Honourable 
Member be pleased to consider that some persons will be 
on the verge of retirement and will not be able to get any 
benefit from this time-scale. Isn’t it proper in such case for 
the Government to give them some increment in lieu of their 
past services ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think 
it is prudent to alter the law in order to meet hard cases! 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


821 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 821 


243 

* Development of Mahanadi Projects in Orissa 

607. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state : 

(a) if he is aware that Sir M. Visweewaraya Committee’s report 
on Mahanadi to stop the ravages of floods in Orissa has 
suggested the development of Mahanadi projects and a 
system of irrigation canals to irrigate huge areas of land 
in Cuttack, Sambalpore, Puri and Balasore Districts; 

(b) if such a scheme was estimated to cost about rupees four 
crores in 1938-39; and 

(c) whether Government of India will consider the advisability 
of taking the initiative and developing that scheme, in view 
of the financial disabilities of the subvention province of 
Orissa and also of the great need of India for more rice 
production ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) No. 

Information on the subject has been called for. 

(c) Government cannot give such an assurance at this stage 
without a careful examination of the scheme. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is Government prepared to examine this 
scheme carefully ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will it form part of the investigations of 
one of the various sub-committees or the National Planning structure 
of committees ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say as regards 
the procedure that Government should adopt. But I shall examine 
the thing. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Thank you. 

244 

@ Arrangements for Supply of Rice to Colliery 
Labour in Bihar 

611. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable Member for Labour 
be pleased to explain in detail the arrangements that are in operation 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1018. 
@ Ibid., p. 1021. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


822 


822 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the province of Bihar in the matter of supplying rice to colliery 
labour ? 

(b) Has the Honourable Member received any complaint that 
the Bihar authorities are charging some of the collieries prices 
for rice to be supplied to their labour force which are higher 
than the control prices and that the quality of rice supplies is 
also bad ? If so, what are the different points raised in these 
complaints, and what are the ascertained facts relating thereto ? 

(c) How does the system in Bihar in the matter differ from 
the system introduced in the Bengal collieries ? 

(d) What action do Government propose to take to remove 
the complaints made on behalf of a section of the Bihar collieries 
in this matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Under an order 
issued by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Dhanbad, under 
the Defence of India Rules dated the 20th April 1944, every 
colliery worker is entitled to buy from the colliery shop at prices 
equal to the controlled prices fixed by the Additional Deputy 
Commissioner, an amount of foodgrains not exceeding a total 
of four seers of foodgrains per week (of which not more than 
two seers shall be rice) for himself and each adult dependent, 
and two seers (of which not more than one seer shall be rice) 
for each minor dependent. In additional every heavy worker is 
entitled to half a seer of free ration in rice for each attendance; 
but miners who prefer may draw the whole or some part of the 
free ration in other grains. 

(b) The reply to the first part is in the affirmative. The 
facts are that the Bihar Government have charged the Colliery 
Associations the actual cost of rice supplied up to the 1st 
November 1944. The bulk of these supplies originated in Nepal 
where the Bihar government had to purchase above their control 
rate. Consequently supplies of Nepal rice have been made to the 
Colliery Associations at approximately Rs. 1 — 8 — 0 above the 
local wholesale control rate. From the 1st November 1944, the 
Bihar Government have decided to charge the local wholesale 
control rate plus four annas administrative charge and to bear 
the resulting loss. The facts relating to the complaint regarding 
quality are being ascertain. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


823 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 823 

(c) In the Bengal collieries there is no rationing system but 
employers of more than 1,000 workers must buy their supplies 
of grains from the Civil Supplies Department of the Government. 
In Bihar every colliery is required to buy through the Rice 
Administrator, Indian Mining Association or the Secretary Joint 
Supply Pool. 

(d) The Honourable Member’s attention is invited to the 
answer given to clause (b) of the question. 

245 

* Contract for Construction of Clerks’ Quarters 
at Lodi Road, Delhi 

612. Shri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the contract for the construction of clerks’ 
quarters at Lodi Road for about Rs. 28,60,000 was 
given to a higher tenderer instead of lower tenderer 
who quoted 11.25 below the schedule of rates; 

(b) if the answer to (a) is in the affirmative what was the 
total excess amount the Government had to pay over 
the lowest tenderer, 

(c) if it is a fact that the same firm was given another 
contract for a similar construction at the very place for 
about Rs. 50,00,000 at 5 per cent, above the schedule 
of rates, rejecting the lowest tenderer; and 

(d) were the above tenders examined by the Department 
before they were accepted ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) No. A portion of the Lodi Road project was given to this 
firm as its tender rate was low in comparison with that of others. 

(d) The tenders were examined and accepted by the Chief 
Engineer, Central Public Works Department who is the competent 
authority in such cases. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, pp. 
1021 - 22 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


824 


824 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

246 

* Prescribing Set Form of Receipt for Rent under 
Delhi Rent Control Ordinance 

625. Mr. Kailash Bihari Lall : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if the Government propose 
to prescribe a set form of receipt to be compulsorily granted 
by the landlord to the tenants under the Delhi Rent Control 
Ordinance, 1944 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government have 
the matter under examination. 

247 

@ Increase in Cost of Living in Certain Cities 

100. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) if it is a fact that the living index has shown an 
increase in the cost of living by 182 per cent in certain 
cities; if not, what the fact is; 

(b) if it is a fact that the wages of Railway servants 
working in those cities have not been raised by 182 
per cent; if not, what the correct fact is; and 

(c) if the Government propose to increase the wages of 
the employees in those cities where the cost of living 
has arisen by 182 per cent accordingly; if not, why 
not; 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
are aware that the published cost of living indexes have risen 
in some towns by 182 or more over the index of August, 1939. 

(b) The answer to the first part is in the affirmative. In 
regard to the second, Railway workers are compensated for 
increased cost of living by relief in cash and concessions in 
kind which together are considered adequate to meet the needs 
and are adjusted from time to time as the situation demands. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1027. 
@ Ibid. p. 1038. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


825 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 825 

(c) The answer to the first part is in the negative. As regards 
the second part, the policy of Government is not to make any 
comprehensive revisions in scales of pay during the present 
unstable economic conditions but to meet increases in the cost 
of living either by dearness allowance or by relief in kind or 
by both. 


248 

* Requests for Adjudication of Railway Trade 

Disputes 

101. Mr, Badri Dutt Pande : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) the number of requests for adjudication of trade 
disputes between the Railway Administrations and its 
employees recorded during the preceding five years; 
and 

(b) how those requests were disposed of? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). I place 
on the table a statement showing the number of requests made 
for settlement of trade disputes between Railway Administrations 
and their employees during the past five years under the Trade 
Disputes Act or Rule 81A of the Defence of India Rules, and 
action taken on them. 


249 

@ Procedure re Appointment of Adjudicator of 
Trade Disputes 

102. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : Will the Honourable the 

Labour Member please state : 

(a) the rules governing the proceedings before an 
adjudicator is appointed under Rule 81 of the Defence 
of India Act Rules; 

(b) the qualifications prescribed for the appointment of an 
adjudicator for the trade disputes between the employer 
and its employees; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1038. 

@ Ibid., p. 1040. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


826 


826 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


s* y 

O JS 

to 


y e 
^ y 

« £ 

y S 

to to 

3 Si 

o, 

•2 y 
Q 3 


8 -2 
8 -8 


6 

y 

-3 

to 

y 

y 

"8 

3 

s 


y 

■8 

8 

So 


-3 

to 


to 

5 y 

6 


S 


e 

e 

o 

y 


cc 

y 

y 

& 


S ^ 

© QO 

So ~o 

o s 

s “5 I 

o ** 

^ ‘loft 

8 ^ k 

KS £ 'S 

y ^ < 

w ^Oo to 


s 

© 


y 


8 

6 S 

^ g 8 

o .y CO 

CO ^ £ 

8 q .2 

So H “ 


a 

^ 8 ^ 


a 

So 


So 

£ 


3 

3 


s a 

« © 8 

« tS ^ 

y « 

3 y b 

^ *N6 S 

^ s 
ft5 » 8 
"e 1 a 
a 03 


0 

P 

ft 

£ ^ 
M 0 
0 > 
P 0 


Ph 


a 

'C 3 
0 Z 
m 


< £ 


o 

ft 

H 

P 

ft 


■s 5 

a 

Jh co 
EH o3 


>> .S 

ft^ 3 

ft 3 

o3 ^ 


-m 2 
0 £ 
.0 

5? ["P 
Ph T3 


CD +n 

s t$ 
3 c 

K*i 

co 

’P a) 

St 

P CL 

P w 

-Lh Q 
O M 

+y 0 
5 h ^ 

P cti 

O Sh 

O H 

03 0 

C 4 _| rP 

o tt 

+J 

p ° 
0 

2 03 
p p 
’o .2 

ft H 
a g 

<1 CO 


o 

H 

s 

be . 
P l " H 

S W 

a; <d 
> P 

03 +> 
5h £ 

^ o 

CO 


o3 


03 ,x3 


o3 0) 
P 
be +J 

B ^ 

2 p 

o CD 

P 
P 

•"rH >< 

£ P 


CD 


Lh 


r ft 
ft a; 
o co 

s_i * 

ft ® 
t3 

2 ^ 
■2 & 


2 ° 


T3 

O) 


O 

O) +y 
T3 

s -s 
s <c 

CO 

'5 Q) 

s. +-» 

H CL 

W .M 

<L-I Q 

o M 

+J 0) 

?h r c3 
3 o3 
O 

O H 

03 o 

y_t 

o *> 

-LJ ^4H 

a o 

0 

2 « 
a 

‘o .2 
ft 2 


0 

s 0 
g 

0) g 

-H O 


"0 

0 


3 & 


o3 ^ 
.2 ft 
r d 0 

o3 

a 2 

CS < 

t)H S - • 

o co 


o3 co 
be go 
£ Q> 


a i> <? 


o 

0 


0 

>> 

o 


0 3 
2 

,S| 

§,. a 

ft 


ft 

2 >> 
0 o3 
£ 

0 rft 
4P cd 
EH 


o 

02 


< O 13 


'S 

0 

fe 

JD 

0 

S 0 
03 
Cd 

£ 03 

03 ^ 
rH 

1 1 o 

03 5h 

1 ^ 
1-2 ^ 
-H ^ 

^ § 


CO 

02 


O 

P 


o3 

2 

Ph 


O 

P 


o 

p 


ti 

_o 

’2 

p 


03 

S 

2 

Ph 


O 


nC O 

EH P 


co 

02 


O 

P 


o 

p 


►» 

03 

rft 


o 

p 


o 

p 


p 

_o 

2 

P 


0 

>» 

o 


W 

Ph* 

* ^ 


o ^ • 
^ 03 ft 

0 5h • 

^ 03 H 

H 14 O 


02 02 


2 

5 

£-t 

0 

> 

o 

O 

p 


p 

o 

0 

f-t 

"0 

p 

P 


o o 
p p 


o 

p 


p 

o 

’2 

p 


2 

03 

2 

Ph 


O 

P 


P 

.2 

'2 

P 


2 

o3 

2 

Ph 


° ^ 

CQ 2 
o 

P P 


02 


02 

(N 

6 

Z 


m 

+y 

o3 

T— I 

o 

1—1 

6 

Z 

p 

o 


P 

cr 


co 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


827 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 827 

(c) on whose report or request an adjudicator under Rule 81 
of the Defence of India Act Rules is to be appointed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Honourable 
Member is presumably referring to rule 81A of the Defence of 
India Rules. There are no rules governing the proceedings before 
an adjudicator. 

(b) No qualifications have been prescribed and it is not 
possible to do so because action under Rule 81A is of an 
urgent nature and it is not always possible readily to obtain 
persons of any particular qualifications in different parts of 
the country. The general rule is to appoint the most suitable 
person available in all circumstances of the case. Persons so 
far appointed include High Court Judges, District and Sessions 
Judges, Chief Presidency Magistrates, Labour Commissioners 
and their Assistants, Workmen Compensation Commissioners 
and War Injuries Claims Officers. 

(c) An adjudicator may be appointed at the request of either 
or both the parties, or on the initiative of Government. 

250 

* Results of Propaganda by Indian Labour 
Federation 

103. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the results achieved from the propaganda 
by the Federation of Labour from the subsidy of Rs. 13,000 a 
month ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I would refer the 
Honourable Member to the reply given by me on the 7th November 
1944 to part (c) of Prof. Ranga’s starred question No. 152. 

251 

@ Appointment of Committee of Enquiry re Mica 
Industry of India 

Mr. Satya Narayan Sinha : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if it is a fact that a Committee 
of Enquiry by the Central Government regarding Mica Industry 
of Bihar has been appointed or is going to be appointed. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1040. 
@ Ibid., p. 1041. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


828 


828 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is the Honourable Member aware that a constitution 
of the said enquiry is beyond the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Legislative list ? 

(c) If the reply be in the affirmative will the Honourable 
Member be pleased to state the reason for such encroachment 
upon the Provincial Legislative List as set out in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, the 
Committee has been appointed. 

(b) and (c) In appointing the Committee the Central 
Government proceeded on the view that no such encroachment 
was involved, but the Honourable Member is of course free to 
form his own opinion. 

Mr. Satya Narayan Sinha : Will the Honourable Member 
please state under what section of the Government of India Act 
has the action been taken ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): 
Presumably Government have acted upon their own responsibility. 

252 

* Summary of Proceedings of the Fifth Labour 
Conference and the Fourth Meeting of the 
Standing Labour Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I lay on the table a copy each of the Summary of Proceedings of 
the Fifth Labour Conference held at New Delhi on the 6th and 7th 
September 1943 and the Fourth Meeting of the Standing Labour 
Committee held at Lucknow on the 25th and 26th January 1944. 

253 

@ Government Contribution to Indian Labour 
Federation 

35. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if his attention has been drawn to a 
contribution by the United Press, published in the Sind Observer of the 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1944, 20th November 1944, p. 1041. 
@ Ibid., Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, pp. 87-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


829 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 829 

17th December, 1944, under the caption “Roy-Mehta Mud Slinging 
over Rs. 13,000” in which Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, M.L.A., now an 
officer in the Government of India, has said that he has with 
him an official correspondence on the aforesaid subject showing 
that the name of the Labour Federation has been used behind 
the back, over the head and without the knowledge of either 
its President or its Executive Council and further Rs. 13,000 
per month were obtained by Mr. Roy for himself to be used as 
he liked ? 

(b) In view of the above information, will the Honourable 
Member be pleased to give information with regard to this public 
money as to whom it was given and for what purpose, and how 
it was used, and did Mr. Roy himself use the money as he liked, 
or did he make use of it for his own purposes or divide it with 
Mr. Jamnadas Mehta ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, by the 
Honourable Member himself. 

(b) I would invite attention to my reply given to the Honourable 
Member’s question No. 31 on the 2nd November, 1944. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : The Honourable Member has not 
given specific replies to my questions. I want to know, with 
regard to part (b), whether what Mr. Jamnadas Mehta has said 
in that article is correct, or what the Honourable Member said 
last time on this question was correct ? Is this money for Mr. 
Jamnadas, is it for Mr. Roy, or is it for both ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing to 
add to the reply that I have given. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : But I want the Honourable Member 
to reply to my questions. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member has given the reply. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : I know that the Honourable 
Member is feeling shy over this question because if he makes a 
statement it would go against his own answers. I submit that 
the Honourable Member should reply to my questions otherwise 
there will be an adjournment motion on this subject. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : I think the House has got a 
right to know whether it is a personal gratuity or it is for the 
benefit of the Federation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


830 


830 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is given to the 
Federation. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know whether 
the Government has satisfied themselves that it has been entered 
in the accounts of the Federation and it has been spent through 
the Federation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know whether the 
Government are contemplating an increased amount being given ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know for what 
period this has been sanctioned for the present ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is sanctioned for 
a year. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know when it ends ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : When the budget ends. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : The Honourable Member said the other 
day that audited copies of accounts will be placed on the table of 
the House. Has he done so ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They have not been 
received as yet. 

Mr. Govind V. Deshmukh : Has the Honourable Member seen 
the details of this account ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I understand that they 
are seen by a special officer who has been appointed by Government 
in this behalf. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : From those accounts that the 
Honourable Member has seen already, is it or is it not clear that 
this money has been utilized by Mr. Roy for his own purposes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think that is not 
the correct statement. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Then which is the correct statement ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It has been spent for 
the purposes for which it has been granted. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : To whom was the money handed 
over to Mr. Roy, to Mr. Jamnadas Mehta, or to the Secretary of 
the Federation ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


831 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 831 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is received by 
the Secretary of the Federation. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : No money has been received by 
the Federation from the Government. The Name of the Federation 
has been used behind the back, over the head and without the 
knowledge of either its Executive Committee or its President. 
The Government have been cheated. It is without the knowledge 
of the Federation. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not my 

information. 

Mr. Jamnadas M. Mehta : Government have been cheated. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Will the Government take any 
action now that the Honourable Member has been told that 
Government has been cheated ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government does 
not believe that it has been cheated. 

254 

* Re-Imposition of Ban on Women Working 
Underground in Mines 

48. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether the matter of continuing to allow women inside 
the mines has been reviewed ; 

(b) how many women are now working under mines ; and 

(c) in view of the fact that women working underneath cannot 
even decently clothe themselves, whether he will consider the 
advisability of abolishing the practice altogether ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The question of 
re-imposing the ban on the underground employment of women 
in coal mines, to which the Honourable Member presumably 
refers, has been reviewed. 

(b) The figure varies but at present about 15,000 to 16,000 
women are employed underground in coal mines. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, p. 104. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


832 


832 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) The ban has been lifted only as a temporary measure, 
and will be reimposed as soon as conditions permit. 

I may also add that all female workers, both surface and 
underground, are supplied with two saries per year at the 
concessional rates as arranged for by the various Mining 
Associations; at some mines the saries are given free and at 
others at half price. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : The question was not 
whether they get saris to wear. It is impossible for them to wear 
the saris in the mines and so the question of presentation of 
saris or giving them at concessional rates is absolutely irrelevant. 
I understand that they cannot wear saris above the waist line 
while working in the mines, because it is too wrong. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is quite wrong. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar: When do you expect 
to reimpose the ban ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As soon as 
circumstances permit. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : What are the 
circumstances ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are not under 
my control nor am I able to anticipate them. 


* Casualties in Coal Mines 

52. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) how many people were killed or wounded while working 
in coal mines in 1943 and 1944; 

(b) whether the proposal of providing “Pit head baths “ for 
women engaged in the mines and creaches for their 
children has been given effect to ; and 

(c) if not, the reasons for the delay ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : 


255 


(a) 1943 

(b) 1944 


Killed 

290 

332 


Injured 

1,320 

1,395 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, pp. 109-10. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


833 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 833 

(b) So far pit head baths have been provided only in the Digwardih 
Collieries ; creaches have been installed in 7 collieries of Central 
Provinces and in one colliery of Raniganj (Bengal). 

(c) The Government of India are not aware of the reasons for 
the delay. They have under active consideration the question of 
amending the Indian Mines Act to make it obligatory on the mine 
owner, who employ women workers to maintain creches. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Government see that these 
improvements are effected in good time before the ban on employment 
of women takes place ? 

Otherwise, there will be no use for these improvements later 
on ? Will the Honourable Member see that they are not delayed 
too long ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Employment of women 
underground may be stopped but employment of women on the 
surface will continue. Creaches will be necessary. That does not 
mean that I am going to delay matters. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : How many of those cases reported killed, 
due to mining accidents, were women ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 

Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Maitra : What percentage of these 
deaths was due to asphyxiation and what percentage was due to 
accidents. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I want notice. 

256 

*Mineral Deposits in South India 

61 . Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
please state the different types of mineral deposits — metalic and non- 
metallic — found in South India as a result of the occasional survey 
done by the Geological Department during the past thirty years ? 

(b) Is it a fact that deposits of magnetic iron ore are found in 
large quantities in easily accessible places ? 

(c) Was there any attempt made by the Government of India to 
establish an iron and steel industry or encourage others to establish 
one in the vicinity of these deposits ? If not, why not ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, pp. 116-17. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


834 


834 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(d) Was there any systematic examination and investigation 
of the following deposits in the Madras Province (i) copper, (ii) 
zinc, (iii) lead, and (iv) aluminium ? If so, what are the results ? 

(e) Is it not a fact that ceramic articles of high quality could 
be manufactured in the Province of Madras if the resources are 
properly tapped ? Are there any investigations made with regard 
to this industry ? If not, why not ? 

(f) Is it not a fact that Ilmenite, an important mineral for 
manufacture of paint, could be found in some of the Southern 
districts ? Was there any scheme or attempt made to develop this 
industry ? If not, why not ? 

(g) Is it not a fact that large quantities of mica, an irreplaceable 
mineral for high tension electrical work, is found in some of the 
coastal districts of the Madras Province ? 

(h) Is it not a fact that mica is simply mined and exported 
to foreign countries without any attempt to start an industry for 
the preparation of electrical goods ? 

(i) Do the Government of India propose to establish in Southern 
India a central research organization to study these deposits ? If 
so, when ? If not, why not ? 

(j) Is it not a fact that almost all the scientific research 
institutions started and to be started under the Bureau of Scientific 
and Industrial Research would be located in Northern India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Metallic : 
Chromite, iron ores, ilmenite and Columbite-Tentalite. 

Non-Metallic : Ceramic materials including Kaolin, Fireclay 
and other types of clays, quartz, felspar, and sillimanite, Coal 
Lignite, and Rare Earth Minerals including Monazitc, Zircon and 
Samarskite. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. The ore is low grade and is not associated with suitable 
fuel for smelting. 

(d) Yes. No deposits of economic value have however been 
discovered by the Geological Survey. 

(e) Possibly. The Madras Government have given attention to 
this question and have employed Ceramic Experts. 

The Geological Survey is conducting investigations on the 
quantity and quality of ceramic materials in Madras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


835 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 835 

(f) First part. Yes. Second part. No, because the deposits 
in Travan-core are much richer than those in Madras, and the 
demand for this mineral is limited. 

(g) Yes. 

(h) Yes, mica is largely exported. 

(i) The Government of India have under consideration a 
scheme of expansion of the Geological Survey of India, both in 
personnel and in activities; it is hoped that in future a much 
more intensive study of the mineral deposits in the country 
would be possible than is the case at present. 

(j) The question should be addressed to the appropriate 
Member. 


257 

* Damodar Canal and Polavaram Projects 

65. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether, in view of his references to the Tennessey 
Valley Authority as a model after which the Damodar 
Canal (Bengal) and Polavaram (Madras) projects are 
to be developed, Government would be pleased to get 
a brief report published about the general aspects of 
that scheme and its achievements ; 

(b) whether, in view of the special need of Bengal for relief 
from floods, flood-relief will be accepted as the primary 
objective of the proposed Damodar project; and 

(c) whether, in view of the great need of scheduled 
classes (Harijans) of Bengal and Bihar for lands, the 
Government of India will take special steps to set aside 
adequate funds for obtaining large areas of lands for 
co-operative settlement and cultivation by the Harijans 
of Bengal and Bihar ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Tennessey 
Valley Authority is a foreign Government organisation. A copy 
of the report on the working of the Authority will be obtained 
and placed in the library of the House. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, p. 118. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


836 


836 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Yes ; flood-control will receive priority over other aspects 
of control measures. 

(c) The problem of the best way of helping landless labourers 
is engaging the attention of Government. 

258 

* Higher Prices Charged for Rice in 
Bihar Coalfields 

72. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that, in spite of his 
reply to my starred question No. 611 (b) on the 20th November, 
1944, that the Bihar Government have decided to charge the 
local wholesale controlled rate plus four annas administrative 
charge and to bear the resulting loss, the Joint Pool at Jharia 
is continuing to charge the old rate from its members ? 

(b) Is it a fact that some mine-owners have lodged protest 
with the Central Government on this question ? If so, what steps 
have been taken to redress their grievances ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the General Manager of a large colliery 
in the Province of Bihar has been committed to the Court of 
Session by the Magistrate, Dhanbad, to stand his trial under 
Section 81 of the Defence of India Rules at the instance of the 
Rationing Officer, Dhanbad, for supply of rice to the miners in 
excess of the prescribed ratio for the purpose of increasing the 
output of coal at his colliery ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the Rationing Officer, Dhanbad, himself 
on behalf of the Bihar Government was charging and allowing 
the Joint Pool to charge higher rates over the declared controlled 
rates during the same period, as admitted by the Honourable 
Member in reply to my above question ? 

(e) Will Government consider the desirability of taking 
necessary steps against the said Rationing Officer, Dhanbad, 
for violating the rules promulgated under the Ordinance, dated 
the 9th February, 1944, issued by the Deputy Commissioner, 
Dhanbad, by charging higher rates than the controlled rates of 
rice ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, p. 121. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


837 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 837 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) The 

Bihar Government report that they have received no protest to 
this effect but I have received one and have asked the Bihar 
Government for a further report. The matter will be further 
considered on receipt of their report. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Collieries were being charged in excess of control rates 
for foodgrains prior to November, 1944, under the orders of the 
Provincial Government. 

(e) Does not arise in view of reply to part (d). 

259 

* Purchasing of Delhi Electric Supply and 
Traction Company 

76. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to refer to his reply to my starred question 
No. 419 on the 15th November, 1944 and state whether any 
decision has been arrived at in regard to the question of the 
Government exercising their option to purchase the Delhi Electric 
Supply and Traction Company, Limited, on the expiry of their 
present licence ? 

(b) If it has been decided to exercise this option, has the 
required notice been served on the Company ? 

(c) In the event of the undertaking being taken over by 
Government, what will be the machinery for running it in future ? 

(d) In case it has been decided not to exercise the aforesaid 
option, will the Honourable Member be pleased to make a detailed 
statement of the reasons for such decision ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). It is 
understood that the Chief Commissioner has decided to serve 
a notice on the Company of the intention of Government to 
exercise their option to purchase, but that the notice has not 
yet been served. 

(c) No decision has yet been taken. 

(d) Does not arise. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 9th February 1945, pp. 123-24. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


838 


838 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

260 

* Recent Racial and Religious Distinction 
set up by Labour Department about 
Allotment of Quarters 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The next 
notice of an adjournment motion is from Sir Syed Raza Ali to 
censure the Government of India for the racial and religious 
distinction recently set up by the Labour Department in the 
allotment of houses in favour of Europeans, Anglo-Indians 
and Indian Christians by issuing Memorandum No. WII-4/114, 
dated 25th Januray, 1945. 

I should like to know from the Member in charge what 
exactly the position is. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I have looked into the Memorandum and I am told that 
instead of the word “Indian” the word “Indian Christians” crept 
it. through inadvertance. It will be corrected so that there will 
be no discrimination involved at all. 

Sir Syed Raza Ali (Cities of the United Provinces : 
Muhammadan Urban): I think the best thing would be for the 
Honourable Member to make a statement in this House and 
have the whole thing placed on record. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have corrected 
the Office Memorandum and it will be issued in the altered 
form. 

Sir Syed Raza Ali : But the House would like to know 
something as to what is being talked about. What is the 
meaning of the Memorandum as it stands and what is the 
correction that my Honourable friend has made and what will 
be the effect of the correction. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Memorandum 
that was originally issued read as follows : 

“This Department has had under consideration the question of 

the abolition of the distinction between ‘Orthodox’ and ‘Unorthodox’ 

types of quarters available in Delhi, New Delhi and Simla for 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 10th February 1945, p. 206. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


839 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 839 

allotment to officers drawing less than Rs. 600 per mensem. 
After considering the views of the Departments, it has been 
decided that the distinction should be abolished with effect 
from the next summer season. 

In respect of Europeans, Anglo-Indians and Indian 
Christians, in whose case the Estate Officer is satisfied that 
they profess European habits, the Estate Officer has been 
vested with discretion to allot residence with raised W. C. 
(unorthodox quarters) to them provided they are otherwise 
eligible for the particular category of ‘A’, ‘B’ ‘C’ and ‘D’ type 
of accommodation.” 

Necessary amendments to the rules will be made in due 
course. That was the original Memorandum that was issued. 
The amended Memorandum makes this change. 

“The Estate Officer has been vested with discretion to allot 
residences with raised W. C. (unorthodox quarters) to those 
officers, whether European, Anglo-Indian or Indian, in whose 
case he is satisfied that they profess European habits, provided 
they are otherwise eligible for the particular categories of “A”, 

“B”, “C” and “D”. 


261 

* Ignoring Claims of Central Assembly Members 

for Accommodation in Western Court Rooms 

156. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum: Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state : 

(a) Whether certain rooms in the Western Court and 
other accommodation are primarily intended for 
the Honourable Members of the Central Assembly 
attending the Sessions or Select Committees. 

(b) whether in allotting accommodation for the Select 
Committee on the Insurance Bill, the claims of the 
Members have been ignored and the Members of the 
National Defence Council have been given preference ; 
and, if so, why ; and 

(c) whether due regard to the prior claims of the Members 
of the Central Legislative Assembly will be paid in 
future ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 14th February 1945, pp. 323-24. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


840 


840 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 19 rooms in the 
Western Court and 69 quarters are reserved for the Honourable 
Members of the Indian Legislature during the sessions. During 
the non-Session periods, 7 rooms in the Western Court and 
8 quarters are reserved for Members visiting Delhi in connection 
with the work of the Central Legislature. 

(b) No ; the rooms in the Western Court were allotted to 
the Members of the National Defence Council in the absence 
of any intimation of the meeting of the Select Committee on 
the Insurance Bill in January, 1945 or of any demand for 
accommodation from the Members. Arrangement was however 
made to accommodate the members of the Select Committee who 
asked for accommodation in the Western Court. 

(c) Arrangement is always made to accommodate the Members 
of the Central Legislature provided timely notice is given. 

262 

* Construction of a Road to Imperial Research 
Institute at Mukteswar 

178. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if there is a proposal to 
construct a cart or motor road to the Imperial Research Institute 
at Mukteswar in the Naini Tal district ? 

(b) If so, what will be the length of the road and the cost of 
construction ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There is no 
such proposal before this Government. 

(b) Does not arise. 


263 

@ Examination of Commercial Aspects of Indian 
Spring-waters 

308. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour member 
be pleased to refer to unstarred question No. 50 of the 5th August, 1943, 
and the reply thereto, and make a statement indicating the results 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 14th February 1945, p. 337. 
@ Ibid., 19th February 1945, pp. 454-55. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


841 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 841 

of the examination of the commercial aspects of Indian spring- 
waters, and the trial given thereto, the location of the different 
springs where trials have been made and the composition and 
properties of the respective waters ? 

(b) Have Government any scheme for the working of any 
of these sources of spring-water through State agency or 
through the agency of any private enterprise ? If so, what 
are the details of such schemes ? 

The Honourable Dr, B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). 
Waters of certain thermal mineral springs in Bihar were 
investigated by the Geological Survey of India and after 
examination of the chemical properties of these waters it was 
decided that there would be no advantage in Government 
undertaking during war time the commercial exploitation of 
these waters. 


264 


* Damodar River Transport for Coal in Bengal 

310. Mr, R. R. Gupta : Is the Honourable the Labour 
Member aware that in the last century a proposal was 
considered by the Government of India for providing river 
transport to the movement of coal from the Bengal coal 
fields to Calcutta by rendering the river Damodar as an all 
weather navigable channel ? If not, will Government consider 
the advisability of re-examining such a proposal in connection 
with the proposed multi-purpose Damodar River project ? If 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not aware 
of any such proposal but there was a proposal to take out 
a canal from the Damodar river from Raniganj to Calcutta. 

The enquiry now being made is examining the possibility 
of a multipurpose scheme for the control of the Damodar — this 
examination will extend to the possibilities of encouraging 
navigation. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 19th February 1945, p. 455. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


842 


842 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

265 

* Discovery of Petroleum Near Rawalpindi 

314. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) whether his attention has been drawn to the reports 
appearing in the newspapers about the discovery of 
petroleum near Rawalpindi and the Punjab ; and 

(b) whether the monopoly for exploiting this petroleum has 
been given to a foreign concern ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, Government 
have seen the reports referred to — 

(b) The matter is the concern of the Provincial Government 
and Government of India have no information. 

266 

* Women Workers in Mills and Factories of 

Delhi Province 

327. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the total number of women workers in the year, 1944, 
in the mills and factories in Delhi Province to which 
the Factories Act is applied; 

(b) whether action under the Factories Act was taken 
against any of these concerns for failure to conform to 
the provisions of Acts for safeguarding the interests of 
women workers ; and 

(c) whether a Women Labour Welfare Officer has been 
appointed for Delhi Province ; and, if so, what her duties 
are ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : With your 
permission, Sir, I propose to reply together to question Nos. 
327 and 328. 

I have made enquiries and will lay a report on the table in due course. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 19th February 1945, p. 456. 
@Ibid., p. 463. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


843 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 843 


267 

* Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Company 

403. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether he has completed the enquiry promised by him in 
his answer to Mr. Neogy’s question No. 419 in the last session 
regarding the Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Company ; 

(b) the profit the company is making; and 

(c) the result of the enquiries, and whether Government propose 
exercising the option to purchase it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (c). The Honourable 
Member’s attention is drawn to the reply given to Mr. K. C. Neogy’s 
question on 9th February 1945. 

(b) The dividend declared by the Company since 1939 has been as 
follows: 


1939 — 11 per cent. 

1940 — 11 per cent. 

1941 — 11 per cent. 

1942 — 9 per cent. 

1943 — 9 per cent. 


— income tax free. 


Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Have Government decided 
to take over the Company ? 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 


Mr. T.S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : When will it come into effect ? 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As soon as the license ends. 


Mr. K. C. Neogy : Has the notice been actually served as yet ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I believe so. 


268 

@ Government Contribution to Indian Labour 
Federation 

404. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether, in view of the fact that the President of the Trade U nion 
Congress, Sri Jamnadas Mehta, has denied the fact of having 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 583. 
@ Ibid., pp. 583-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


844 


844 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

received the amount from the Government as alleged by the 
Labour Member, he has investigated into the matter; 

(b) whether the amount has been credited in the accounts of the 
Trade Union Congress ; and 

(c) in whose hands the money is being given ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable Member 
is apparently referring in this question to Indian Federation of Labour 
of which Mr. Mehta was the President and not to the All-India Trade 
Union Congress. 

(a) I would refer the Honourable Member to my reply to 
Mr. Lalchand Navalrai’s question No. 3 1 on the 2nd November, 
1944. 

(b) I have no knowledge. 

(c) The payment was originally mae to the representatives of 
the Federation through the National War Front and later, 
through the Chairmen, National Service Labour Tribunals. 
From June 1944, the payment is made to the Secretary of 
the Federation. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Is it not necesssary that 
Government should satisfy themselves that when money is sanctioned 
for a particular organisation it has been credited to the accounts of 
that organisation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not my business to 
check the accounts of any organisation. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : In view of the Honourable 
Member’s statement on a previous occasion that an auditor had been 
sent to audit the accounts may I know if the auditor’s report has been 
received ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable friend 
must put down a specific question on that point. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable Member give the names of 
the office-bearers of the organisation who actually received the money ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : First of all it was paid 
through the National War Front; then a change was made and the money 
was paid through the Chairmen of the National Labour Service Tribunals; 
and from June, 1944 it is paid to the Secretary of the Federation. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable Member give the name 
of the particular gentleman who received the money ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall require notice. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


845 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 845 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : In view of the fact 
that the Public Accounts Committee for 1942-43 specifically said 
that no vouchers and no accounts are kept for this money given 
to Mr. Roy, may I know if the money was given to Mr. Roy in 
his personal name and whether audits were made and what 
conclusion the auditors came to as to whether the amounts were 
credited to the organisation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say to 
whom the money was paid before the new arrangement was 
made. After the new arrangement was made the money is paid 
to the person who is known as Secretary. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : In view of the fact that the subsidy 
to the Labour Federation is not approved by this House, is it 
the intention of Government to discontinue it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not wish to 
anticipate the decision. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Has provision been 
made for it in the next Budget ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend will wait he will know. 

Mr. Sri Prakasa : Have Government made sure that the 
money is well spent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes sir. I have no 
doubt about it. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Sir, may I point out 
to the Chair that this is an impertinent answer ? The Budget 
is coming up soon and he must know whether provision for this 
amount has been made. May I know whether this sum has been 
provided for ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend will know it on the 28th February. 

269 

* Labour Exchange Bureaus 

405. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state in how many places 
labour exchange bureaus have been established ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, pp. 584. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


846 


846 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) For what class of persons are these bureaus intended to 
serve ? 

(c) Till now, for how many persons have they found 
employment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Employment 
Exchanges have been established at ten centres in India, viz., 
Bombay, Ahmedabad, Nagpur, Madras, Calcutta, Dhanbad, 
Cawnpore, Delhi, Lahore and Karachi. 

(b) for the present, the Employment Exchanges are intended 
to serve technical personnel as defined under the National Service 
(Technical,) Personnel Ordinance, 1940 who are in receipt of 
wages of not less than Rs. 1-8-0 per day in the cities of Bombay 
and Calcutta and Re. 1 per day in other places. 

(c) Upto 31st December, 1944 the Exchanges had found 
employment for 5,909 workmen. 

I may add that it was only in December, 1943 that it was 
decided to set up these exchanges and considerable difficulty 
was experienced in securing competent staff and suitable 
accommodation. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : May I know whether 
Government propose to extend the work of these Labour 
Exchanges to other categories of labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : What are these other 
categories of labour which extension is proposed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We have come to 
no decision as yet. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : May I know for what percentage of 
the total applicants jobs were found ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The total number 
of workmen that were registered as wanting jobs was 14,697 out 
of whom employment was found for 5,909 men. 

Shrimati Radha Bai Subbarayan : Do these figures include 
women also? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My figures do not 
make any distinction between male and female. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


847 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 847 

270 

* Arrangements for Care of Children of Women 

Miners 

436. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) what the specific arrangements are for the care of infants 
and children of women miners working inside mines and 
on the surface in all mining areas, and under whose 
supervision these arrangements are carried out; 

(b) the facilities provided for nursing mothers working inside 
mines to feed their infants at regular intervals ; and 

(c) whether the arrangements referred to in (a) and (b) 
have been approved by any medical authority ; and, if 
so, by whom ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No specific 
arrangements have so far been made, but at a few mines creches 
with female attendants have been provided and in some collieries 
child clinics exist where milk is distributed to miners’ children. 
The question of requiring provision of creches is at present under 
the consideration of Government. 

(b) Children are not allowed underground and therefore no 
special facilities are required underground. Mothers are not 
allowed underground within one month of delivery. Information 
as to facilities allowed to other mothers to come up to feed their 
children is being called for. 

(c) No. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask, Sir, if 
the Government will prohibit women from working underground 
in mines where these arrangements have not been made until 
Government consider this question ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not followed 
the question. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will Government 
take definite steps to have proper arrangements for the care of 
children and for enabling women to come up to the surface to 
feed their children ? Surely infants require to be fed even after 
they are a month old ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 609. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


848 


848 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot arrive at a 
decision until I know what is the magnitude of the problem. I have 
called for information. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : As the Honourable 
Member himself admits that the problem is a very serious one, will 
Government prohibit women from working underground till they 
have finished considering the problem ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know whether 
there are any number of women who are suckling babies underground. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Will the Honourable Member discontinue 
the work of women underground in those mines where the creches 
and other facilities mentioned by him do not exist. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am taking steps to 
see that every mine has got creches. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Will the Honourable Member discontinue 
the work of women until that time ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If that was the only 
alternative, that proposition might be considered. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will Government consult the All-India 
Medical Council in regard to part (c) of this question in regard 
to the advisability or otherwise of allowing mothers with suckling 
babies to work underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know whether 
they will accept the responsibility of advising Government in this 
matter. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : I am asking whether Government will be 
willing to ask them, whether they are prepared to give advise or not. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think this is 
a problem where consultation is necessary. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask if the 

International Labour Conference during its last session made certain 
suggestions with regard to this matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information 
at all at present with me. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is it a fact that these creches in most mines 
only function effectively when visitors are conducted round and when 
Government Inspectors go round there on their pre-arranged visits and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


849 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 849 

that miners’ children who live in neighbouring areas are 
sometimes not permitted into the creches and there are no 
adequate facilities in most of the mines for the care of infants 
or children, even where creches exist in name with very few 
exceptions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know how 
the Honourable Member knows that there are no creches when 
she does not go and visit. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : The Honourable Member had gone to the 
mining areas. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have also gone. 

271 

* Steps for Enforcing Mines Maternity Benefits 
Act in Mining Areas 

437. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) what steps Government have taken to enforce the 
provisions of the Mines Maternity Benefits Act in mining 
areas since women miners are illiterate and ignorant 
of their rights ; 

(b) whether Government have any report about the 
application of this Act since it was passed in 1941 ; 

(c) whether four week’s absence before and after delivery 
of a child has not proved insufficient to give adequate 
relief to the women miners and avoid injury to their 
health; and 

(d) whether Government have obtained medical opinion 
on the subject referred to in (c); and, if so, whether 
Government will place a copy of it on the table of the 
House ; and, if not whether Government propose to take 
steps to secure such opinion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) One Senior 
Labour Inspector and two Junior Labour Inspectors who are 
qualified doctors have been appointed, under the Chief Inspector 
of Mines in India. 

(b) Although Government themselves have not received reports 
about the working of the Act, the Inspectors under the Chief Inspector 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, pp. 610-11. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


850 


850 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of Mines submit reports to him regularly and suitable action is taken 
by the Department of Mines. 

(c) and (d). The four-week period before and after delivery in respect 
of women is in line with similar provision under F actory legislation. The 
question of increasing the period before delivery in respect of women 
employed underground is under consideration. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : What about after delivery ? Will Government 
also consider the advisability of extending the period after delivery ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not necessary. There 
is complete prohibition on the employment of women who have delivered. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Is the Honourable Member aware of the fact 
that since the ban on the employment of women underground was 
withdrawn, there have been cases in some mines of children being 
born underground. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Will the Honourable Member kindly find out 
and take steps to see that such cases do not occur ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If the Honourable Member 
will refer me to specific cases, I shall certainly make inquiries. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : I am prepared to do so. 

Shrimati K, Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask for an assurance 
that Government will get the opinion of a competent medical authority 
on this important question, before they come to a decision on it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They will undoubtedly, 
if they find it necessary. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Is it not a fact that the 
International Labour Conference during its last session suggested that 
the period before and after confinement should be about two months 
under the Maternity Benefits Act ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no information. 
I do not recall that. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : I understand that it is 
mentioned in the report which the Government have circulated to us. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : Since the Honourable Member considers that 
he is justified in ignoring the International Convention prohibiting 
women working underground, I should like to know if he thinks it 
also unnecessary to consider the maternity benefits provision of the 
International Labour Conference ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We are considering that 
matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


851 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 851 

272 

* Abolition of Distinction between Orthodox and 
Un-Orthodox Quarters 

451. Mr. H. A. Sathar H. Essak Sait : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the reasons that led to the decision to abolish the 
distinction between “orthodox” and “un-orthodox” 
types of quarters as stated in the Labour Department 
Memorandum, dated the 25th January, 1945; and 

(b) the effect of this decision on (i) the present occupants 
of such quarters and (ii) those who qualify for these 
quarters in the future ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) According to the 
allotment rules hithertho in force, applicants for accommodation 
had to apply either for the orthodox or the un-orthodox type of 
quarters and those who applied for one type of quarters were 
considered ineligible for the other type. In view of the present 
shortage of accommodation, the above rules very often worked 
to the disadvantage of the officers eligible for these types of 
accommodation, and produced the anomalous result that if an 
applicant failed to secure accommodation in the type he had 
applied for, he was obliged to go without any accommodation at 
all, even though he might have secured accommodation in the 
other type, had he applied specifically for that type. 

Further, the maintenance of the distinction between the two 
types of quarters entailed extra work in the Estate Office in as 
much as the allotment of the two types of quarters had to be 
kept separate. Besides, it was also felt that the maintenance of 
the distinction between orthodox and un- orthodox quarters and 
their allotment on the basis of the orthodoxy or otherwise had 
become out of date. 

(b) (i) None. 

(ii) The decision of 25th January 1945 has since been slightly 
modified on 151h February 1945. Those who are eligible for the 
particular category of ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ type of accommodation 
will be eligible to apply for both types of quarters. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 618. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


852 


852 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


273 

*Deaths of Women Workers in Mines 

453. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the number of deaths of women workers in 
the mines of India (including coal) in the years of 1942, 1943 and 
1944 due to (i) diseases, and (ii) accidents ? 

(b) Is it not a fact that men workers are not available to work 
in coal mines as the wages offered are not commensurate with the 
rise in prices of foodstuffs and other necessaries of life ? 

(c) Is there any attempt on the part of the mine owners or the 
Government of India to offer better wages and special amenities of 
life in the supply of foodstuffs and housing accommodation to mine 
workers to attract enough men workers to enable the Government 
to apply the ban on women working underground and thus save the 
dignity of womanhood in India as in every other civilized country ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that infant mortality is very high in the mining 
areas due to lack of milk from the mother who is automatically 
getting dry due to hard and strenuous work underground ? 

(e) Is it not a fact that no pure milk is available to the workers 
in the mining areas ? 

(f) Are any attempts made by the mine-owners or Government 
to supply milk free of cost to children at least below one year in 
the various mining areas ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The number of 
deaths of women in all mines in India due to accidents both on 
surface and undergound for the years 1942, 1943 and 1944 were 
9, 11 and 53 repsectively. No figures of deaths due to diseases 
are available. 

(b) No. 

(c) Yes. The following improvements in regard to wages, welfare 
and amenities have been introduced ; 

(1) subsidisation of foodstuffs and the provision of grain 
shops ; 

(2) improved health measures including malaria control and 
increased provision for construction of hospitals ; 

(3) provision of an adequate range of consumer goods for 
purchase; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 620. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


853 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 853 

(4) provision of transport to and from work ; 

(5) increase in the rates for coal raisings at Railway Colleries 
so as to enable the contractors to offer more attractive 
wages to labour; and 

(6) an informal agreement between Government and the 
mine-owners for an increase in the wages of colliery 
labour. 

(d) It cannot be said that infant mortality is very high in 
mining areas due to lack of milk. Infant mortality figure in the 
coalfields is less than the All-India figure. 

(e) Pure milk is available in mining areas. Samples of milk 
are frequently taken and examined by the Inspectors employed by 
the Mines Boards of Health and action is taken when adulteration 
is discovered. 

(f) No. Government are examining further possibilities in 
regard to improvement of health of women and children in 
mining areas. 


274 

* Women Workers Working Underground in 

Mines 

454. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the number of women workers underground 
in the years 1942, 1943 and 1944 ? 

(b) Is there any attempt made to reduce the number of women 
employed underground ? If not, why not ? 

(c) Is it a fact that in certain coal mines women are allowed 
or compelled to work even in stages of advanced pregnancy, thus 
giving rise to child births underground ? Was any report to that 
effect brought to the notice of Government ? If so, what is the 
action taken to put a stop to such a malpractice ? 

(d) Would Government consider the question of applying a 
strict ban on women working underground as soon as the seventh 
month of pregnancy is complete ? If not, why not ? 

(e) Are Government aware that maternity benefit offered to women 
workers is only nominal and that several complaints are made to their 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 621. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


854 


854 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

immediate superiors who do not care to report to the authorities 
concerned ? 

(f) Does the Honourable Member propose to make an enquiry 
and remedy the defects ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 1942 — Nil., 
1943— about 7,000, 1944—16,000. 

(b) Yes. Every effort is being made to expedite the bringing 
about of such conditions as would enable Government to re- 
impose the ban on the underground employment of women in 
coal mines. In other mines, the ban already exists. 

(c) No. So far as I am aware no children have been born 
underground in mines. No such reports have ever been received. 
The last part of the question does not arise. 

(d) A proposal on these lines is under the consideration of 
Government. 

(e) There are one Senior Labour Inspector and two Junior 
Labour Inspectors working under the Chief Inspector of Mines 
to administer the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, and every 
effort is made to see that the requirements of this Act are 
complied with. 

(f) No. 


275 


* Scheme for Recruitment of Gorakhpur Labour for 
Employment in Coal Mines 

464. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to explain in detail the scheme for the 
recruitment of Gorakhpur labour and its employment in the 
coal mines ? 

(b) What is the total number of labourers so far recruited 
under this scheme ? What has been the total expenditure 
incurred therefor, and how much of it has been and is expected 
to be recovered from the collieries in which the labourers are 
employed or intended to be employed ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 1945, p. 629. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


855 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 855 

(c) What rates of wages and what amenities are these labourers 
entitled to, and how do they compare with the average terms 
and conditions on which other labourers are engaged in the coal 
mines ? What reports, if any, have been received as regards their 
output of work and general efficiency as also aptitude for mining 
work from the different mines where they are employed ? 

(d) What are the names of officers directly in charge of the 
working of the scheme, and what are their respective duties ? 
What are their qualifications and experience in the line, and 
what emoluments do they receive ? 

(e) From what source is the requisite finance obtained 
initially ? Are the accounts relating to the scheme regularly 
audited under the control of the Auditor General ? Up to which 
period has audit of these accounts been completed ? Has any 
financial or accounts irregularity been brought to light as a 
result of audit of the accounts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The labour is 
recruited by the Gorakhpur Labour Supply Depot in the United 
Provinces for employment on various Government works as well 
as in the coalfield. It is organised in gangs under the following 
supervisory staff : — 

One sirdar for each gang of 50 men. 

One unit Supervisor for each contingent of 250 men. 

One camp Supervisor for each camp of 1,000 men. 

One Group Officer in charge of the personnel of one or more 
camps according to location. 

The officer directly responsible for these labour camps is 
the Deputy Director, Labour Supply (Coal) with Headquarters 
at Dhanbad. 

The labourers are recruited for six months or one year’s service 
at work site or until no longer required, whichever is shorter. 
Each labourer is given a set of mazri clothing and blanket; he is 
also given advances to meet initial expenses and provided free 
with accommodation, medical aid, cooking fuel and rations. He 
is remunerated for work done on specified scales of wages in 
addition to bonus for good work and long service. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


856 


856 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Total number of labourers so far recruited for work in 
mines 33,500. Present working strength 15,000. 

Total expenditure incurred — Rs. 74,16,584 up to the end of 

January 1945. 

Recoveries 

Total amount billed for up to the middle of 

January 1945 14V 2 lakhs. 

Actual recoveries 5 lakhs. 

(c) Gorakhpur labour is entitled to the following wages and 
amenities when serving in colliery areas: 

Basic wage of 12 annas per day. 

Production Bonus of 4 annas per day. 

Extra allowance for working underground — 4 annas per day. 

In addition the labour gets free foodstuffs for a complete diet, 
the estimated cost of which is about 14 annas per day. They are 
also entitled to free housing and free medical aid. 

Labour from Gorakhpur gets on the whole better terms and 
conditions than local labour. 

Local colliery labour gets : 

(i) as cash wages 50 per cent over the pre-war local rates of 
wages — the pre-war rates of wages were for an average 
worker about 8 annas in the case of surface workers and 
14 annas in the case of those employed underground; 

(ii) food concessions as follows: 

V 2 seer of rice free for each day of attendance. 

Adequate supply of dal at concession rate of 6 seers to 
the rupee. Such further supplies of rice and dal as he 
may require at controlled rates. 

The intention of the present concession rates is to supply full 
ration at concession rates for the miner himself and to require 
him to pay controlled rates for his family. These concessions were 
introduced in May last, but previously the concessions extended to the 
worker’s family and were for rather larger quantities of grain. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


857 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 857 

worker is now given in lieu an additional cash allowance of 
two annas in the case of a bachelor and five annas in the 
case of a married man with children. 

Reports from various sources including colliery owners 
show that Gorakhpur labour is adaptable to most kinds 
of work such as building camps, removing over burden in 
quarrying schemes, loading coal into wagons as well as 
cutting coal. It is also reported to be regular in attendance, 
and under proper supervision, its output is as good as that 
of any other labour. 

(d) (1) Mr. Walsh — Deputy Director, Labour Supply (Coal) 
Pay Rs. 1,925 per mensem. 

(2) Mr. Morris — Assistant Director Coal (Production). Pay 
Rs. 1,215 per mensem. 

Mr. Walsh is in complete charge of all matters relating 
to Gorakhpur labour including rations, pay, accommodation 
and welfare. He has 12 years’ planting experience, was 
3 years’ Army Staff Officer in administrative capacity and 
was Labour Staff Officer at No. 3, Indian Reserve Base for 
10 months where he was responsible for original organisation 
of Gorakhpur labour into Centralised force. 

Mr. Morris is in charge of the labour on work sites, output 
of work, provision of tools and transport. He has handled 
labour of various classes during last 25 years in India and 
Burma. He raised and commanded Pioneer Battalion during 
past two years. 

(e) The expenditure is initially debited to the head “Advance 
Repayable — Special Advances” while recoveries effected from 
the mine owners are credited to the receipt head “XXXVI — 
Miscellaneous Departments”. The difference between the 
expenditure incurred and the recoveries effected is recouped 
from the Coal Production Fund. The Audit Department is 
responsible for the audit of the expenditure. No audit or 
accounts irregularities have been brought to light so far. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


858 


858 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


276 


* Late Publication of Legislative Assembly and 

Council of State Debates (1944 Autumn Session) 

13. Mr. Ananga Mohan Dam : Will the Honourable the 
Leader of the House please state : 

(a) the dates on which the Legislative Assembly and Council 
of State Debates for the Autumn Session (November), 
1944, were made available for sale and for supply to 
the Honourable Members, respectively; and 

(b) the reasons for the late publication of those Debates ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The information 
is given in the statement® attached. 

(b) The delay in the publication of the debates was due to 
various causes, e.g., rush of operational war work, defective 
working of machines for want of replacement of spare parts and 
shortage of staff due to non-availability of suitable men. 


277 


f Annual Reports of Supervisor of Railway 
Labour, Calcutta 

532. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member to pleased to state : 

(a) whether the Supervisor of Railway Labour, Calcutta, 
has submitted to the Government his annual reports 
on the working of (i) the Payment of Wages Act, and 
(ii) the Hours of Employment Regulations subsequent 
to 1940-41 ; if so, whether these reports have been 
published in full or part and whether the Honourable 
Member will be pleased to lay copies thereof on the 
table of the House; and 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 21st February 19-15, p. 630. 
@ Statement omitted. — Ed. 

f Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, p. 797. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


859 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 859 

(b) if the reply to the last portion of part (a) above is in 
the negative, whether the Honourable Member proposes 
to supply the following information in a tabular form 
for each Railway, separately, for the financial years 
1941-42, 1942-43 and 1943-44 

(i) the amount of fines inflicted on the Railway staff; 

(ii) the total number of cases in which fines were 
inflicted ; 

(iii) the total number of irregularities detected in the 
working of the Payment of Wages Act; 

(iv) the total number of irregularities detected in the 
working of the Hours of Employment Regularities ; 

(v) the nature of instruction issued to the various 
Railway Administrations to avoid a repetition of 
such irregularities ; 

(vi) the nature of representations made by the Labour 
Supervisor to the Labour Department of the 
Government of India on points where a conflict of 
opinion existed between the Supervisor and the 
Railway Administrations or the Board ; and 

(vii) the decision given on points referred to in (vi) 
above ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Since the year 
1940-41, annual reports on the working of the Payment of Wages 
Act and the Hours of Employment Regulations for the years 1941-42 
and 1942-43 have been submitted by the Conciliation Officer 
(Railways) and Supervisor of Railway Labour. As I informed the 
Honourable Member in answer to his unstarred question No. 43 
on the 10th February 1944, Government have decided not to 
publish these reports in view of the acute shortage of paper. 
They have, however, now decided to issue a press note in respect 
of the reports for the year 1942-43 as also in respect of future 
report until such time it is found possible to renew the previous 
practice of publishing them. 

(b) Such information as is readily available is being complied 
and a statement will be laid on the table of the House in due 


course. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


860 


860 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


278 

* Composition of Employees’ Delegation to 
the Tripartite (Labour) Conferences 

f 533. Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the Employees’ Delegation to the Tripartite 
(Labour) Conferences or Standing Committee is composed 
of representatives of — 

(i) the Indian Federation of Labour; 

(ii) the All-India Trade Union Congress ; and 

(iii) other workers ; 

(b) which industries and workers are included in category 
(iii) of “Other workers” and how their representatives are 
elected or nominated ; 

(c) if the representatives of “other workers” are nominated 
by Government whether it is proposed to discontinue the 
practice ; if not, why not; and 

(d) on what basis and considerations Government nominate 
these delegates and whether the Provincial Governments 
have any hand in such nominations ; if so, to what extent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b), (c) and (d). Category (iii) relates to labour interests not 
adequately represented on the two all-India labour organisations, 
viz., the All-India Trade Union Congress and the Indian Federation 
of Labour. The nominations are made by the Government of India 
after taking into consideration suggestions received from Provincial 
Governments. It is not the intention to discontinue the practice at 
least for the time being. Such nomination is necessary at the present 
stage of development of workers’ organisations in the country. 

279 

@ Hydro-Electric Schemes 

539. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state how many hydro-electric schemes are at present 
functioning in India ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, p. 798. 
@ Ibid., p. 804. 

f Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


861 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 861 

(b) What is the amount of power generated by each of them ? 

(c) How much of this power is used for industrial purposes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 34 excluding 
private, industrial and military installations. 

(b) It is not possible to give information about individual 
stations. The total energy generated by all the stations is 
approximately 1983 million K.W.H. 

(c) About 56 per cent. 


280 

* Hydro-Electric Schemes 

540. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Labour Member 
please state how many other hydro-electric schemes have been 
considered ? 

(b) How many of them are going to be dealt with by (i) the 
Government of India, (ii) the Provincial Governments, and (iii) 
the Indian States ? 

(c) What will be the total horse-power of these schemes ? 

(d) How many of them have been already sanctioned by the 
Government of India ? 

(e) For how many of them is machinery either under 
negotiation or under order ? 

(f) What is the approximate date when they are expected to 
function and make power available ? 

(g) Which of these schemes will be the first ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A large number 
of schemes have recently been considered ; several of them are in 
various stages of investigation. Plant requirements for 31 have 
so far been notified to the Secretary of State. 

(b) (i) Under the present constitution, development of Hydro 
Electric Schemes falls within the purview of the Provincial 
Governments. The Government of India are, however, rendering 
them such assistance as is asked for through the Central Technical 
Power Board which they have recently set up for the initiation, 
co-ordination and pushing forward of electricity development schemes. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, pp. 804-05. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


862 


862 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) and (iii). Of the 31 schemes mentioned in reply to part 

(a), 14 are being dealt with by Provincial Governments, 13 by 
Indian States and 4 by private concerns. 

(c) Approximately 6,70,000. 

(d) 28 schemes requiring plant before the end of 1947 have 
so far been approved by the authorities concerned. 

(e) Seven. 

(f) Between the end of 1946 and 1949. 

(g) The Mohammadpur Hydro Electric Schemes of the U. P. 
Government will probably be the first to start functioning out 
of postwar schemes. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Is it a fact that the Government of 
India are unduly strict with regard to hydro-electric projects which 
arc submitted to them from the Provinces and from the States ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not suppose 
there is any ground for believing that they are more strict than 
the necessities of the case require. 

281 

* Electrical Commissioner’s Report 

f 541. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member state why a copy of the report produced by the 
Electrical Commissioner with the Government of India has not 
been placed in the library of the House ? 

(b) Has the Policy Committee, in connection with power, 
reported ? 

(c) If so, will a copy of their report be made available to the 
Members of the Legislature ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Presumably the 
Honourable Member refers to the proceedings of the Technical 
Power Conference of which the Electrical Commissioner was the 
Chairman. The report is under print and a copy will be placed 
in the Library of the House as soon as the printed copies become 
available. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, p. 804. 
f Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


863 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 863 

(b) and (c). Presumably the reference is to the second meeting 
of the Policy Committee held on 2nd February 1945. The Record 
of the meeting is being finalised and copies will be placed in 
the Library of the House in due course. The Record of the first 
meeting of the Committee is already available in the Library of 
the House. 


282 

* Scheduled Castes Employees of Central Public 
Works Department 

556. Mr. Piare Lall Kureel : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the number of members of the scheduled castes employed 
in the Central Public Works Department as Executive 
Engineers, Sub-Divisional Officers and Subordinates 
in the permanent, temporary and work-charge staff, 
separately ; 

(b) whether it is a fact that none of the temporary 
incumbents of the posts of Subordinates belonging to 
the members of the scheduled castes were confirmed 
as permanent staff during the year 1944 ; and 

(c) what measures Government propose to take to secure 
a fair representation of the members of the scheduled 
castes among the permanent staff of the Central Public 
Works Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
number of permanent and temporary Executive Engineers in 
the Central Public Works Department is 12 and 55 respectively. 
Two of the temporary Executive Engineers are members of the 
Scheduled Castes. There are no officers of that community among 
the permanent Executive Engineers and there are no posts of 
Executive Engineers borne on the work charged establishment. 

The rest of the information required by the Honourable 
Member is not readily available. It is being collected and will 
be supplied to him as soon as possible. 

(c) Under the orders regarding communal representation in the 
Pubhc services, one out of every twelve vacancies (other than vacancies 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 25th February 1945, pp. 812-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


864 


864 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

filled by promotion) is set aside for members of the Scheduled 
Castes. These orders, which are generally applicable to all classes 
of posts in the Central Public Works Department will secure a 
fair representation for members of the Scheduled Castes, in that 
Department. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : May I ask whether the Scheduled 
Castes are reckoned as one of the minorities so that their share 
comes from 33 per cent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are a separate 
category. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Then if you put them in a 
separate category how will the percentage of 33 per cent, reserved 
for minorities, be affected by this category ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not affected at 
all; it is quite apart from that. 

283 

* Liens on New Delhi Quarters of Government 

Servants Transferred to Calcutta and Bombay 

564. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) whether it is a fact that allotment to Government servants 
of Government quarters at New Delhi is made according 
to seniority in service which is reckoned from the date of 
a person’s continuous appointment at New Delhi/Simla ; 

(b) whether such persons transferred to Simla hold their 
liens on quarters at New Delhi during the period of their 
transfer ; 

(c) whether Government laid down recently that officers 
transferred to the Branch Secretariat at Calcutta are 
also allowed to retain liens on Government quarters at 
New Delhi whereas those transferred to Attached Offices 
will not be eligible for this privilege ; 

(d) whether it is a fact that the staff transferred to Calcutta 
with the office of the Additional Chief Engineer, Central 
Public Works Department, was allowed to retain liens on 
their quarters at New Delhi and were allotted quarters 
on their return to Delhi; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, pp. 817-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


865 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 865 

(e) whether it is a fact that the period of break in the 
continuous employment of certain persons employed in 
the Central Public Works Department which occurred 
on account of their transfers to places other than Simla 
has been condoned on their re-transfer to Delhi, as a 
special case ; 

(f) whether it is a fact that the Central Government 
servants transferred from Delhi to Calcutta, Bombay, 
etc. in the interest of service are not allowed to hold 
liens on their quarters at New Delhi and on their return 
to New Delhi are considered not to be continuously 
employed for the purpose of allotment of quarters ; and 

(g) whether Government propose to accord such persons the 
same treatment as is accorded in the cases mentioned 
in parts (c) and (e) above ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Persons transferred to Simla on or before 10th November, 
1942 retain liens on quarters occupied by them in New Delhi 
but those transferred to Simla after that date temporarily are 
allowed to retain liens for a period of one year from the date 
of their transfer. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Two members of the staff of the Office of the Additional 
Chief Engineer, Central Public Works Department were allowed 
to retain the quarters allotted to them in Delhi for the period of 
their stay in Calcutta which was less than one year. 

(e) Yes, but the break in such cases was under one year. 

(f) Central Government servants are allowed to retain liens 
on their quarter if the Departments concerned certify that the 
individuals will return to Delhi within a period of one year. 

(g) Does not arise, in view of reply to part (f). 

284 

* Production Cess on Coal Mines 

565. Prof. N. G. Ranga : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if Government have levied 
a Production cess of Rs. 1-4-0 on portion of coal despatched from 
mines in British India ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, pp. 818-19. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


866 


866 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is the cost of recruiting unskilled labour from Gorakhpur, 
Ballia and other districts of the United Provinces and their 
maintenance at the coal fields defrayed out of the proceeds of 
the cess ? 

(c) What is the Contract Form the labour (including women) 
have to sign ? Will Government place on the table of the House 
a copy of the order under which this labour is recruited and 
their contract form ? 

(d) What is the machinery to recruit them ? 

(e) Where are they usually stationed ? 

(f) What was the approximate number of this labour at the 
various coalfields on the 31st December 1944 ? 

(g) Have separate camps been established for them ? If so, 
are latrine and bath-room conveniences provided ? 

(h) How many batches have been sent by now and what is 
their numerical strength ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The expenditure is initially met by Government. A part 
of it is recovered from mine owners and the balance is recouped 
from the Production Cess Fund. 

(c) No form of contract is signed by labourer who verbally 
agree to serve for a period of 6 or 12 months. 

(d) Labour Supply Depot, Gorakhpur, run by the Government 
of the United Provinces. 

(e) Coalfields in Bengal and Bihar and Singareni colliery in 
Hyderabad. 

(f) (i) Bengal/Bihar coalfields. 15,400. 

(ii) Singareni Colliery. 2,500. 

(g) Yes, latrines are provided in most camps and will soon 
be provided in all, but not bath-rooms. Adequate water supply 
is however made available. 

(h) The total number of labourers despatched is : 

Bengal/Bihar coalfields. 37,000. 

Singareni collieries. 5,000. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


867 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 867 

285 

* Medical Aid at Coal Mine Workers Camps 

566. prof. N. G. Ranga : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to say if’ there is any provision for rendering 
medical aid to the coal mine workers at their camps ? 

(b) If so, has any schedule been drawn up for maintaining 
any minimum stock of medicines and surgical instruments at 
such camps ? What is the number of medical staff and their 
qualifications ? 

(c) Is, there any arrangement for the treatment of venereal 
diseases, at these camps ? 

(d) Is any record maintained of the incidence of sickness ? 

(e) If so, what is the total number of cases of malaria and 
venereal diseases from the beginning of these establishments of 
the labour camps up to the 31st December, 1944 ? 

(f) Is there any arrangement for periodical medical examination 
of the workers ? 

(g) If so, what are the diseases most prevalent which these 
examinations show and their percentage ? 

(h) Have any deaths taken place ? If so, how many and due 
to what reasons ? 

(i) Is there any supervision machinery for the Medical 
Department of the Camp ? Does the local Civil Surgeon 
visit the camps and treat serious cases ? Are serious 
cases taken to Civil Hospitals ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) An adequate stock of medical supplies and surgical 
instruments are kept at each camp. One graduate in medicine is 
in charge of each camp with more than 1,000 labourers ; while 
one licentiate in medicine is in charge of each camp with less 
than 1,000 labourers. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) The camps, are spread over a large area and it has therefore 
not been possible to collect the information in the time available. 

(f) Yes. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, p. 819. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


868 


868 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(g) Annemia. In this case also time is required to collect the 
statistics asked for. 

(h) yes. 156 up to end of last December. The majority of deaths 
is due to natural causes. A small number is due to accidents 
at work sites. 

(i) Yes. A post of chief Medical Officer of the Directorate of 
Unskilled Labour Supply has been sanctioned. In view of the 
special provisions made the local Civil Surgeon does not visit 
the camps. Serious cases are taken to Civil Hospitals. 

286 

* Rations at Coal Mine Workers Camps 

567. Prof. N. G. Ranga : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if the workers living at these mining 
labour camps are provided with rations directly by Government 
or through a contractor ? 

(b) Is each worker allowed to draw his ration separately or 
are the rations given in bulk to a gang of fifty men ? 

(c) Is it a fact that labour are usually supplied short weights 
by the contractor ? 

(d) Can this labour purchase their rations from the Local 
Government Ration Shops or Depots ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Workers in 
mining labour camps are issued rations by Government through 
a contractor under the supervision of Group Officers. 

(b) Rations are issued weekly in bulk for each gang. 

(c) No. 

(d) No, as they are issued free Government rations. 

287 

@ Corporal Punishments at Coal Mine Workers 

Camps 

568. Prof. N. G. Ranga : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that corporal punishment 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th February 1945, pp. 819-20. 
@ Ibid., p. 820. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


869 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 869 

is being given to the workers at these coal mining labour camps ? 
Does this apply to men and women both ? 

(b) Does any inachinery exist for the redress of these workers’ 
grievances ? 

(c) Are the Labour Welfare Adviser to the Government of India 
and his Assistants or the Coal Mines Welfare Commissioner and 
the officers under him empowered to look after the welfare of these 
workers or conduct inquiries into their grievances ? If not, why not ? 

(d) If so, who investigates their complaints ? 

(e) Is any record maintained of these cases ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. There are no 
women’s camps. 

(b) Yes. The workers can approach the Deputy Director Labour 
Supply (Coal) for redress of grievances. 

(c) No. The Labour Camps are looked after by the Deputy 
Director Labour Supply (Coal) and his staff. 

(d) Chief Liaison Officer and the Group officers of the Unskilled 
Labour Supply Directorate. 

(e) If cases are submitted in writing, the records are kept 
in the office of the Deputy Director Labour Supply (Coal). Oral 
complaints are dealt with on the spot. Where considered necessary 
records are kept. 


288 

* Mica Commission 

661. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the object of appointing the Mica Commission ? 

(b) What were its terms of reference and composition ? 

(c) What assistance have Government rendered at any time to 
the mica producers of this country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
Honourable Member presumably refers to the Mica Enquiry 
Committee. His attention is invited to Resolutions No. MD-55, dated 
15th May, 1944 and 23rd October 1944, copies of which have been 
placed in the Library of the Indian Legislature. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 5th March 1945, pp. 1022-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


870 


870 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Under the Government of India Act, 1935 Mineral 
Development is a Provincial subject except to such extent as is 
declared by a Federal law to be expedient in the public interest. No 
such federal law at present exists and Mineral Development has 
therefore been left entirely to Provincial Governments. But even 
so during the war the Central Government has given considerable 
assistance to mica producers in helping them to get supplies and 
by allowing the bonus on excess production to be free of excess 
profits tax. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Is it a fact that Government have 
controlled the price of mica and that bulk of the mica has been 
purchased both for this Government and for the Allied Governments 
at controlled prices, and that the control has been introduced by 
the Central Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Prices have been fixed. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : May I know how these prices compare 
with the pre-war prices ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They compare very 
favourably. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : How much is the difference ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I must have 
notice of that question. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: May I ask whether the Mica Commission is 
going to consider the conditions of work of the mica miners, and, if 
so, whether the miners are represented on the Mica Commission ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, that is not one 

of the subjects which the Commission will make enquiries about. 

Mr. G. W. Tyson : With reference to part (c) of the question, 
will the Honourable Member say whether he is satisfied that 
during the war, in which period the Central Government has 
had a good deal to do with the mica industry, Government has 
accorded protection to the mechanized mining companies which 
have suffered very heavy losses as a result of the illicit trade in 
mica ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is one of the 

reason why the Committee was appointed. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I know if the 
Maternity Benefit Act is applied to mica factories ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It applies to all mines. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


871 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 871 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Is it a fact that the 
Factories Act is not applied to mica splitting factories. If so, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no reason 
to believe that it is not applied. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I draw the 
attention of the Government to the report in the Trade Unions 
Record of September, 1944? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Probably that might 
need further corroboration. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether the Honourable Member 
will make enquiries to find out whether the Factories Act applied 
to mica factories, or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will make 
enquiries. 


289 

* Abolition of Distinction between Orthodox and 
Un-Orthodox Quarters 

662. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari : (a) With reference to 
the Honourable the Labour Member’s reply to the adjournment 
motion on the 10th February, 1945, regarding the abolition of the 
distinction between orthodox and un- orthodox quarters, will he 
be pleased to state whether other Departments of Government 
were consulted and which and how many of the Departments 
of the Government of India were for and against the proposal 
to abolish the distinction ? 

(b) Has the Estate Officer been vested till now with the 
discretion to allow un-orthodox quarters ? If not, why has he 
now been vested with such discretion ? 

(c) What is the method or machinery by which the Estate 
Officer will be able to satisfy himself whether an applicant, 
who is an Indian, professes European habits and thus becomes 
eligible for a unit in the un-orthodox quarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. Government 
do not consider it necessary to specify the Departments who were 
against or in favour of the proposal. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 5th March 1945, p. 1023. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


872 


872 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) No. The Estate Officer will have no discretion in the 
allotment of un-orthodox quarters as Government have decided 
that a declaration by an applicant in respect of his style of 
living should be accepted without question. 

(c) Does not arise. 


290 

*Abolition of Distinction Between Orthodox and 
Un-Orthodox Quarters 

663. Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state whether, according 
to his reply of the 10th instant in connection with the 
adjournment motion on the same subject, mentioned in the 
preceding question, it is proposed to disturb the provisional 
lien holders of un-orthodox quarters ? If so, will they be 
allotted similar accommodation of the type to which they are 
eligible, if available ? 

(b) In the event of such higher category accommodation 
not being available, is it the intention to allow them as 
heretofore to continue in the type of house they are already in 
occupation until such time as the higher type accommodation 
is available ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The reply to 
the first part of the question is in the negative. The second 
part does not arise. 

(b) Yes. 


291 

@ Break-Down of Trade Disputes Arbitration 
Machinery in Ahmedabad 

668. Mr. K. S. Gupta : (a) Is the Honourable the Labour 
Member aware of the serious situation arising out of the 
break-down of the permanent machinery of arbitration for 
settlement of disputes capital and industry in Ahmedabad ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 5th March 1945, pp. 1023-24. 
@ Ibid., p. 1027. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


873 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 873 

(b) Is it not a fact that the break-down is viewed with grave 
concern by the Joint Representative Board of the Textile Labour 
Association of Ahmedabad ? 

(c) Do not Government of India propose to restore arbitration 
system ? If not, why not ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that there is a written agreement of 1937 
signed by both the Textile Labour Association and the Millowners’ 
Association of Ahmedabad ? 

(e) Is it not a fact that the above said agreement is still 
unregistered and not acted upon by the Millowners’ Association ? 
If so, do Government propose to use their influence and power 
necessary to end the dispute ? 

(f) Does the Government of India propose to encourage and 
help the formation of a Labour Research Institute contemplated 
by the Textile Labour Association of Ahmedabad for the benefit 
of the working classes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am aware of the 
existence of a trade dispute over bonus between the Textile Labour 
Association and the Millowners’ Association, Ahmedabad, which 
has been taken up by the Chief Conciliator under the Bombay 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1938. I have no information regarding 
any breakdown of the arbitration machinery and other matters 
referred to in the question all of which are the concern of the 
Provincial Government. 


292 

* Communal Composition of certain Staff under 
Labour Department 

55. Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the total number, and 

(b) the number of Sikhs, 

(c) Christians, 

(d) Domiciled Europeans and Anglo-Indians, and 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 5th March 1945, p. 1039. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


874 


874 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Parsis, appointed since 1934 in each grade of pay on 
(i) permanent and 

(ii) temporary basis, carrying a salary of Rs. 100 p.m. 
and above, in all the Departments and offices under 
him, giving the designations of Sikhs so appointed ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The time and labour 
involved in collecting this information will not be commensurate 
with the results to be achieved. The Government therefore regret 
their inability to furnish this information. 

293 

* Profiteering in House Property Transactions 

in Delhi 

57. Mr. Satya Narayan Sinha : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if it is a fact that a good deal of 
profiteering is going on in house property transactions in Delhi 
City ? If so, what action has been taken by Government to check 
it? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
have no information. 

(b) The question does not arise but for the information of 
the Honourable Member I would state that Government have 
not passed any measure regulating the sale of private house 
property in Delhi City. 


294 

@ Labour Officers’ Training in Britain 

810. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether Labour Officers are being sent to the United 
Kingdom for training; 

(b) the object and course of training ; and 

(c) how many are proposed to be sent and the expenditure 
involved in this scheme ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 8th March 1945, p. 1039. 
@ Ibid., p. 1167. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


875 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 875 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The object is to have experienced and suitably trained 
staff to tackle problems of labour administration, e.g., industrial 
relations including the settlement of Labour disputes, factory 
inspection, and labour welfare, wage regulation and inspection, 
employment exchanges, demobilisation and resettlement, which 
are of immediate importance to India. The course will cover 
mainly all the subjects enumerated above and will be conducted 
partly at the headquarters of the Ministry of Labour and partly 
in other centres in the United Kingdom. It will last for a period 
of about six to eight months. 

(c) The intention is to send three batches of 20 officers each, 
each batch including 12 officers of the Central Government and 
eight of the Provincial Governments and States. Financial sanction 
has been accorded to the sending of 12 Central Government 
officers with the first batch of trainees and this will cost the 
Central Government about a lakh of rupees. The Provincial 
Governments and States will bear the expenditure in connection 
with their nominees. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Will the Honourable Member say how 
he proposes to make the selections ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : With regard to the 
selections of nominees of Provinces and States, the matter rests 
with them. With regard to the selection of officers from Centre 
it rests with the Central Government of India. If the point of 
my Honourable friend is whether communal proportions will be 
recognised in making the selections, I want to tell him that I 
do propose to apply that principle. 

Sardar Sant Singh : Will preference be given to those 
who are better qualified so far as educational qualifications are 
concerned. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It will be one of 
the qualifications. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : May I know from the Honourable 
Member whether these officers will be selected by the heads of 
the particular Departments or by some committee. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are selected 
by the different Departments. 

The Muhammad Yamin Khan : Are they officers already 
in Government service ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


876 


876 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, they will be 
officers already in service. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask if 

Government will include women, as welfare of women workers 
is very important. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

295 

* The Mines Maternity Benefit 
(Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I beg to move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941.” 

The Motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


296 

The Factories (Second Amendment) 

Bill 

@ Presentation of the Report of the Select 
Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I present the Report of the Select Committee on the Bill 
further to amend the Factories Act, 1934. 

297 

f The General Budget-List of Demands — contd. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray (Nominated Non- Official): Sir, May I just say 
that I should like to move my cut motion No. 189 on the Consolidated 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 8th March 1945, p. 1206. 
@ Ibid., 10th March 1945, p. 1311. 
t Ibid., 10th March 1945, p. 1312. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


877 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 877 

List of Motions under Demand No. 23 under the head 
Department of Labour, after Mr. N. M. Joshi’s motion, during 
the time allotted to Unattached Members. The Unattached 
Members, Mr. Frank Anthony and Sardar Sant Singh and 
Mr. Hooseinbhoy Lalljee, have agreed to allow my cut motion to 
take precedence over theirs. I have also notified the Honourable 
the Labour Member accordingly. I hope you will kindly agree 
to this arrangement. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Has 
the Government Member any objection to it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
I do not have any rights in this matter; the matter, I think, 
is entirely in your discretion, Sir. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): As the 
Honourable Member has got the permission of those unattached 
Members in whose time this motion will be moved and the 
Government have enough time till Monday or Tuesday to be 
ready with their reply to the motion, I think I shall allow the 
motion to be entered on the agenda. 

298 

* Registered Trade Unions 

814. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state how many registered Trade 
Unions there are in India and what the total membership is ? 

(b) What is the total number of persons employed in 
industrial concerns excluding State concerns ? 

(c) On what basis have Government recognized Trade Unions 
for State employees such as Posts, Telegraphs, Railways, etc. ? 

(d) What channel have Government provided for 
representation of subordinate services in the Civil Departments 
of the Government of India of their legitimate grievances, 
particularly with regard to dearness caused by the war ? 

(e) What assistance or contribution or grant, direct or 
indirect, has been given to labour Unions in India by the 
Government of India during the last five years and for what 
purposes ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 8th March 1945, p. 1171. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


878 


878 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) On the 31st 
March 1942, there were 747 registered unions and the membership 
of 455 unions out of these (which submitted returns) was 5,73,520. 
I regret later information is not available. 

(b) According to the latest available reports the average daily 
number of persons employed during 1943 in private factories 
subject to the Factories Act, 1934, was about 21 lakhs and that 
in mines subject to the Mines Act, 1923, about 3 V 2 lakhs. In the 
Assam tea plantations the average number of workers on the 
books was a little over 6 lakhs during 1942-43. 

(c) A copy of the Rules regulating recognition of unions of 
industrial employees of the Central Government is laid on the 
table. 

(d) Members of Subordinate Services in Civil Departments 
can represent their grievances either orally or in writing to the 
Heads of Departments or similarly placed officers or can approach 
such authorities or Government through recognised unions, staff 
councils or works committees, where they exist. It is also open 
to any aggrieved Government servant to make representations 
to the Head of his Department or the Government of India in 
accordance with the instructions laid down in Home Department 
Notification No. 106/38, dated the 24th August, 1938, a copy of 
which is laid on the table. 

(e) The Railway Department grant to railway employees who 
are union officials certain facilities in regard to causal leave and 
free passes for railway journeys for attending meetings of the 
union. No other direct assistance is granted to labour unions as 
such by the Government of India. 

299 

* Hours of Work, Wages, etc., of Labour in 
War Supplies Factories 

@936. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the number 
of hours for which the labour in factories producing War supplies 
and in the mines, has to work at a stretch, and what wages they 
are paid for their labour ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 13th March 1945, p. 1407. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


879 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 879 

(b) Do the same labour work in shifts in the same factories 
and mines ? 

(c) What is the rate of overtime wages for labour in factories 
and mines ? 

(d) What is charged for rations supplied to labour in factories 
and mines and what is the quantity allotted to each labourer 
in mills, factories and mines ? Is there any officer appointed by 
Government to watch the Distribution of ration to labourers in 
factories, mills and mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Hours of work in 
Factories are regulated by sections 34,36-38 of the Factories Act, 
1934 and those in Mines by sections 22B and 22C of the Indian 
Mines Act, 1923. In the case of factories producing war supplies 
exemption has been granted by Provincial Governments in several 
cases from all or some of the provisions. Instructions have been 
issued that except for short periods and in emergent conditions, 
the hours of work should not exceed 60 a week. Ordinarily no 
exemption is granted from the statutory requirements as to 
intervals of rest. It is regretted that more precise information 
is not available. 

Wage rates vary considerably in different classes of factories 
and mines and in different units in any particular class. I regret 
detailed information regarding wages or general averages of 
wages are not available. 

(b) The question is not understood. 

(c) Section 47 of the Factories Act, 1934, prescribes the rates 
of overtime wages in factories. No Exemption has generally 
been allowed from the provisions of this section. No overtime 
work is permissible in mines except in the case of an emergency 
involving serious risk to the safety of the mine or the persons 
employed therein. 

(d) There is no uniformity in regard to prices charged for 
rations supplied to labour in factories and mills. But it is known 
that several employers do supply foodgrains, etc., at less than 
controlled rates and a large number of controlled rates. 

In ‘rationed’ areas, workers receive the same scale of rationed 
articles as the general public. ‘Heavy workers’ are eligible for 
extra-rations. In addition, industrial canteens supplying cooked 
food now receive supplies outside the ration. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


880 


880 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The basic standard weekly rations at controlled rates for 
coal-mine workers in Bihar consists of 4 seers each for the 
worker and adult dependent and 2 seers for a child and dal at 
one-fourth basic ration at a concession rate of 6 seers per rupee. 
In addition 1 h seer of rice or other foodgrain is given free for 
each attendance at mines. Some of the collieries in Bengal have 
adopted the same scale with slight variations while others allow 
a flat rate of 6 seers per week per worker at reduced prices. In 
some collieries in the C.P. and Berar ration at concession rates 
is allowed on the scale of 6 seers a week per adult worker, 3V 2 
seers for each woman dependant and 1% for each child. No special 
officers of Government apart from the usual Food Rationing 
Organisations have been appointed to look after distribution of 
ration to workers. In respect of coal mines, however, six Ration 
Inspectors have been appointed, three for Bihar under the Bihar 
Government and three for Bengal attached to the Department 
of Mines. 


300 

*Fixation of Minimum Living Wages of Labour 

@ 937. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Has 
the Honourable the Labour Member fixed the minimum living 
wages of labour in factories, mills and mines in accordance with 
the price of essential foodstuffs and clothing required by the 
labouring classes ? 

(b) Is there any arrangement for the education of children 
of the labourers in the factories, mills and mines ? Is there any 
educational arrangement for adult labourers ? 

(c) Is there any provision for holidays with pay in factories, 
mills and mines ? What arrangements are there for medical 
treatment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There is no 
legislation for fixing minimum wages for employees in factories 
including mills, or in mines. 

(b) Educational facilities outside factories or mines whether 
for children of workers or for adult workers are provided by 
provincial authorities. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 13th March 1945, p. 1407. 
@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


881 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 881 

The owners of some undertakings have made provisions 
themselves for both purposes but no detailed information in 
this regard is available with me. The Honourable Member is no 
doubt aware that there is no legal obligation in this respect of 
the owners of industrial undertakings. 

(c) There is no legal provision requiring holidays with pay 
to be given. As regards non-seasonal factories there is a Bill on 
this subject before this House which it has referred to a Select 
Committee. 

Apart from legal provisions many concerns give to their 
employees holidays with pay to varying extent. 

As regards medical treatment the only statutory provisions 
within factories and mines relate to the provision of first aid. 
Some concerns run dispensaries and hospitals but apart from 
these the employees have to depend on the medical facilities 
provided by the Provincial Governments. 

301 

*Women Labour in Mines 

938. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the number 
of women labour in the mines and if there is child labour in 
mines, i.e., minors in the mines. If so, what ages ? 

(b) What maternity benefits are given to women in factories, 
mills and mines ? How long does the Honourable Member 
contemplate to continue women labour in mines ? 

(c) What is the function of the Labour Welfare Officers in 
the factories, mills and mines ? What are their qualifications ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) In 1943 the 
number of women labour in mines was 72,403 (this figure includes 
those working above and underground). Figures for 1944 are not 
available. In accordance with the Indian Mines Act, no children 
are employed in mines. 

(b) A comparative statement showing some of the important 
provisions of Legislation regarding maternity benefit at present in 
force (or in contemplation) is laid on the table of the House. Recent 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 945, 13th March 1945, pp. 1408-09. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


882 


882 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

information from Bombay and Madras indicates that some of the 
mills in those provinces have increased the maternity benefit 
from the statutory rate of annas eight to annas twelve per day. 

With regard to the second part of the question, there is no 
intention to withdraw women completely from work in mines. 

(e) The functions of the Labour Welfare Officers generally are : 

(i) to establish close contact between the employers and the 
workmen in all aspects of labour relations and conditions of work ; 

(ii) to promote proper understanding, closer co-operation and 
mutual appreciation of difficulties, between the employers and 
the workmen; 

(iii) to make constructive suggestions for workmen’s welfare, 
and to coordinate and supervise all welfare activities of the 
undertakings ; 

(iv) to acquaint themselves with the grievances of the workers, 
and to secure redress of such grievances and generally to attempt 
to remove causes of friction. 

As regards qualifications while academic qualifications are 
given due importance, the essential qualification is that the 
candidates should have experience of social work, preference being 
given to those who have successfully undergone a recognised 
training course like that of the Calcutta University or the 
Sir Dorabji Tata Graduate School of Social Work, Bombay. 

Comparative Statement showing some of the important provisions 
of Legislation regarding maternity benefit at present in force (or in 
contemplation ) in the provinces and the mines 

Penalty for 

Rate of maternity contravention 
benefits of Act by 

employer 

Bombay 1929 9 8 8 annas a day or Rs. 

average daily 500 

wages, whichever 

is less. But in the 

cities of Bombay 

and Ahmedabad 8 

annas a day. 


Maximum 

Year in Qualifying period for 
Province which period maternity 
passed (months) benefits 
(Weeks) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


883 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 883 


Maximum 

Year in Qualifying period for 
Province which period maternity 

passed (months) benefits 

(W eeks) 

C.P. and 1930 9 8 

Berar 


Madras 1934 2 4 0 7 




days (8 
months) 
within 
a period 
of one 




year. 


U.P. 

1938 

6 

8 


Bengal 

1939 

9 

8 

Punjab 

1943 

9 

60 days 

Assam 

1944 

150 days 

8 


Penalty for 

Rate of maternity contravention 

benefits of Act by 

employer 

8 annas a day or Rs. 500 
average daily 
wages, whichever 
is less. 

8 annas a day. 250 


8 annas a day or 

500 for first 

average daily 

offence and 

wages, whichever 

1,000 for 

is greater. 

the second 
and any 
subse- 
quent 
offence. 

Ditto. 

500 

12 annas a day 

500 

1. In planation Re. 

500 


1 per week for 
the period before 
confinement and 
Rs. 1/4/- per week 
for the period 
after confinement, 
provided the total 
cash payment is 
Rs. 14. 

2. In other 
employments Rs. 2 
per week or average 
weekly wage or 
salary whichever 
is greater. 


Mines 1941 6 8 8 annas a day 500 

(under 
the 

Indian 

Mines 

Maternity 

Benefit 

Act.). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


884 


884 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


302 

* Training Indians in Labour Welfare in 
United Kingdom 

@ 939. Mr. Amarendra Nath Chattopadhyaya : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state if it is a fact that the 
Labour Department is going to send a considerable number of men 
for training in labour welfare to the U. K. ? If so, why Government 
cannot train these people in India ? What would be the cost of 
their training scheme ? What would be the minimum qualification 
required of such trainees ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is proposed 
to send in the first instance, three batches of 20 officers each, of 
whom about 12 will be officers of the Central Government and 8 of 
Provincial Governments and States. Financial sanction has been 
accorded to the sending of 12 Central Government officers with the 
first batch of trainees. 

In the initial stages the training and experience necessary for 
labour administration in the immediate post-war period cannot 
be acquired in India except by a lengthy process of trial and error. 
It is therefore, necessary to take advantages of the experience 
and practice of other more highly industrialised countries like the 
United Kingdom. 

The cost to the Central Government is estimated at Rupees one 
lakh for the nominees in the first batch. The Provincial Governments 
and States will bear the charges in respect of their nominees. 

The minimum qualifications are that the officers should be 
under Government employment or designated to fill posts under 
Government and should have experience of welfare work or 
administration of labour legislation. Officers having high educational 
qualification will be given preference. 

303 

t Factory Inspectors and Labour Welfare Officers 
in Delhi Province 

964. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of Factory Inspectors and Labour Welfare 
Officers in the Delhi Province, and if they include women ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 13th March 1945, pp. 1409-10. 
f Ibid, p. 1422. 

@ Answer to this question laid on the table, the questioner being absent. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


885 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 885 

(b) whether these officers have reported on the urgency 
for providing proper residential quarters for workers 
in factories ; and, if so, what steps Government have 
taken or propose to take in the matter; and 

(c) if the answer to (b) is in the negative, whether 
Government propose to call for an immediate report 
on the subject ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There are 
two full-time Factory Inspectors and two Additional Factory 
Inspectors. The latter are part time. There is no Labour Welfare 
and Maternity Centre. Delhi Municipality, exercises the powers 
of an inspector under the Bombay Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 
as extended to Delhi. 

(b) No, the latter part does not arise. 

(c) Government will take up for consideration in due course 
the general question of housing of industrial labour. It is not 
therefore proposed to call for special report in respect of Delhi 
Province only. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I know, Sir, if 
Government will consider the proposal to appoint a whole-time 
Woman Welfare Officer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, I will consider 
that. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: What is the meaning of “due time” regarding 
housing ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think it 
is a very unusual expression which requires explanation. 

304 

*Contract System for Engagement of Labour 
in Delhi Factories 

965. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state ; if labour is 
still engaged in factories in Delhi by contract system ; and, 
if so, (i) the names of the factories who have that system ; 
(ii) the number of workers, men and women, employed under 
that system, by each of those factories ; (iii) the average daily 
wage of the workers and the rate of dearness allowance ; 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 13th March 1945, pp. 1422-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


886 


886 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and (iv) if the workers receive the benefits under the Factories and 
Maternity Benefits Acts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, in the case of some 
factories. A list of such factories is laid on the table. No information 
is available as regards the number of workers employed through 
contractors but the number of such persons is small and is limited to 
coal handling and loading. Information in regard to the average daily 
wage and the rate of dearness allowance is not readily available, but 
dearness allowance varies from Rs. 10 to Rs. 32 per month and in 
factories where no dearness allowance is paid the basic wages have 
been increased. All factory workers receive benefits under the F actories 
and the Bombay Maternity Benefit Acts. 

List of Factories in Delhi in which part of the labour force is 
employed through Contractors referred to in question No. 965, 
dated the 13th March, 1945. 

1. Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. 

2. Mahabir Cotton Spinning, Weaving and Manufacturing Co., 
Ltd. 

3. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co., Ltd. 

4. Latifi Printing Press. 

5. Gwalior Potteries Ltd. 

6. Ishwar Potteries Ltd. 

7. Delhi Flour Mills Co. Ltd. 

8. Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Ltd. 

9. Tin Printing and Metal Works Ltd. 

10. Ganesh Flour Mills (Vegetable Products Factory). 

11. Aggarwal Hosiery Mills. 

12. Ordnance Clothing Factory. 

13. Malik and Qureshi. 

14. H. S. Sidhu, 26, Daryaganj, Delhi. 

15. Girdhari Lai Gauri Shanker Textile Factory. 

16. Messrs. Pearey Lai and Sons (Lahore) Ltd. 

17. The Premier Textile Factory. 

18. Phoenix Cotton Tape Factory. 

19. Sharma Textile and General Manufacturing Co., 

20. Messrs. Aggerllios and Co., 50-Garriston Bastion Road, Delhi. 

21. Messrs. Aggerllios and Co., 11-B, Faiz Bazar, Daryaganj, 

Delhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


887 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 887 

22. British Niwar Factory. 

23. Yadev Niwar Factory. 

24. Delhi-Press. 

25. Saksaria Printing Works. 

26. British Motor Car, O. B. F. Co., Section. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Since Delhi is so 
near New Delhi will Government assure me that they will secure 
this information as soon as possible ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Yes, in due time. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : In view of the admitted evils of this 
contract system of recruiting labour, will Government take early 
steps to put an end to it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: This is not a matter 
in which Government is concerned. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that the Royal Commission 
on Labour recommended to the Government that they should 
take special steps to root it out ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend is referring to such labour as is employed through 
contractors in Government departments, that matter will certainly 
be considered. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I know whether Government consider 
welfare of labour recruited under contract system as not a matter 
of labour welfare ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is quite entitled to draw any inference he likes. 

305 

* Average Wage of Women in Delhi Factories 

967. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the average wage of women employed in factories in 
Delhi; and whether they are paid at a daily or monthly 
rate ; 

(b) the dearness allowance paid to them ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 13th March 1945, pp. 1424-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


888 


888 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) if there is any difference in the wages and dearness 
allowance paid to the men and women workers doing the 
same kind of work ; and, if so, the reasons for the difference ; 

(d) whether the women engaged under contract system receive 
the same wages and dearness allowance as those directly 
recruited, and the reasons for the difference, if any ? 

(e) whether any of the factories provide facilities for maternity 
and Child Welfare ; and if so, in what manner ; 

(f) whether any of these factories provide creches and make 
other arrangements for the care of the children of their 
employees ; and 

(g) if the answers to (e) and (f) are in the negative, whether 
Government propose to take immediate steps to compel the 
owners of factories to make the necessary arrangements ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Data in respect of 
the average wage of women employed in factories in Delhi is not 
readily available. In some factories women are paid at monthly rates 
and in others at piece or daily rates. 

(b) No detailed information is available but the dearness allowance 
paid to women workers ranges from Rs. 10 to Rs. 32. 

(c) So far as is known, there is no difference in wages and dearness 
allowance paid to men and women doing the same kind of work. 

(d) So far as is known women in factories are engaged direct 
and not through contractors. 

(e) Two factories provide facilities for maternity and child welfare, 

(f) Yes, two factories provide creches. In one factory free baths are 
provided daily to the children of employees and under-nourished 
children are supplied daily half a seer of milk free of cost. In the 
other factory free education is given to the children of employees in 
the school run by the factory and half a seer of milk each is given 
daily to all the children free of cost. 

(g) Does not arise. 

Sir Vithal N. Chandavarkar : May I know whether the Province 
of Delhi has no Labour Department of its own ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice of 
that question ? 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : May I ask whether it would surprise the 
Honourable the Labour Member to hear that there are 3,500 women 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


889 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 889 

in the thread ball factories who do not get any dearness allowance 
and that men and women are not paid equal wages and is he 
willing to inquire into this and if he finds it is so, will he take steps 
immediately to rectify their grievance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sure that nothing 
that comes from the Honourable lady will surprise me. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi: With reference to his reply to part (a) that 
the information is not readily available, may I know whether he 
will make very special effort to make it available ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will see what I can do. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I know, Sir if 
Factory Inspectors do not send periodical reports to the Government ? 
How is it that Government say that they have not got the information ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It must be going to 
the Chief Commissioner of Delhi. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Sir, I wish to seek your guidance in regard 
to the reply given by the Honourable Member. It appears to me that 
it is a sort of aspersion cast upon a lady. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): I do not 
think the Honourable Member meant to cast any such aspersion. 
However, you ought to leave it to the lady who put the question to 
take care of herself. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Mr. President, especially 
today the replies of the Government Benches have been in a tone 
that is unusual and we had occasion to know about it from the Food 
Member. And now, Sir, the reply of the Honourable Member to the 
lady is this. She asked whether he will enquire. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. Whether I would 
be surprised to know that. 

Mrs. Renuka Ray : And would he be willing to look into the 
matter ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): As regards 
the tone of the Honourable Member’s reply to the question it is very 
difficult for me to judge for I am afraid so far as that is concerned 
it is not only one part of the House that is concerned. 

(At this stage, several Honourable Members stood up and spoke 
simultaneously.) 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Order, order. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


890 


890 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

306 

* Re-employment of a Government Servant after 

Conviction 

972. Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choudhury : With reference 
to the reply to starred question No. 407 on the 14th March, 
1944, regarding re-employment of a Government servant after 
conviction, will the Honourable the Labour Member please state 
whether any enquiry was made in regard to the Government 
servant referred to in that question ? If so, what was the result 
of that enquiry, and what action was taken by Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. Though the 
individual had been dismissed by the Punjab Government, that 
Government had permitted him to take up employment either 
in the Central Public Works Department or elsewhere. In view 
of this and the fact that he has been continuously employed in 
the Central Public Works Department since February, 1942, no 
further action was considered necessary. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : What was the charge 
for which the particular person was dismissed by the Punjab 
Government? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Mere assault. 

307 

@ Post-War Plans for Improving Labour 

1043. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether Government have any post-war plans for 
improving labour in this country ; and 

(b) whether they will consider the advisability of setting 
apart a portion of the profits of all organised industries 
for improving the standard of life and giving education 
to the labourers employed in the respective industries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government’s 
final plans in this respect have not been formulated. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 13th March 1945, p. 1428. 
@ Ibid., 16th March 1945, pp. 1598-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


891 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 891 

(b) The suggestion will be considered along with others in 
implementing Government’s plans. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : When are these plans likely to be 
formulated ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As soon as the 
investigating committee has reported. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : May I know if there is a time limit 
for this committee to report? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, they have 
promised to give us their report sometime in August next. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will Government consider the advisability 
of expediting their plans so that before the profits earned for this 
year are dissipated by the industries, they may be able to set 
apart a portion of the profits for improving labour conditions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall bear the 
suggestion in mind. 


308 

* Provision of Quarters for Mines 

1054. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if residential quarters arc provided for miners in all 
mining areas ; and if not, why not; 

(b) if no quarters are provided, what steps Government 
propose to take to ensure that miners have proper 
housing accommodation ; 

(c) if Government are aware that the sanitary conditions 
in mining areas are very unsatisfactory and that lack 
of good housing accommodation and proper sanitation 
is seriously affecting the health of the miners and their 
families and thereby production; and 

(d) if Government propose to consult the Tripartite 
Conference about the matter referred to in (c); and, if 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Residential 
quarters are provided for miners in the important mining areas, 
(b) Does not arise. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 16th March 1945, pp. 1604-05. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


892 


892 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) The Indian Mines Act lays down the primary requirements 
regarding sanitary and health provisions ; and the Mines 
Inspectorate see that they are properly observed. 

(d) I shall consider the suggestion. 

Shrimati K. Radhu Bai Subbarayan : Since the coal 
situation is very grave may I ask Government if they will appoint 
a Committee of Experts, Medical Health and Engineering, to go 
into the questions mentioned in (c) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We have already 
appointed a Coal Mines Welfare Committee by whom all these 
questions are considered. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask what proportion of miners are 
housed in the houses provided in the mining areas ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am afraid I must 
have notice of that question. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : The Honourable Member has made a 
wrong statement. 


309 

* Restoration of Ban on Women 
Working Underground in Mines 

1055. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if Government have seen the recent report of questions 
and answers in the House of Commons regarding women 
working underground in mines ; and, if so, whether 
and when Government supplied Mr. Amery with the 
information that he stated he had called for, and what 
that information is ; 

(b) when Government will conclude the consideration of the 
question of restoring the ban on employment of women 
underground in mines; 

(c) what steps Government have taken to prevent such 
hardships to women ; “are low but compare favourably 
with the pay in other industries in India” is based on 
facts ; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 19-45, 16th March 1945, p. 1605. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


893 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 893 

(d) if the answer to (c) is in the affirmative, the rates of 
pay for women workers in other industries in India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government 
have seen the reports in question. They do not consider it in the 
public interest to disclose the nature and contents of their report 
to the India Office. 

(b) The question of the restoration of the ban on the employment 
of women underground in mines is constantly under review. 

(c) and (d) What the Secretary of State said was that the rates 
of pay “compare favourably with those of other industries in that 
part of India”. The only comparable labour is that employed on 
the neighbouring construction works, and Government believe 
that the statement is not far from truth. 

(e) Arrangements have been made for ante-natal and post- 
natal care by the Mines Board of Health in the Jharia and 
Ranigunj coalfields. Some of the larger mines provide independent 
arrangements. 

(f) Women doctors and adequate staff are employed at some 
of the large mines. Many mines provide midwives and nurses at 
hospital. The second part of the question does not arise. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : May I ask if 

Government will make uniform arrangements in all mines for 
the welfare of women ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We have that matter 
under consideration. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : In view of the fact that the House has 
declared itself against the employment of women below ground, 
will the Government of India now impose the ban in accordance 
with the wishes of this Legislature ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I thought that the 
decision of the House was more of a political demarche than a 
decision on merits. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : He has wilfully misunderstood the 
intention of the House. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : On a point of order, is the Honourable 
Member free to put such an interpretation as to impute motives in 
regard to a well-considered decision of the House ? If so, it will be 
very difficult to carry on. We have an irresponsible Government, 
and if they are going to talk like this 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


894 


894 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim) : It is a 
speech you are making. On a point of order you cannot make 
a speech. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Can he impute motives ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): As I 
followed the Honourable Labour Member, I believe he wanted 
to convey to the House that the question was considered from 
more than one point of view including political. At any rate, I do 
not think he was imputting any wrong motive to the House by 
saying that the question has been dealt with on political grounds. 

Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : On a point of explanation, the official 
report of what the Honourable Member said may be referred to. 
He said it was a political demarche. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I know if the Government of India 
reconsidered the question after the vole given by this Legislature ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing to 
add to what I said. 


310 

* Dr. Krishnan’s Suggestions re Mineral 
Resources of India 

1773. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) If his attention has been drawn to the report of a 
lecture delivered by Dr. M. S. Krishnan to the Geology 
Association of the Presidency College, Madras, on the 
14th of March, as reported in the Hindu, of the 14th 
March; 

(b) What steps are being taken to obtain adequate quantities 
and build up reserves of copper, silver, nickel, platinum, 
tin, mercury, graphite and potash; 

(c) what steps are also being taken to develop and exploit 
hydraulic (electrical) power resources in all those 
provinces which do not have coal mines within easy 
reach, so as to develop local industries; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946. 12th April 1946, pp. 3899-3901. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


895 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 895 

(d) whether any steps are being taken to draw power from 
wind through wind mills and to popularise the use of 
wind mills ; and 

(e) whether Dr. Krishnan’s suggestion of establishing 
“well-equipped laboratories” to “assess the quality and 
quantity of the various minerals” and also his suggestion 
that locally available minerals shall be utilised in 
preference to imports will be fully studied ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) During the war Government had a proposal under 
consideration to build up in India a strategic stock of certain 
important minerals and related substances; but it did not 
materialise. Government are considering a revision of its which 
are in short supply in India. 

(c) Generally speaking steps arc being taken by Provincial 
and State Governments to develop and exploit Hydro-Electric 
Power Resources to the maximum extent of technical manpower 
at present available for such investigations. Central Technical 
Power Board is already assisting in certain cases subject to limit 
of its present strength in man-power and do more when adequate 
technical staff is procured. Government of India are fully aware 
of the necessity for far greater measure of Hydro-Electric System 
development throughout the country than is at present being 
undertaken, particularly in areas which are remote from major 
coal deposits, but they consider that this cannot be achieved 
without a far greater body of experienced technical personnel 
than at present exists and to this end are doing their utmost to 
recruit Specialists Technical personnel on contract. 

(d) No special steps are being taken by Government of India 
to draw power from wind or to popularise use of Wind Mills at 
present. Government is advised that such installations, while 
useful in selected areas depending on Meteorological conditions, 
are individually productive only extremely small amounts of 
power and that too intermittently. 

(e) The Geological Survey of India has been lately 
re-organised and its laboratory facilities considerably 
expanded. Further expansion in the direction of providing 
free advice and information on mineral and mining 
matters is being taken up. The recently planned National 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


896 


896 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Metallurgical and National Chemical Laboratories will be fully 
equipped to assess the quality of Indian minerals and in other 
ways prove of great assistance in the development of mineral 
industries. Domestic treatment and utilisation of India’s minerals 
and ores, in preference to their export in the raw conditions, is 
being considered by Government. A number of industrial Panels, 
instituted since 1944, have collected valuable information and 
data under this head which are being studied for the framing 
of a new Mineral policy. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : As regards part (c), the Honourable 
Member says they need many more specialists in order to develop 
these hydroelectric power resources. What steps are Government 
taking to get Indians of requisite abilities and qualifications to 
specialise in these directions so that their services may be made 
use of? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A number of 
Indians have been sent abroad for training in these specialised 
occupations. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : As part of this new scheme of sending 
scholars ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In addition to them, 
there are also other people who have been sent. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : With reference to part (d), my Honourable 
friend threw cold water on the suggestion to utilise wind power 
by saying that it could only give intermittent power and nothing 
more. In view of the fact that thousands of peasants are interested 
in these windmills, will Government try and look into this 
matter a little more carefully and devise ways by which they 
can possibly assist our peasants and others to draw as much 
power as is possible from wind and thus help them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said it depends 
upon how much wind there is in any particular area. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : There are meteorological experts and it 
ought to be possible for them to work out some plans and see 
how much power can be derived by utilising wind in different 
parts of the country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes; we have 
considered that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


897 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 897 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I know if the Government of India 
reconsidered the question after the vote given by this Legislature ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing to 
add to what I said. 


311 

*Arrangements for Care of Miners’ Children 

1057. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the information received by Government about 
arrangements for the care of children and infants of 
miners since the reply given to starred question No. 
436 on the 21st February, 1945 ; 

(b) the information received by Government on the points 
raised in supplementaries to that question; and 

(c) whether milk is supplied free to infants and children 
of the miners ; and, if so, the quantity of milk given 
to each child according to age, and if no milk is given, 
the reason for not giving it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). I have 
not yet received a report on all matters, but would first make 
clear that there is an absolute prohibition on women at any time 
taking babies underground, and themselves going underground 
for a period of 4 weeks after childbirth. 

An enquiry made by the Lady Labour Welfare Officer a 
few months ago disclosed that women in an advanced state of 
pregnancy generally did not go underground and I have introduced 
a Bill which while giving longer benefit will prohibit them from 
going underground for 10 weeks before expected date of childbirth. 

So far as I have ascertained no organised facilities exist for 
mothers to come to the surface to feed their babies at regular 
intervals, but the Lady Welfare Officer states that there is a 
tendency for women with children at home to leave the mines 
early to return to their homes. 

(c) In a few mines only Government are examining further 
possibilities in regard to improvement of health of women and 
children in mining areas. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p 2006. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


898 


898 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : In regard to that tendency for mothers 
who have left their children at home to leave the mines a little 
early, are they made to suffer any loss of wages because they 
leave a little early, or are they encouraged to leave the mines 
early without loss of pay ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are paid by 
tubs: it is piece work. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : How many hours 
at a stretch do they work ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is piece work ; 
they can go any time and come at any time. 

312 

* Tea Garden Labourers sent on 
Assam Projects 

1313. Dewan Abdul Basith Choudhury : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state whether he is aware 
that a large number of persons have been sent by the Managers 
of Tea Gardens to projects in Assam as labourers ? 

(b) Is the Honourable Member also aware that no compensation 
has yet been granted to the dependents of many labourers who 
have lost their lives while engaged in project work ? 

(c) Is it a fact that in those cases where compensation has 
been granted to the dependents of the deceased project workers, 
the amount paid is Rs. 200 to Rs. 300 ? Is this amount considered 
adequate ? 

(d) Is the Honourable Member aware that the dependents of 
these unfortunate labourers are experiencing great difficulties in 
receiving payments of the compensation money ? 

(e) Does the Honourable Member propose to consider the 
desirability of paying adequate compensation to the dependents 
of all labourers who have their lives in the projects ? 

(f) Does he also propose to consider the desirability of paying 
the compensation money through the Sub -Divisional Office instead 
of through the Tea Garden Office ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2007. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


899 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 899 

The Honourable Dr. B . R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The information is not correct. The Government of India 
in the War Department have directed payment of compensation 
to all labourers recruited by the Indian Tea Association (besides 
some other categories of labourers who have either lost their 
lives or have been injured as a result of their employment in the 
War projects in Assam. The Controller of Emigrant Labour has 
been appointed Commissioner of Workmen’s Compensation for 
the settlement of these claims. He has paid compensation in over 
4,000 cases within the last two years. The number of applications 
for compensation received by him on behalf of the Labourers of 
the Indian Tea Association alone up to 28th February 1945 is 
2,612. Of these payments have been made in 2,309 cases. 217 
cases have been rejected and 86 cases are under enquiry. 

(c) Compensation is paid according to the rates under the 
Workmen’s Compensation Act in all cases coming under the 
operation of the Workmen’s Compensation Act and in other cases 
Ex-Gratia payments of Rs. 900 for death and Rs. 1,200 for total 
disablement are paid. A preliminary payment up to Rs. 300 is 
paid in the first instance. The Honourable Member is apparently 
referring to this preliminary payment. 

(d) The amounts of compensation ordered to be paid in 
lump sums are paid through the Deputy Commissioner of the 
Managers of Tea Estates if the dependants live in Tea Estates. 
In the case of minors and persons incapable of taking care of 
large amounts, the amounts are invested in the Post Office 
by the Commissioner of Labour, Assam, and remitted to them 
in periodical instalments by Postal Money Order. There has 
been some delay in the investment and remittance in the early 
stages as the Postal Department were unable to deal with the 
large number of investments but remittances are now issued 
systematically. 

(e) As stated in reply to part (c) the rates of compensation 
paid in cases coming under Workmen’s Compensation Act are 
those laid down in the schedule of the Act. In the other cases 
the amounts of Rs. 900 for death and Rs. 1,200 for permanent 
total disability have been based on the rates admissible under 
the Act to a labourer receiving similar cash emoluments. These 
rates of compensation are considered adequate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


900 


900 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(f) In most of the cases the dependants are minors or persons 
incapable of taking care of large amounts. The amount invested 
in these cases are paid in instalments through Postal Money 
Order. Only preliminary payments and lump sum payments are 
made through the Deputy Commissioners and Managers of Tea 
Estates. The amounts are sent to the Managers of Tea Estates 
only in cases in which the dependants live in tea Estates. It 
is found expedient to do so because the Managers will be in a 
position to identify the dependants, effect the payment promptly 
and forward the acquittance to the Commissioner of Workmen’s 
Compensation. This system has worked satisfactory so far. 

313 

* Bad Health of Labourers Returned from 
Assam Projects 

1314. Dewan Abdul Basith Choudhury : (a) Is the 

Honourable the Labour Member aware that several hundred 
labourers returned from the project works in Assam in a very 
bad state of health ? 

(b) Is he also aware that a large number of them are still 
suffering from various diseases ? 

(c) Is it a fact that no proper arrangements have been made 
for their treatment ? 

(d) If the replies to parts (a) to (c) be in the affirmative, 
does he propose to consider the desirability of representing the 
difficulties of these unfortunate labourers to the authorities 
concerned ? 

(e) If the replies to parts (a) to (c) be in the negative, does 
he propose to enquire and lay the result of the enquiry on the 
table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Virulent 
forms of malaria and some other diseases are incidental to 
the work in the unhealthy jungle tracts of Assam where 
the war operations have been in progress; therefore some 
labourers returned from the projects in a bad state of health. 
The Ex-Gratia payments of compensation for deaths by 
diseases have therefore been specially ordered to be paid by 
the Government of India as there is no provision for payment 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2010. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


901 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 901 

of compensation in such cases under the Workmen’s Compensation 
Act. Compensation is paid also to labourers who on returning 
from projects die of diseases contacted in the projects. 

(b) The Government have no information. 

(c) The labourers returning to Tea Gardens are treated in the 
Garden Hospitals as in the case of other Tea Estates labourers 
and those returning to villages may avail of the treatment in the 
local hospitals. No other medical arrangements are practicable 
in the case of labourers who return individually to their gardens 
and villages. 

(d) The question does not arise in view of the answers to 

(a), (b) and (c). 

(e) The facts ascertained have been stated above. 

314 

* Grievances of Employees of Government of 
India Press, Calcutta 

1315. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) Whether the employees of the Government of India Press, 
Calcutta, submitted memorials on the 20th December, 
1944, and 24th January, 1945; 

(b) the nature of the grievances mentioned therein; and 

(c) the action taken or proposed to be taken by Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The employees asked for (1) increase in basic wage and 
fixation of a minimum wage of Rs. 10 p.m. (2) grant of enhanced 
dearness allowance, (3) concessional rates of grain supply, 
(4) reduction in working hours, (5) extension of casual leave to 
piece workers, (6) abolition of the piece system, and (7) abolition 
of the system of classifying employees as superior and inferior 
and the grant to inferior employees of the privileges allowed to 
superior employees. 

(c) Items at (2), (3), (5) and (7) referred to in part (b) are 
under consideration. It is not possible to consider the other items 
during the present emergency. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2010. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


902 


902 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

315 

* Hours of Work for Employees of Government of 
India Press, Calcutta 

1316. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state : 

(a) the total number of hours of work per week for 
the employees of the Government of India Press, 
Calcutta; 

(b) whether the Bengal Government have reduced the 
hours of work of the Bengal Government Presses 
to forty hours per week within a bonus ; and 

(c) whether Government propose to reduce the hours in 
their Presses : if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 48. 

(b) The hours have been reduced to 40 per week but no 
bonus has been granted. 

(c) No reduction can be contemplated during the present 
emergency. 


316 

@ Revision of Scale of Pay of Employees of 
Government of India Press, Calcutta 

1317. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum: Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether the dearness allowance granted to the Press 
employees corresponds to the abnormal rise in the 
cost of living ; 

(b) when the last revision of pay of the Press employees 
of Calcutta took place ; 

(c) whether the Government Press employees in Calcutta 
have to pay more for rationed and non-rationed 
articles than the Railway and other employees ; and 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2010. 
@ Ibid. p. 2010. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


903 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 903 

(d) whether Government propose to revise the scale of pay ; 
and, if not, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The existing 
rates of dearness allowance were fixed with due regard to the 
rise in prices and a revision thereof is under consideration. 

(b) In 1924. The revised rates of pay for new entrants were 
introduced in 1933 and 1934. 

(c) Yes. They have to pay more as compared with Railway 
employees but the concessions admissible to them are the same 
as for all other employees of the Central Government. 

(d) Government do not propose to undertake any general 
revision of pay during the present emergency. 

317 

* Leave Benefit to Piece Workers of Government 
of India Press, Calcutta 

1318. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state : 

(a) whether the piece workers in the Calcutta Central 
Government Press are entitled to the same leave benefit 
as the salaried employees; 

(b) whether the salaried employees in Delhi and Calcutta 
are entitled to the same casual leave; and 

(c) if not, whether Government propose to equalise the 
condition in Delhi and Calcutta ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) No. 

(c) Salaried employees in all the Government of India Presses 
have been granted casual leave up to 15 days in a calendar year. 
Government of India have, in view of the climate and other 
conditions raised the limit of casual leave to 20 days per year 
for all Central Government servants in Delhi including the New 
Delhi Press employees. The higher limit of casual leave is not 
extended only to the Calcutta Press employees. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2010. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


904 


904 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


318 

* Desirability of Giving Certain Benefits to 
Inferior Servants of Government of 
India Press, Calcutta 

1319. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state if it is not a fact that the inferior servants of 
the Government of India Press, Calcutta, are not entitled to get any 
benefit enjoyed by the superior servants, such as General Provident 
Fund, permanent service, house allowance, Medical leave, etc. ? 

(b) If so, do Government propose to sanction all the privileges 
to the inferior staff as are enjoyed by the superior staff? 

(c) Is it not a fact that employees of the Government of 
India Press, Calcutta, appointed after 1928, are not allowed the 
compensation leave in lieu of attending on holidays ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that only 25 per cent, allowance is granted 
to the employees for attending on closed holidays and that no 
payment is made for attending on non-closed holidays ? 

(e) If so, under what circumstances have the employees appointed 
after 1928 been deprived of the benefit of compensation leave ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). No. They 
are entitled to medical leave. Permanent inferior servants are 
also entitled to the benefits of permanent service, e.g., pension, 
leave on average pay or earned leave and extraordinary leave. 
The question of granting them house rent and other privileges is 
under consideration. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) In lieu of compensatory leave they are paid overtime for 
working on closed holidays at 25 per cent above their normal rates. 

(e) For administrative reasons. 

319 

@ Schemes for Technical Education of Students 

Abroad 

1320. Dewan Abdul Choudhury : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether there are two different 
schemes before Government for sending students abroad for higher 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2010. 
@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


905 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 905 

technical education ? If so, what are the main features of the 
two schemes ? 

(b) Is the training scheme sponsored by the Labour Department 
different from the scheme of the Education, Health and Lands 
Department ? 

(c) Is the proposed scheme akin to the Bevin Training Scheme ? 

(d) What are the technical subjects which Government 
contemplate to provide for the students abroad ? And what will 
be the duration of training on each subject ? 

(e) What type of jobs, do Government contemplate to offer to 
the successful candidates after they return from abroad ? 

(f) Are Government selecting the students on a fixed quota 
basis from each of the Provinces and maintaining the proportion 
of different communities ? If so, how many students will be sent 
from Bengal and Assam ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). There 
are two distinct schemes. The first is for sending students 
abroad for higher studies in technical and scientific subjects ; 
the second is for sending abroad technicians already employed 
in industry for further training or for enlarging their industrial 
or professional experience. The former scheme is dealt with by 
the Education, Health and Lands Department and the latter by 
Labour Department. 

(c) The proposed scheme is in a way an extension of the 
Bevin Training Scheme. The object is to provide higher technical 
training for the more important supervisory post in industry. 

(d) The types of training contemplated under the Labour 
Department scheme are : Mechanical Engineering, Electrical 
Engineering, Radio Manufacture, Ship-building, Aeronautical 
Engineering, Marine Engineering, Civil Engineering, Structural 
Engineering, Metallurgy, Generation of Electricity, Locomotive 
Construction, Chemical Engineering, Fertilisers, Plastics, Glass, 
Steel Manufacture. 

This list is not exhaustive and other types of training will 
be considered, if required. 

Normally the period of training will be one year, but may be 
extended to two years in individual cases. 

(f) No quotas have been allotted. Provincial Governments have 
been asked to make their own nominations for which they will bear the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


906 


906 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cost. Private employers are also making their own nominations. 
Government of India will make a final selection from these 
nominations. 


320 

* Workers in Mica Mines of Gudur Division 

1327. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of workers — men and women — employed 
for underground and surface work in the mica mines 
of the Gudur Division; 

(b) their average daily wage and dearness allowance; 

(c) if it is a fact that they are engaged mostly through 
contractors who lake a percentage of the wages; and, 
if so, the reasons for permitting this system ; and 

(d) if Government propose to hold an inquiry about the 
conditions in these mines and report to this House? If 
so, when? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The number of 
male and female workers employed in Mica Mines in the Gudur 
area is approximately 7,000 and 4,000 respectively. No women 
are employed underground. 

(b) Average daily wage is Rs. 12 for men and Rs. 7 for women. 
As wages were raised recently, no dearness allowance is paid. 

(c) As far as is known labour is engaged and paid direct by 
the mine-owners, and not through contractors. 

(d) No; the second part does not arise. 

321 

@ Applying Factories Act, etc. to Mica Splitting 
Factories in Gudur Division 

1328. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if it is a fact — (i) that the Factories Act is not applied 
to the Mica Splitting Factories in the Gudur Division; 

legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2014. 
@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


907 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 907 

(ii) that the large majority of workers employed here 
are women and that they receive no advantage of 
the Maternity Benefits Act, (iii) that there are no 
arrangements for the care of infants and children of 
the women workers, and (iv) that the premises are in 
an insanitary condition without sufficient ventilation ; 
and 

(b) whether Government propose to take steps to apply the 
Factories and Maternity Benefits Acts to these factories, 
improve labour conditions and provide adequate facilities 
for the care of infants and children of the women workers 
and report to this House about this matter? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
administration of the Factories Act and of the Madras Maternity 
Benefits Act is the responsibility of the Provincial Government. As 
regards a survey of the working conditions of labour in the Mica 
Splitting Factories in Gudur Division, the Labour Investigation 
Committee is engaged on the work. Government will consider 
in due course proposals which will be made by the Planning 
Committee for labour which Government hope to set up after 
the Labour Investigation Committee’s work is over. 

322 

* Rule re Appointment of Qualified Copyholders 

and Revisers as Junior Readers in Government of 

India Presses 

1330. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether Government have 
recently received any memorials from the employees of any 
Government of India Presses regarding their hardships created 
by the anomalies which exist in the present rule governing the 
appointment of qualified Copyholders and Revisers in the Junior 
Readers’ post ? 

(b) is it a fact that in May, 1940 the Government of India Press 
Workers’ Union, New Delhi, sent a representation to the Secretary, 
Labour Department, fully approved by Mr. Asaf Ali, M.L.A. (Central), 
who was the President of the Union, for amending the rule so that 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2020. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


908 


908 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

earlier passed candidates might get preference over subsequent 
qualified men ? 

(c) Do government propose to consider the advisability of 
amending the existing rule in the light of these memorials ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Memorials 
have been received from three copyholders of the Government of 
India Press, New Delhi, but there is no allegation of hardship or 
anomaly in the present rules governing appointment to readers’ 
posts. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) The memorials will be considered on their merits. 

323 

* Irregular Appointments in Certain Branches of 

C.P.W.D. 

1351. Syed Ghulam Bhik Nairang : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether under the rules about 
communal representation in the services, an appointment made 
against those rules should be cancelled ? 

(b) Is it a fact that it was found that an irregular appointment 
of a Sikh was made in the Horticulture Department of the Central 
Public Works Department ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the appointment was not cancelled, but 
the Muslim, who should have been appointed to that vacancy, 
was assigned his correct position in the seniority list ? 

(d) Is it a fact that some irregular appointments were also 
made in the cadre of Electrical Engineers ? 

(e) Is it a fact that it was decided not to cancel those 
appointments but to assign the Muslims their correct position 
in the seniority list ? 

(f) Is it a fact that subsequently the orders about seniority 
were also cancelled and seniority was fixed according to the 
dates of the irregular appointments of non-Muslims ? If so, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2025. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


909 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 909 

(c) Two vacancies in the grade of Horticulture Subordinate 
arose simultaneously, of which the first was reserved for a 
Muslim and the other was unreserved. A Muslim was selected 
against the Muslim vacancy and a Sikh against the unreserved 
vacancy. The Sikh joined his appointment earlier than the 
Muslim, as the latter was employed elsewhere and could not 
be released in time by the office where he was employed. 
As the first of the two appointments was earmarked for the 
Muslim he was placed higher than the Sikh in the seniority 
list. 

(d) , (c) and (f). Certain officiating appointments in the 
grade of Electrical Engineer were made without observing 
the strict order of communal rotation laid down in the orders 
regarding representation of minority communities in the 
public service. These appointments had to be made at very 
short notice in connection with urgent war works in Eastern 
India and it was administratively impracticable to follow the 
prescribed communal rotation in making these appointments. 
The appointments were not, therefore, cancelled, and the 
seniority of the officers concerned was fixed in accordance 
with their respective dates of appointment. No orders fixing 
the seniority of any Muslim officer in the grade of Electrical 
Engineer were passed and cancelled later. 

324 

* Affording Certain Maternity Benefits to 
Women Mine Workers 

1358. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state: 

(a) in pursuance of his anwer to starred question No. 
437, asked on the 21st February, 1945, whether 
Government have examined the matter of extending 
the time when women before and after delivery 
should not be allowed to go within the mines; 

(b) whether Government have considered the matter of 
every mine being provided with creches for children 
of mothers working in mines; and 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2028. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


910 


910 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) whether, in view of the fact that statements have been 
made in the House by Members with personal experience 
that these creches are not functioning regularly, Government 
have taken or are taking steps to see that these are properly 
functioning ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The 

necessary Legislation is already before the House. 

(b) and (c). The whole question of the compulsory provision 
of creches in mines is under consideration. 

325 

* Scheme for Training in Technical Industries 

Abroad 

1359. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state: 

(a) apart from the training given in universities to 
students, as mentioned in the press communique 
of the Education, Health and Lands Department, 
whether Government have any scheme to depute 
and train men in technical industries, so that they 
can be used in the starting of industries in the 
post-war period ; 

(b) whether the Government of India have negotiated 
with the Government or industrialists of the U. K. 
or the U.S.A. to get such men trained; and 

(c) if so, in what industries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 
Attention of the Honourable Member is invited to Labour 
Department letter No. TRC-II-1140, dated the 12th December, 
1944, a copy of which was placed on the table of the House 
on the 14th February, 1945 in reply to his question No. 198. 

(b) With the Governments. 

(c) Negotiations on general lines and not confined to 
specific industries have taken place. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1945, 26th March 1945, p. 2029. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


911 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 911 

326 


* Tonnage on Which Soft Coke Cess 
has been Realised 

104. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state the tonnage on which the Soft 
Coke Cess Committee realised its cess on despatch on Soft 
Coke during 1941 to 1944? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
is as follows: 


1941 

957,553 tons 

1943 

354,835 tons 

1942 

431,858 tons 

1944 

445,721 tons 


327 


@ Miscellaneous Departments 

The Honourable Sir Jeremy Raisman : Sir, I move : 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 10,00,000 
be granted to the Governor General in Council to defray the 
charges which will come in course of payment during the 
year ending on the 31st day of March, 1945 in respect of ‘ 
Miscellaneous Departments’.” 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): Motion 
moved: 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 10,000 be 
granted to the Governor General in Council to defray the charges 
which will come in course of payment during the year ending 
on the 31st day of March, 1945 in respect of ‘Miscellaneous 
Departments’.” 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : The explanation 
given on page 27 is : 

“Due to the setting up of additional Provincial and Regional 
Labour Supply Committees, Labour Supply Depots and Labour 
Supply Bureaux.” 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 28th March 1945, p. 2219. 
@ Ibid., p. 2219. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


912 


912 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I find on page 12 under the Demand for Labour: 

“Creation of the Directorate of Unskilled Labour Supply for 
coordination of the work of the provincial and regional labour 
supply committees and the labour supply depots.” 

I think, Sir, there is a repetition. I should like to know what 
is the difference between the two. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
That demand was quite different. It was for the pay of officers, 
it refers to the salaries of officers, while this is quite a different 
thing. This is on account of opening of certain labour supply 
committees, labour supply bureaux and labour supply depots. 
This is the cost incurred in regard to workmen and that refers 
only to salaries of officers of the Secretariat. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : I will read it again: 

Due to setting up of additional Provincial and Regional Labour 
Supply Committees ” 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This is for co- 
ordination, that is done in the Secretariat. The item on page 12 
refers to salary of officers working in the Secretariat, while this 
demand refers to work done outside the Secretariat. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
question is: 

“That a supplementary sum not exceeding Rs. 10,00,000 be 
granted to the Governor General in Council on the 31st day of 
March, 1945 in respect of ‘Miscellaneous Departments’.” 

The motion was adopted. 


328 


* Controlled Rates of Price of Rice in 
Dhanbad Sub-Division 

1464. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state the present local controlled rates of 
price per maund of the different kinds of rice in Dhanbad Sub- 
Division in the Province of Bihar ? 

(b) At what rates is the Provincial Government charging the two 
Coal Trade Organisations for supplying rice for the benefit of colliery 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2235. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


913 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 913 

labour ? Is any incidental charge realised by that Government from 
the said Organisations in addition to the controlled price of rice in 
Dhanbad Sub-Division ? If so, at what rate and for what reasons ? 

(c) Has any complaint been received recently from the Indian 
Collieries Union stating that the Joint Pools are still charging 
from its members approximately Rs. 4 per maund of rice, over 
and above the local controlled prices ? 

(d) Has any comprehensive report been obtained by Government 
in this or any connected matter, from the Welfare Commissioner 
who is stationed at Dhanbad ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The wholesale 
control rates for rice in Dhanbad Sub-Division are Rs. 11 and 
Rs. 12 per maund for coarse and medium qualities respectively. 
The corresponding retail rates for the 2 qualities of rice are -/4/714* 
and -/ 5/-* per seer. 

(b) The Provincial Government is charging the two coal trade 
organisations the basic wholesale control rate at the source of supply 
of Rs. 9 per maund for coarse and Rs. 10 per maund for medium 
quality plus -I4J-* per maund to cover administrative charges. The 
organisations have to pay in addition the cost of the bags and the 
actual incidental charges incurred in effecting despatches of rice 
from the source of supply to the consuming centres. 

(c) Yes, Sir. 

(d) No. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With regard to (b), is the Honourable Member 
in a position to tell the House whether the resulting price which is 
charged to the collieries is higher than the local controlled price, 
having regard to all the different levies which are paid ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am afraid I have 
not made any calculations. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : That is really the point of the complaint. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable friend 
can make the calculations. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : With regard to (d). I take it that this officer 
is an officer of the Government of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : In view of the frequent complaints received in 


Rates are shown in annas and pies. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


914 


914 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regard to this question, will the Honourable Member consider 
the desirability of obtaining a report from this officer as regards 
these matters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This work will not 
fall within the purview of his duties. This is a matter for the 
Provincial Governments. 

Mr. K. C. Neogy : The Honourable Member is aware that 
the complaint amounts to this, that the Provincial Government is 
not fully cooperating with the Central Government in the matter 
of making rice supplies to the collieries reasonably cheap ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will get into 
touch with the Provincial Government, but I do not think I can 
ask the Coal Welfare Commissioner to deal with this matter. 

329 

* Area under Irrigation in Baluchistan 

1469. Mr. Abdul Qaiyum : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state : 

(a) the total area brought under irrigation in Baluchistan 
since the war began; 

(b) how much of such area was brought under irrigation 
by Government and how much by private enterprise; 

(c) the total amount spent by the Government on such 
projects; and 

(d) whether any sums were advanced to Zamindars for 
bringing land under irrigation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (b) and (c). 
No substantial areas have been brought under irrigation in 
Baluchistan since the war began; but two flood control schemes, 
sanctioned by Government, costing about, Rs. 68,000, will add 
about 1,000 acres. As a result of more intensive cultivation of 
lands under irrigation and expansion of dry farming coupled 
with the Administration’s procurement measures, Baluchistan 
has become a surplus province with wheat, paddy and Jowari 
for export to other provinces. 

(d) The information is being collected. 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. II of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2239. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


915 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 915 

330 

* Liquor Shops in Vicinity of Railway Coal Mines 

1470. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if it is a fact that there are liquor shops in the vicinity 
of Railway coal mines; and, if so, the days and hours 
when they are open; 

(b) whether the management of these mines are aware that 
these liquor shops tempt miners to waste their wages 
on drink and ruin their health and that, consequently, 
the attendance of the miners and the output of coal in 
the mines on the day following the pay-day is adversely 
affected; 

(c) if the reply to (b) above is in the negative, whether 
Government propose to call for a report on the matter; 
and 

(d) whether Government also propose to ask the authorities 
concerned either to abolish liquor shops in mining areas, 
or to restrict the hours of opening and the quantity of 
liquor sold per individual and to close them fully on pay- 
days ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. There are 
liquor shops in the vicinity of coal mines owned by railways as 
well as by others. I regret I have at present no information about 
the days and hours of opening but I shall obtain it and place it 
on the table of the House. 

(b) No. 

(c) Government will call for a general report on the relations 
between drink and the health and production of miners. 

(d) Excise administration is a Provincial subject. On receiving a 
report, however, Government will consider if any recommendations 
appear necessary in regard to liquor shops. 

I should add that about December 1944, the retail prices for 
distillery liquor in the Bihar coalfields was increased and the Provincial 
Government is watching the effect of this increase of prices before 
considering any other action to restrict the consumption of liquor. A 
report received last year from Bengal suggets that there has been 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2239. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


916 


916 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no evidence of excessive consumption of drink in the Bengal 
coalfields area. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Sir, in view of the 
fact that the coal situation is very grave in this country and that 
it is necessary to have the utmost output from coal mines, will 
Government consider the importance of taking immediate steps 
to close down the liquor shops in their vicinity, even though it 
is a provincial matter ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am afraid we 
have no control as the Honourable Member suggests. 

Mr. G. Rangiah Naidu : May I know if the liquor shops were 
located in the vicinity with the consent of the Local Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I say, that is a 
matter for Provincial Government. 

331 

* Primary Schools for Railway 
Coal Miners’ Children 

1471. Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether there are any primary schools for children of 
the miners working in the Railway-owned coal mines; 
and, if so, the number of schools and pupils — boys and 
girls — attending each of them; 

(b) whether the number of schools and pupils has increased 
or decreased since June, 1939, and what the difference 
now is; 

(c) whether these schools are co-educational, and if there 
are women teachers on their staff; 

(d) if a midday meal is provided to the pupils at these 
schools; and, if not, why not; 

(e) whether these schools are under entire or partial 
management of the Coal Mine Authorities or under 
some other local authorities; and 

(f) what steps Government are taking to promote elementary 
education among miners ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2239. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


917 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 917 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. I regret 
I have no detailed information about the number of schools 
but I shall obtain it. As regards the number of children of 
miners attending the schools, it will not be easy to obtain 
the information as the schools are open to other children 
as well. 

(b) , (c) and (d). I have no information but I shall obtain 
it and place it on the table of the House. 

(c) The schools are under the management of the 
Hazaribagh Mines Board to which the Railway Collieries 
make financial contribution. 

(f) The responsibility for educational facilities is primarily 
that of the Provincial Governments. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : Sir, the 
Honourable Member told us the other day that there is a 
welfare committee, may I ask if the Honourable Member 
will draw their attention to the suggestions that I have 
made in this question and also get a record of the children 
of the miners who attend the schools ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is 
nothing to prohibit the Welfare Committee from interesting 
themselves in this and taking action in the matter. 

Shrimati K. Radha Bai Subbarayan : I want to 
know, Sir, if the Government will give instructions to this 
Committee to give their attention to these matters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, it might 
do. There is nothing to prevent the Committee from doing it. 

332 

*Application of Essential Services Ordinance to 
Government Employees 

1485. Mr. N. M. Joshi : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether Essential Services Ordinance applies to all 
Government employees; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. II of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2245. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


918 


918 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) whether protests have reached the Government 
regarding non-application of the provisions of sections 
(5) and (6) of the Essential Services (Maintenance) 
Ordinance II of 1941, in regard to obligation of the 
Crown not to discontinue the services of the Crown 
servants without a reasonable cause, and the issue of 
rules regulating or empowering a specified authority 
to regulate their wages and other conditions of 
service ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask why Government have not 
taken steps that are necessary to be taken under the Essential 
Services Act ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend’s question was whether protests were received. 


* 


* 


* 


*Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Item 3 in the 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
I am sorry I was not here to listen to the points raised by 
my Honourable friend, Mr. Avinashilingam Chettiar. But I 
should like to tell him that these quarters are permanent. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : All of them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, and the 
necessity that forced us to undertake this construction 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : I know that. I 
know my Honourable friend can give a lecture on that. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think it is a 
great advantage that in the midst of so much money which 
is being spent on building temporary structures, we have 
succeeded in securing at least these quarters as permanent 
houses which will enable us to house a large number of 
clerks’ population which will be working in the Secretariat. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1945, 29th March 1945, p. 2261. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


919 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 919 

333 

* Erection of Wall Round a Mosque in 
Karol Bagh, Delhi 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state : 

(a) whether he is aware that under the Delhi Muslim Wakfs 
Act (XIII of 1943), there has been established a Sunni 
Majlis-e-Awkaf; if so, whether the said Sunni Majlis-e- 
Awkaf is the sole Administrator of all the Wakfs in the 
Province of Delhi; 

(b) whether he is aware of the existence of an old mosque 
and a grave yard attached to it in the Karol Bagh area 
in New Delhi near the recently constructed Government 
quarters and that the Muslims do offer their prayers 
therein; 

(c) whether it is a fact that the Central Public Works 
Department intends to enclose the said mosque by erecting 
a wall around it and thereby slopping ingress of Muslims 
in it for offering their prayers; 

(d) whether his Department has sought the permission of 
the Sunni Majlis-e-Awkaf to erect a wail around it; 

(e) whether it is a fact that on the objections of the 
Mussalmans offering their prayers in the said mosque 
the contractor and men of the said Central Public Works 
Department is of the Central Public Works Department 
now ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) I am not aware of the existence of any old mosque although 
evidence of an old and unused grave-yard is visible near the recently 
constructed Government quarters in Karol Bagh. But I am aware 
of the fact that some Muslim residents of this area have recently 
built a pucca platform with a thatched roof and an enclosure on 
this area and say their prayers in this structure. 

(c) In consultation with the Local Administration, Government have 
proposed to wall off this area in order to prevent encroachment on this 
Government land by either the Muslims or the Hindus. In deference 
to the representations received from representatives of the Muslim 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 2nd April 1945. p. 2304. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


920 


920 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

community this proposal has been now held in abeyance pending 
clarification of the legal issues involved. 

(d) In view of my reply to question (b) this question does not 
arise. 

(e) The Honourable Member is referred to my reply to question 
(c). 

(f) The Honourable Member is referred to my reply to question 
(c). 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : When the Honourable Member 
says that the Government has decided to built a wall to stop 
people going on this Government land, may I ask how does it 
become Government land ? When it is a grave yard, how does the 
Honourable Member say that it is Government land ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As at present advised 
the Government regard this to be Government land; but I am 
obtaining legal opinion on it. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Does the Honourable Member 
call all the English cemeteries and the Hindu Cremation ground 
as belonging to the Government ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, I am 
asking for legal opinion. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : But the Honourable Member 
has himself said that there is a grave-yard and at the same time 
he calls it as Government land ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is the position 
as Government is advised at present. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : By whom ? 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member has already said that he was taking legal 
opinion. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : By whom is he advised ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : By those who are 
entitled to advise Government. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : May I know whether 
Government has made an acquisition of that portion of the land to 
which the Honourable Member refers as a grave-yard and mosque. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is unnecessary 
to acquire. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


921 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 921 

334 

* Public Utility Concerns held by 
Non-Indian Interests 

1591. Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of public utility concerns held by British 
and other non-Indian interests in India; and 

(b) whether any attempts were made to acquire these public 
utility concerns ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
information asked for is being collected and will be laid on the 
table of the House. 


335 

@ Audit of Accounts of Government of 
India Presses 

1596. Sri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the accounts of the Government of India Presses 
are annually audited by the Accountant General, Central 
Revenue, New Delhi; 

(b) whether copies of the audit reports are sent to his 
Department for perusal and action; and whether such 
copies were received in the last two years; if so, the 
action taken thereon. 

(c) whether it is a fact that serious discrepancies in the 
accounts of paper were found in the last two reports and 
no action was taken on them; if so, what the reasons 
are; and 

(d) whether Government propose to place a copy of each 
of the audit reports for the last two years of the New 
Delhi Press on the table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The accounts 
of the Presses are audited by the Accountant General, Central 
Revenue and other Accountants General who act on his behalf. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 4th April 1945, p. 2428. 
@ Ibid., p. 2431. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


922 


922 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Reports are submitted by audit to Heads of Departments. 
Reference is made to Government of India only on points of 
importance or matters on which settlement cannot be reached. 

(c) The 1942-43 report revealed certain discrepancies which 
were mostly due to wrong entries in registers. The matter is 
still under examination. The 1943-44 report has recently been 
received and is under examination by the Controller of Printing 
and Stationery, India. 

(d) No. Important points are included in the Appropriation 
Accounts of the Year by the Accountant General, Central 
Revenues. These accounts are examined by the Public Accounts 
Committee and their report is laid before the Legislative Assembly. 

Sri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : May I know with reference to 
part (d) of the question whether the Honourable Member will 
please lay the audit reports on the table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No, Sir, It is not 
necessary. These are included in the Public Accounts Committee 
reports. 

Sri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : May I know whether these 
audit reports are incorporated in full in the Public Accounts 
Committee reports ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Such parts of it as 
are necessary for the purposes of the Public Accounts Committee 
are incorporated. 


336 

* Central Government Servants not provided 
with Quarters 

1606. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state the percentage of Central 
Government servants servicing in Delhi and New Delhi and 
having a monthly salary of below Rs. 600 who have not so far 
been provided with any Government accommodation ? 

(b) Is it a fact that a Government servant whose monthly 
salary is below Rs. 600 is not deprived of his quarter when he 
becomes out of class until accommodation of a higher type can 
be provided to him ? 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 4th April 1945, p. 2439. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


923 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 923 

(c) Will Government please state the number of Government 
servants in Delhi and New Delhi who were in possession of 
Government quarters but have been deprived of them on 
technical ground of transfer from one Government office to 
another in New Delhi e.g. from Agricultural Institute, Pusa, 
Government of India Press, New Delhi, A.G.P. & T. etc., to 
the Government of India Main Secretariat Departments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) About 65 
per cent. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) The required information is not readily available 
and its collection at this stage would not justify the labour 
involved, but I would inform the Honourable Member that 
except in the case of the staff transferred from Government 
of India Press, Agricultural Research Institute and A.G.P. & 
T’s Office, who have got their separate pool of quarters, no 
officer is required to vacate his quarter on transfer from one 
Government office to another in New Delhi. 


337 


* Plight of Central Government Servants 
deprived of Quarters on Transfer to 
another Office in New Delhi 

1607. Sardar Sant Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state if it is a fact that in a 
considerable number of cases where Government servants 
have been deprived of their quarters, the persons concerned 
have a total length of permanent service under the Central 
Government in Delhi and New Delhi for a period of fifteen 
years or more ? 

(b) Are Government aware that under the existing 
conditions, some of these Government servants who had to 
wait in the beginning for a number of years before they got 
Government accommodation, will have no chance during their 
service-life to get Government accommodation again ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 4th April 1945, p. 2439. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


924 


924 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) Is it a fact that distinction between orthodox and 
unorthodox quarters has been abolished with a view to enlarge 
the scope of a Government servant to get accommodation in 
Delhi and New Delhi ? 

(d) Do Government propose to consider the cases of Government 
servants referred to in (a) and (b) above and grant them relief 
in the matter of accommodation by taking into account their 
length of service under the Central Government in Delhi and 
New Delhi. If not, why not? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Honourable 
Member’s attention is invited to reply to part (c) of starred 
question No. 1606. 

(b) Officers mentioned in my reply to the last question may 
have to wait for their turn in the general pool, but for how long 
they may have to wait, I cannot say. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) The length of service in the general pool is always the 
deciding factor. Government do not consider it equitable to 
alter this rule in favour of any particular groups of Government 
servants. 


338 

* Applications for Khas Khas Tatties from 
Occupants of Government Quarters in 
Delhi and New Delhi 

131. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether he is aware that formal applications 
in regard to the supply of khas khas tatties in the residences 
occupied by Government servants in Delhi and New Delhi during 
the ensuing Summer Season, 1945, were invited by the 20th 
March, 1945, vide Additional Chief Engineer (Western Zone) 
Central Public Works Department, circular memorandum No. 
WII/3708, dated the 20th February, 1945 and No. WII/3708, 
dated the 13th March, 1945 ? 

(b) Is he also aware that the Summer allotment (1945) is 
not yet out ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 4th April 1945, p. 2449. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


925 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 925 

(c) If the reply to (b) above be in the affirmative, does he 
propose to extend the date for applying for khas khas tatties 
in the case of those Government servants who will be allotted 
quarters in April, 1945, but have none at present ? If not, why 
not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) As seasonal allotments have been dispensed with under 
the latest Rules, this question does not arise. 

(c) Government servants who have no official quarters now 
and will be alloted official quarters in April, will be permitted 
to apply for khas khas tatties upto the end of April, although 
the supply of such tatties will be necessary somewhat delayed. 


339 


* Technical Centres opened by Labour 
Department 

1697. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please mention the number of Technical 
Centres opened by the Labour Department (i) in association 
with Muslim Institutions, (ii) in association with non-Muslim 
Institutions, and (iii) in association with independent Institutions 
not connected with any Engineering Institutions ? 

(b) How many of the Institutions under (iii) are under 
Muslim Administration, and how many under non-Muslim 
administration ? 

(c) Does the Honourable Member propose to lay on the table 
of the House the names of all these Centres for Technicians 
mentioned in classes (i), (ii) and (iii) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) (i) 5, (ii) 74, 
(iii) If by “independent institutions” are meant “private 
institutions”, there are 36. 

(b) Of the 36, 2 are under purely Muslim administration. 

(c) A statement is laid on the table. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2611. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


926 


926 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

STATEMENT 

I. Technical Training Centres associated with Muslim 
Institutions 

A. Engineering : — 

1. Abdullah Fazalbhoy Technical Institute, St. Xavier College, 
Bombay. 

2. Anglo-Arabic College Technical Institute, Delhi. 

3. Muslim University Engineering College, Aligarh. 

B. Non-Engineering : — 

4. Anjuman Industrial School, Madras. 

5. Shia Intermediate College, Lucknow. 

II. Technical Training Centres Association with Non-Muslim 
Institutions 

(Excluding Centres Associated with Institutions run by Provincial 
Governments and States and with Railway Workshops). 

A. Engineering : — 

1. B.P. Chdy. Technical School, Krishnagar. 

2. College of Engineering and Technology, Bengal. 

3. D. J. Industrial School, Rajshahi. 

4. Don Bosco Technical School, Krishnagar. 

5. I. G. N. Co., Ltd., Sonachara Workshop, Narayanganj. 

6. K. K. Technical School, Mymensingh. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : What is the nature of 
these technical centres ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They are centres 
where technical training is given. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : For what industries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : For many of the 
trades. 

Sir Muhammad Yamin Khan : Is Aligarh one of them ? 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, certainly. 

340 

* Opening of War Technicians Depot or 
Reception Centre 

1698. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member contemplating to open War Technicians Depot or 
Reception Centre ? If so, at what places ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2614. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


927 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 927 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government 
of India propose to have a Reception Depot in each circle where 
civilian recruits after being selected for training may be sent 
for short periods before being allotted to a training centre. A 
statement indicating the reception depots already sanctioned, 
their capacity and location is placed on the table. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Are there many centres ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member may see the statement and find for himself. I am placing 
a statement on the table. 

Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Ghani : What is the total 
number of reception centres ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot make a 
calculation here. 

Mr. President (The Honourable Sir Abdur Rahim): The 
Honourable Member had better look at the table. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : It is not a big list. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is a big list. I 
cannot read the whole thing unless you Sir, permit me to do 
so. India is divided into circles Northern Circle, Central Circle, 
N.E. Circle, S. E. Circle, Eastern Circle, Western Circle and 
Southern Circle. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : What are their headquarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The headquarters 
or centres for training are : Northern Circle, Lyllpur and Sonepat; 
Central Circle — Delhi, Akola or Nagpur; N. E. Circle — Aligarh; 
S. E. Circle — Gulzarbagh (Patna) and Cuttack; Eastern Circle — 
Hooghly; Western Circle — Worli (Bombay) and Hubli; Southern 
Circle — Madras, Bewada, Trivandrum and Coimbatore. 

341 

* Developing of U. P. Technical Training Centres 
into Politechnique 

1699. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the technical training Centres 
in U. P. which Government are contemplating to develop into 
polytechnique ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2614. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


928 


928 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Is it not a fact that Government have selected two places 
for developing Technical training centres into Polytechnique, 
i.e. Dyal Bagh and Benares University ? Is the Honourable 
Member aware of the fact that the Aligarh Muslim University 
Engineering College has been omitted from the list of the 
Centres ? 

(b) Is it not a fact that Aligarh Centre was included in the 
list on the special request of the Muslim League Party ? Is it 
not a fact that one of the Inspectors and Advisers who deal 
with the War Technicians’ class is a Muslim ? If the answer 
is in the negative, what is the number of Muslim Inspectors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) There is 
no scheme under consideration of the Labour Department 
at present for developing any training centre, either in the 
United Provinces or anywhere else, into a polytechnic. The 
question of selecting any centre for this purpose does not 
therefore arise. 

(b) In view of the reply given to (a) above the fist part of 
the question under (b) does not arise. As regards the rest of 
part (b) none of the Regional Inspectors under the Technical 
Training scheme is a Muslim and there are no officers 
designated as “Advisers”. 


342 

* Starting of Canteens and Cafeteria in 
Industrial Establishments 

1700. Sri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether Government is encouraging starting of 
canteens and cafeteria in all industrial establishments 
by the employers where food is made available at 
cheap rates; 

(b) how many such (i) canteens, and (ii) cafetaria are 
started in the country in 1944-45; 

(c) whether Government have offered any such benefits 
to the workers in the Ordinance Factories in the 
country; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2615. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


929 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 929 

(d) whether the Honourable Member is aware that the workers 
in the Aravankada Factory have demanded such benefits 
from Government; and 

(e) whether Government propose to offer such benefits to their 
workers at Aravankadu ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) No statistics of canteens as distinct from cafeteria are 
maintained. Information available shows that towards the close of 
1944, there were 315 establishments for supplying cooked food and 
the rest provided refreshments. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) No. 

(e) Provision already exists at the Factory for the sale of tea 
and other light refreshments. The question of providing meals at 
the Factory will be considered if the demand therefor becomes 
appreciable. 

Shri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : How many workers should apply 
for these benefits ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Certainly, if they 
express a desire it will be considered ? 

Sri K. B. Jinaraja Hegde : What is the number of workers 
that should apply ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : So far we have not 
prescribed any minimum for a demand of this kind. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it one of the task of their welfare officers 
to encourage employers to provide these facilities for their employees ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We are thinking of that. 

343 

* Increasing of Dearness Allowance and 
Scales of Pay of Government of 
India Press Employees 

1706. Qazi Muhammad Ahmad Kazmi : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether Government are aware : 

(i) that the Unions of the Government of India Presses 
have formed a Federation of their own ; 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2619. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


930 


930 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ii) that a statement has been issued by the Executive 
Committee of the Government Press Unions Federation, 
India, narrating the woeful tale of the hardship of the 
Press employees with some recommendations for an 
increase in Dearness Allowance and the scales of pay; 
and 

(b) If the answers to (a) are in the affirmative, has any action 
been taken in the matter since the issue of the statement ? If 
not, when does he intend to take action, and in what way ? If 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) (i) and (ii) Yes. 

(b) The matter is under the consideration of Government. 

344 

*Safeguarding of Indian Interests in 
Mica Mines 

1709. Prof. N. G. Ranga : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state if his attention has been drawn to an article 
in the Free Press Journal of the 16th March, 1945, under the 
title, ‘India Chief Producer of Mica’ in which it is pointed out 
that British and American interests are trying to get control of 
mica mines in India ? 

(b) If this is true, what precautions are Government taking 
to safeguard the interests of those engaged in mica industry at 
present, and of Indian Joint Stock Companies, who have acquired 
mica interests ? 

(c) How many Indian Joint Stock Companies are interested 
in Mica mines in India ? 

(d) Have any applications been received by the Controller of 
Capital Issues to register new companies in respect of mica, and 
has permission been given ? If so, to which ones ? 

(e) Do Government propose to give an assurance that mica 
interests in the hands of Indians will not be threatened by more 
powerful British or American interests and that they will not 
be deprived of the existing rights? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The article in 
question is not traceable in the Free Press Journal of the 16th 
March, 1945. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2619. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


931 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 931 

(b) The question does not arise. 

(c) According to the annual returns received for the period 
ending 31st March 1943, the number is twenty. Later information 
is not available. 

(d) Applications have been received by the Examiner of Capital 
Issues, and permission has been given in some cases. It is not 
the practice of the Department concerned to disclose the names 
of the firms with which they have been dealing. 

(e) Government are alive to the necessity for putting the 
Indian Mica industry on a sound footing and they intend to 
take all possible steps to safeguard the interests of the Indian 
mica producer. 

Mr. Manu Subedar: May I know why Government have 
not attempted to bring the small mica producers together into 
a combine under their supervision and guidance and why they 
are making the way open for foreign interests ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We do not propose 
to take any step until we receive the report of the Committee 
we have appointed. 

Mr. Manu Subedar: Will Government permit the small 
Indian interests to be bought out by these foreign interests ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not wish to 
prejudge the issue. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Meanwhile what is to happen to this 
industry ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is no need 
to fear very much on that account. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Will Government give an assurance 
to the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As soon as the 
report is received we shall take all the necessary measures. 

345 

* Bad Condition of Timarpur Quarters, Delhi 

1722. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether Government quarters in 
Timarpur were built temporarily ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2630. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


932 


932 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Is he aware that these quarters are now in worst condition, 
that no repairs can stand for long, and that there is always a danger 
of some of the quarters coming down at any time ? 

(c) Is he aware that the New Delhi Government quarters are cent 
per cent better than those in Timarpur ? 

(d) Is he further aware that even in C Type of quarters there is 
only one water tap, whereas in the New Delhi quarters there are 
three to four taps ? 

(e) Is he aware that neither any Executive Engineer nor any 
higher official has ever gone to these quarters to see whether each 
one has been properly repaired or not, and that no one looks after the 
convenience of the tenants there ? 

(f) Why do Government charge the same rate of rent from those 
living in much inferior type of quarters where there are less facilities 
as compared to the New Delhi quarters ? Do Government propose to 
have the case examind and reduce the rent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No, but I am aware that these quarters require frequent repairs. 

(c) The New Delhi quarters are much superior to the Timarpur 
quarters. 

(d) Yes. 

(e) No. On the other hand my information is that the quarters are 
regularly inspected by responsible officials of the Department. There 
is an Enquiry Office at site for the tenants to register their complaints. 

(f) It is not possible to lay down different rates for recovery of 
rent from Government servants for similar type of quarters though 
the facilities may be somewhat less. The standard rents of Timarpur 
quarters are lower compared with the standard rents of similar quarters 
in New Delhi and consequently a larger number of occupants of these 
quarters pay less than 10 per cent of their salaries. The question of 
reducing rents does not arise. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Have any steps been taken to improve the 
amenities for the older quarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They have already got 
amenities. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : The Honourable Member stated in his 
question that water laps and other conveniences do not exist. Will 
the amenities be improved. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will look into the matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


933 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 933 

346 

* Difficulty re Accommodation of Simla Staff 
permanently Located at New Delhi 

1723. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state the number of staff who have come 
down from Simla to be located permanently at New Delhi ? 

(b) Is he aware that much inconvenience is being felt by the 
staff and others for locating such staff far away from the main 
Branches of the Departments or Offices ? 

(c) Docs he propose to see that each departmental unit is 
located in one building ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The information 
is not readily available and its collection does not justify the 
time and labour involved. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Under the present circumstances it is not always possible 
to accommodate the entire staff of a particular office in one 
building. Attempts are however made to adhere to this principle 
as far as possible. 


347 

@ Government Contribution to Indian 
Labour Federation 

1800. Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : (a) Will the Honourable the 
labour Member please state whether Government has seen a 
book entitled “The Story of a Sordid Episode” of Rs. 13,000 grant 
given by his Department to Mr. M. N. Roy as Secretary, Indian 
Federation of Labour, published by one Ganpat Raj ? 

(b) Will Government please lay a statement of accounts 
showing how the amount was spent ? 

(c) Will Government please state whether this grant of 
Rs. 13,000 per month has been included in the current years 
budget, and, if so, under what head the figure is shown in 
Demands for grant ? 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April, 1945, p. 2631. 
@ Ibid., 12th April 1945. p. 2797. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


934 


934 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I have, not 
seen the book. 

(b) The attention of the Honourable member is drawn to my 
answer to his supplementary question to starred question No. 
31 by Mr. Lalchand Navalrai on the 2nd November 1944. 

(c) Yes; it is included in Demands for Grants for 1945-46 
under the head “Miscellaneous Expenditure connected with 
the War-C.5 — Expenditure on War Publicity-C. 5 (4) — Labour 
propaganda”. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : The Honourable Member had said 
the other day that a statement of the accounts will be placed on 
the table of the House. When is he going to do that? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That does not 
arise out of this. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai: If the Honourable Member has not 
read that book, may I tell him that there are two books, one 
against the other. One is by Mr. Jamnadas Mehta and the other 
by Mr. Roy. Will the Honourable Member send for these books 
and read them and he will then find that there is a contradiction 
between them ? Will the Honourable Member then go into this 
question and find out how this money has been spent-whether 
it has been divided half and half between them or what ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not propose 
to spend my money on purchasing them. If they are sent to me, 
I will read them. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : I am sorry I could not 
catch the answer to part (c) of the question. Will the Honourable 
Member kindly repeat it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said that the 
grant is in the Demands for Grants. 

Mr. T. S. Avinashilingam Chettiar : Has the grant been 
enhanced or is it the same amount ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is the same 

amount. 

Mr. Lalchand Navalrai : If I send these books which I have 
got with me, will the Honourable Member read them ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


935 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 935 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If I find time, 
I will. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : How did the Honourable Member 
say in reply to my supplementary question that the question 
does not arise of placing a statement of accounts on the table 
of the House when it is definitely stated in the question that 
a statement of accounts should be so laid showing how the 
amount was spent ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not been 
able to follow the question. 

Mr. Badri Dutt Pande : You said just now that the 
question of laying a statement of the accounts on the table 
does not arise, but that is a definite part of the question as 
stated in part (b). 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am sorry. Such 
information as I have I will lay on the table of the House. 

348 

* Authority for Appointment of Mica 
Enquiry Committees 

1801. Mr. Ram Narayan Singh : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether, according to the 
7th Schedule of the Provincial Legislative List, item 27 to the 
Government of India Act, 1935, Mica Industry is a provincial 
subject ? If so, is the formation of the present Mica Enquiry 
Committee by the Government of India within their powers 
under the Act ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing 
further to add to the reply I gave to Mr. Satya Narayan 
Sinha’s short notice question on the same subject on the 20th 
of November, 1944. 

Mr. Ram Narayan Singh : May I ask whether this is an 
encroachment by the Government of India on the rights of the 
Provincial Governments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, I have 
nothing to add to the answer I gave. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April, 1945, p. 2631. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


936 


936 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


349 

* British-American Mica Mission 

1802. Mr. Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state at whose instance the present joint 
British American Mica Mission was instituted ? 

(b) What is the respective strength of the British and American 
representatives on the said Mission ? 

(c) What are the purposes and functions of the Mission ? 

(d) Is it only a ware measure or is the Mission to permanently 
continue even after the war ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Joint Mica 
Mission was set up as a result of discussions between the Government 
of India and His Majesty’s Government, and through His Majesty’s 
Government with the Government of the United States of America. 

(b) Three British and three United States of America 
representatives. 

(c) The Mission under instructions from their principals, are 
responsible for purchasing, inspecting, accepting, paying for and 
despatching all mica required by the United Nations. 

(d) It is only a war measure. 

Mr. Ram Narayan Singh : May I ask why the Government of 
India or the Mica industry have not been represented on the Mission ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is unnecessary; it 
is only a purchasing Mission. 

Mr. N. M. Joshi : May I ask whether it is a fact that the mica 
is sold in America for a much higher price than the price paid to the 
mica owners in India and if there is a profit — and a large profit — , 
who takes that profit ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of the question. 


350 

@ Candidates from Hindu Backward Classes 
appointed as Labour Officers, etc. 

1803. Mr. M. Ghiasuddin : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if any labour Officer, Labour Inspector, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2799. 
@ Ibid., p. 2799. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


937 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 937 

Labour Legal Adviser and Labour Welfare Society Officer has 
been appointed from amongst suitable candidates belonging 
to the Hindu backward classes, such as Ahirs, Gadariyas, 
Tcli, Tambolics, Kahars, Lohars, Barhais and Kumhars, 
who are hereditary occupational and artisan classes and 
who number sixteen to seventeen crorcs in the country ? If 
not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : From 
information readily available, it appears that no officer from 
such particular classes has been appointed. 


351 


* Facilities to Candidates from Hindu Backward 
Classes under Bevin and Other Technical 
Schemes 

1804. Mr. M. Ghiasuddin : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to grant official facilities to 
the candidates of the backward classes such as Lohars, 
Barhais, Gadariyas, Kumhars and Kolies, who are hereditary 
occupational and artisan classes in the Bevin Trainees 
Scheme and such other technical schemes as are being 
formulated every now and then ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Government 
have already taken special steps to help recruitment of 
backward classes (Scheduled Castes, etc.) in the Bevin 
Training Scheme. The National Service Labour Tribunals 
which make the selections have been directed to follow 
the orders in force in the different Provinces with regard 
to communal representation and to see that the various 
communities and classes are adequately represented. In 
addition Tribunals have been asked to associate with them 
a non-official of influence belonging to the Scheduled Caste 
and if necessary, a Muslim to guide them in determining 
the adequate representation of Scheduled Caste and other 
backward class candidates. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 9th April 1945, p. 2619. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


938 


938 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


352 


* Hindu Backward Classes Representative on 
Provincial National Labour Service Tribunal 

1805. Mr. M. Ghiasuddin : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state if Hindu backward classes have 
any representative on the Provincial National Labour Service 
Tribunal ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government of 
India are not aware if there are members of the Hindu Backward 
Classes on the National Service Labour Tribunals. Representation 
on the Tribunals on a communal basis is neither necessary nor 
practicable. 


353 


@ Summary of Proceedings of the Fifth Meeting 
of the Standing Labour Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): I 
lay on the table a copy of the Summary # of Proceedings of the 
fifth meeting of the Standing Labour Committee held at New 
Delhi on the 27th June, 1944. 


354 


f Summary of Proceedings of the Sixth Labour 

Conference 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
I lay on the table a copy of the Summary# of Proceedings of the 
Sixth Labour Conference held at New Delhi on the 27th and 
28th October, 1944. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1945, 20th November 1945, 

p. 1001. 

@ Ibid., Vol. I, 21st January 1946, p. 61. 

# Not printed in these debates, but copies have been placed in the Library of the 
House. 

t Ibid., Vol. I, 21st January 1946, p. 61. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


939 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 939 


355 

* Summary of Proceedings of the Sixth Meeting 
of the Standing Labour Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : I 
lay on the table a copy of the Summary@ of Proceedings of the 
sixth meeting of the Standing Labour Committee at New Delhi on 
the 17th March, 1945. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar (Madras ceded District 
and Chittcr : Non-Muhammadan Rural): On a point of information. 
May I know why it has taken so long to these papers which were 
ready on the 27th of June, 1944 and on the 27th and 28th of 
October, 1944 on the table of the House ? Why were they not placed 
in the last Assembly Session ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot give an 
answer, but I will look into the matter. 

356 

# Indian Mines (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend the Indian 
Mines Act, 1923. 

Mr. President : The question is 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Indian Mines Act, 1923.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce the Bill. 

357 

f Inadequate Accommodation for Government 

Servant 

24. Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state — 

(a) the number of clerks and assistants in Government 
Departments who have applied for quarters but have not 
yet been allotted accommodation in New Delhi; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 21st January 1946. 

@ Not printed in these debates, but copies have been placed in the Library of the House. 

# Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 30th January 1946, p. 247. 
f Ibid,., 5th February 1946, p. 477. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


940 


940 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) the number of superintendents who have applied for but not 
given any Government accommodation so far: 

(c) the number of houses or flats requisitioned in New Delhi and 
Karol Bagh areas for the use of persons in (a) and (b) above 
during the war; 

(d) the number of houses and flats in New Delhi and Karol Bagh 
which have been handed over or proposed to be handed over 
to their owners on and from the 1st January, 1946; and 

(e) when he expects those who have applied for accommodation 
before the 1st January, 1945, will be allotted Government 
accommodation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). Applicants 
for quarters arc divided into two categories, viz., (i) officers drawing 
a pay of less than Rs. 600 and (ii) officers drawing a pay of Rs. 600 or 
more. All clerks and Assistants and some Superintendents come under 
category (i). The number of applicants under this category, who have 
not been allotted accommodation is 16.256. Information regarding the 
number of clerks and assistants or superintendents, who applied for 
but were not allotted quarters, is not readily available. 

(c) The number of flats requisitioned in New Delhi and Karol Bagh 
areas for officers, drawing a pay of less than Rs. 600 is 188. 

(d) 3. 

(e) It is not possible to furnish the information as an applicant’s 
propsects of securing an allottment of quarter depend on many factors 
which cannot all be forseen, such as the date of his posting to New Delhi, 
the amount of his pay, whether he is single, married or with family, 
his preference for a particular type of quarter, etc. 

358 

* Surplus Government Buildings in Delhi 

25. Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the Honourable 
the labour Member please state — 

(a) if any of the barracks and buildings built to the north and 
south of the Imperial Secretariat Buildings and in other places 
in New Delhi for the use of the American, British and Indian 
personnel have now become superfluous for such use, if so, 
how many, 

(b) the total number of rooms, etc., in the buildings in (a) above, 

(c) whether any offices are now located therein, if not, what is 
proposed to be done will them; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 5th February 1946, pp. 478-79. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


941 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 941 

(d) whether it is proposed to allot such buildings now or in 
the near future for (i) office use, and (ii) for residential 
accommodation with slight alterations for kitchens and 
bathrooms where necessary, 

(e) if the answer to (d) above is in the affirmative, whether 
any have been allotted so far, if so, how many, and 

(f) in particular what is proposed to be done with the 
American barracks on the Talkatora Road, Gurdwara 
Road, Queensway and Connaught Place ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). I take it 
that the Honourable member is referring to temporary buildings 
which were till recently occupied by personnel other than that 
of the Government of India. 

A statement containing the necessary information in respect 
of such buildings as have been surrendered to Government or as 
will, according to the information in the possession of Government 
be surrendered within the next three months is laid on the table. 

(c) I confine my answer to this part of the question to the 
buildings which have actually been surrendered to Government. 
The answer is in the affirmative except in the case of the 
buildings surrendered only very recently which are also required 
by Government and are proposed to be used by them. 

(d) I confine my answer to this part of the question to buildings 
which will be surrendered within the next three months. Such 
buildings are also required by Government and are proposed to 
be used for one or the other purposes. 

(e) No, the latter part of the question does not arise. 

(f) The buildings on Talkatora Road and Gurdwara Road are 
being used by Government for office purposes and will continue to 
be used so long as these are required by Government. As regards 
the American buildings on Cannaught place and Queensway, 
the method of their disposal is under consideration but they are 
likely to be required for Government purposes. 

Statement showing the buildings surrendered or to be 
surrendered to Government within the next three months in New 
Delhi. 


Name of the building 

Number of rooms, etc., available therein 

L Block 

74 

M Block 

107 

Gurdwara Road 

106 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


942 


942 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Name of the building 

Number of rooms, etc., 

available therein 

Talkatora Barracks 

14 barracks 

49,000 Sq. ft. 


1 barrack 

2,890 Sq.ft. 


Office rooms (18) 

4,446 Sq. ft. 


Recreation Hall with 4 

5,000 Sq. ft. 


adjoining rooms and 
godown. 

Kitchen and Dinning 
hall. 

2,893 Sq. ft. 

Officers quarters on the Central Vista 

288 rooms 


Jodhpur Mess 

120 


(To be surrendered in April 1946) 
Canning Road Barracks — ’B’ Block 

6 barracks (double) 

62,406 Sq. ft. 

(To be surrendered on 21-2-46) 

1 barrack 

4,598 Sq. ft. 


10 office rooms 

4,566 Sq. ft. 


359 

* Appointment of Mr. Harkness as Town 
Planning Officer, Delhi and New Delhi 

26. Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state — 

(a) if it is a fact that one Mr. Harkness has been appointed as 
Town Planning Officer for Delhi and New Delhi recently, 

(b) the terms on which his recruitment has been made, 

(c) if the post was advertised in India and applications called 
for from qualified or capable Indians for the post, and, 
if so, whether any applications were received, 

(d) if the appointment was made through the Federal Public 
Service Commission, and, if not, why not, 

(e) if he has satisfied himself that no Indian of the necessary 
ability was available before Mr. Harkness was given the 
job, and 

(f) whether Mr. Harkness has had previous experience of town 
planning in a country like India or whether his experience 
has been confined to Europe and other countries ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The post has been sanctioned for a period of 3 years and 
is non-pensionable. It carries a pay of Rs. 2,000 per mensem. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol.I of 1946, 5th February 1946, p. 479. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


943 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 943 

(c) The answer to both parts of the question is in the 
affirmative. 

(d) The post was first advertised by the Federal Public 
Service Commission but no suitable candidate was available 
in India. 

(e) Yes. 

(f) Mr. Harkness’s experience has been confined to Europe 
and countries other than India. 

360 

* Handmade paper for Members of Legislative 

Assembly 

31. Seth Govind Das : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether he proposes to procure for 
future use of and sale to the Members of this House, handmade 
paper only which is manufactured as a village industry by 
institutions organised on cooperative basis ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If all the Members 
of the House agree to accept and use handmade paper of 
the kind referred to by the Honourable Member, such paper 
will be procured for sale to them whenever it is available in 
acceptable qualities. 


361 

@ Wells and Additional Accommodation for 
Members of Legislature 

33. Seth Govind Das: (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact that there 
is a shortage of bungalows for the residence of members 
of both the Houses of the Central Legislature ? If so, what 
steps Government are taking to construct sufficient number 
of additional bungalows so as to provide residence for all the 
members ? 

(b) Are Government aware that the absence of wells in these 
localities cause great hardship to such orthodox members of the 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 5th February 1946, p. 481. 
@ ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


944 


944 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
families of M. L. As. who have objection to the use of tap water ? 

(c) Do Government propose to take steps to construct wells, 
at suitable distances and places in these localities, before the 
members take up their residences for the next session ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Until the 
beginning of this Session no shortage was reported to Government 
and no complaint of shortages was received by them. A small 
shortage of bungalow type accommodation has just been brought 
to the notice of Government and the matter is now under their 
consideration. 

(b) No. 

(c) Government have not at present any such proposal under 
consideration. 


362 

*Re-Constitution of Geological Survey of India 

36. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state what action has been, or is proposed 
to be, taken in the matter of (i) reconstitution of the Geologial 
Survey of India in order to make it “a potent instrument for the 
furtherance of Government’s mineral policy”, and 

(ii) undertaking legislation for the purpose of establishing 
control over minerals in terms of his statement in the Legislative 
Assembly on the 12th March, 1945, while defining Government’s 
policy regarding mineral resources of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (i) A very large 
expansion of the Geological Survey has been undertaken by the 
Central Government. The superior gazetted staff of the Survey 
has been increased from its pre-war strength of 27 to 102 which 
includes specialists, like Geophysicist, Mining Engineer. 

A copy of the brochure showing the Functions and Organization 
of the Geological Survey of India is available in the Library of 
the House. 

(ii) Provincial Governments were consulted in the matter and 
their replies are under consideration. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 5th February 1946, pp. 482-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


945 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 945 

363 

* Abolition of Utilisation Branch of Geological 
Survey of India 

37. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state the circumstances that led to the 
abolition of the Utilisation Branch of the Geological Survey of 
India ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the Advisory Committee attached to the 
said Branch was at one stage, expected to function as a post-war 
planning committee with reference to minerals ? 

(c) Which Committee, if any, is now engaged in considering 
questions relating to post-war policy about minerals. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Utilization 
Branch was established with a view to utilizing undeveloped 
mineral resources of the country for furtherance of the war effort. 
On the termination of the war, the emphasis changed from that 
of war-time production to that of a planned policy of minerals 
development in the country. The development of such planned 
policy is an integral function of the Geological Survey of India 
and is being pushed forward but the necessity for a separate 
branch for productive purposes no longer exists. 

(b) Yes, but the change-over in function has necessitated a 
change in the personnel of the Advisory Committee. 

(c) The Government of India have recently formed an expert 
Advisory Board to advise them on problems connected with 
the mineral development of the country. A copy of the Labour 
Department Resolution No. M102 (4), dated the 9th January 
1946, constituting the committee is available in the Library of 
the House. 


364 

@ Indian Bevin Boys 

40. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state how many Indians were trained in 
Great Britain under the Bevin Training Scheme ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 5th February 1946, p. 483. 
@ Ibid. pp. 484-85. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


946 


946 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) How many of them have been employed in factories engaged 
in war production ? 

(c) How many of the latter have since been discharged ? 

(d) Is it a fact that a number of Indian technicians trained 
under the Bevin Training Scheme have been asked by the 
Government of India to accept places other than those in which 
they have specialised ? If so, for what reason, and what is the 
number of such technicians ? 

(e) Is it a fact that, though there was no guarantee of service, 
assurances were freely given during the stay of the Indian Bevin 
Boys in the United Kingdom that their services would be utilised 
for the betterment of the industrial status of India? If the answer 
be substantially as above, what steps have been, or are proposed 
to be, taken to ensure the proper employment of these trainees ? 

(f) Has any representation been received from these trainees 
indicating their grievances ? If so, to what effect and with what 
result ? 

(g) Is it a fact that one of the objects of the Bevin Training 
Scheme, with reference to Indian trainees was to give them an 
appreciation of the Britain methods of cooperation between the 
employers and workers, and the value of sound Trade Union 
principles ? If so, how is it proposed to utilise in India the training 
of these technicians in Trade Unionism ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 712. A batch of 
75 is at present under training. 

(b) 414. Another 168 trainees were engaged on essential work 
in Defence Services in Government (Central, Provincial and Indian 
States) undertakings including Railways. 

(c) 111 from the factories engaged on war production and 9 
from the other undertakings. 

(d) Orders for employment of Bevin trainees on their return 
from United Kingdom were issued by the Government of India 
under the National Service (Technical Personnel) Ordinance. In 
most cases Bevin Trainees were placed in employment consistent 
with the training received by them in the U. K. In a few cases 
they could not be engaged on work for which they specialised 
and were entrusted with other work which they could perform 
by virtue of their general training. Government are making a 
scrutiny of all such cases and every effort will be made to find 
suitable employment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


947 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 947 

(e) No such assurances were given, so far as the 
Government of India is aware. The prospectus clearly stated 
that no guarantee of employment could be given but that every 
endeavour would be made to place trainees in suitable posts. 

(f) Yes. Their main grievance relates to their prospects 
of employment in suitable posts in the post-war period. 
Every endeavour is being made to find employment for 
the unemployed Bevin trainees in Government and private 
undertakings. Managers of all Employment Exchanges have 
been instructed to do their best to help Bevin trainees who 
register for employment. The position regarding unemployment 
among Bevin trainees will be reviewed periodically and, as 
far as practicable, suitable action will be taken to remove 
legitimate grievances. 

(g) Yes. Facilities for the study of the working of trade 
unionism in Great Britain were made available to Bevin 
trainees. It is hoped that the experience gained will enable 
Bevin trainees to take their part in the development of trade 
unionism on sound lines in India. 

365 

* Proposed Evacuation of Villages in the 
Prosecution of the Damodar Scheme 

Mr. President : May I know when the scheme was started 
and how far it has proceeded ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : I 
would like to submit that at this stage there is absolutely nothing 
to be discussed. Government has no doubt under contemplation 
putting certain dams on the Damodar River, which flows 
through Bihar and Bengal, but with regard to the specific 
questions raised in this adjournment motion, which speaks of 
forced evacuation, all I have to say is this — that we are at a 
very very preliminary stage — we are merely making an inquiry 
as to how much land would be submerged by the enclosure 
of this water, what would be the area that would be affected, 
etc., and we arc trying to see how many persons will have to 
be evacuated, the nature of their holdings and what rights 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 7th February 1946, pp. 605-06. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


948 


948 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

they have. There is really nothing specific, no action has been 
taken by government at this stage which could be the subject 
matter of discussion, and what I would like to say is this — that I 
hope when the government has come to some definite conclusion 
in this matter I shall be able to circulate a paper to the House 
containing the conclusions of government and members can then 
raise the matter for discussion in any way they like. 

366 

*Electricity (Supply) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I move for leave to introduce a bill to provide for the rationalisation 
of the production and supply of electricity, and generally for 
taking measures conducive to the electrical development of India. 
Mr. President: The question is — 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for 
the rationalisation of the production and supply of electricity, 
and generally for taking measures conducive to the electrical 
development of India.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


367 

@ Purchase of Temporary Buildings by 
Government of India 

Sri R. Venkatasubba Reddiar : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) If his attention has been drawn to the article under 
the heading “Stop the Loot” in the last column of the 
1st page of the Hindustan Times, dated the 4th February, 
1946. 

(b) if the answer to part (a) is in the affirmative, whether it is a 
fact that His Majesty’s Government is pressing the Government 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 7th February 1946, p. 616. 
@ Ibid.., p. 689. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


949 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 949 

of India to purchase the two buildings mentioned in the article, 

if so, whether the Government of India has taken a decision 

regarding that, 

(c) the value of the buildings at present, 

(d) the cost of the buildings to his Majesty’s Government, 

(e) the price at which these buildings are offered, and 

(f) if the two buildings have only to be pulled down and are not 
fit for any use ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) No. The Government of India themselves have decided to 
purchase the buildings for housing their officers. The terms of 
purchase are now under consideration. 

(c) No firm figure can be given as the estimates of the present 
value of the buildings, which depend on several factors, necessarily 
differ. 

(d) Rs. 25,58,000. 

(e) Rs. 21,31,667. 

(f) The buildings are being occupied by the staff of the Far 
Eastern Bureau as well as by the Government of India officers and 
it cannot be said that they arc not fit for any use. They are however 
temporary buildings and will be demolished when they are no longer 
required by Government. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : For how many years are they expected to 
last ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know. I suppose 
it might be estimated between 8 to 10 years. 

Mr. Sasanka Sekhar Sanyal : Is it voluntary purchase or forced ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Voluntary. Why forced ? 
If Government need them they have to purchase them. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : On what basis is the value fixed ? Is it 
cost of depreciated value or knock down value ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The value is not fixed. 
The matter is under negotiation. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : How many years of life 
from the war? 8 to 10 years have already expired? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They were constructed 
during the war and I do not know the exact date at the moment. 

Shri Mohan Lai Sansena : Will the demand for the purchase 
of these buildings come before the House ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-08.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


950 


950 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Why ? It is an 

administrative act. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : If they were constructed 
at the beginning of the war and the life is 8 to 10 years and they 
are to exist three years more, why does the Honourable Member 
think it necessary to spend Rs. 25 lakhs ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have said the 
matter is under consideration. No figure has been fixed. 

Mr. M. Asaf Ali : I do not quite follow the Honourable 
Member’s last but one answer. He said something about an 
administrative act which did not require the sanction of this House. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not say that. 
I said it was an administrative act for which the House need 
not be consulted. The money will be provided for in the Budget. 

Mr. M. Asaf Ali: I want to know if the money is sanctioned. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It will come up 
for sanction. 

Mr. M. Asaf Ali: In what form are you bringing it up ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is a matter 
for the Finance Member. 

Mr. M. Asaf Ali: I want him to answer it. It is no use the 
Honourable Member taking up that high-handed attitude and 
saying it is an administrative act. He has got to answer us. 

Mr. Sasanka Sekhar Sanyal: Answer. (No answer — 
Interruptions .) 

Mr. President: Order, order. We will now take up the 
adjournment motion. 


368 

* Dearth of Accommodation in Delhi and 
New Delhi 

155. Sir Hassan Suhrawardy : (a) Is the Honourable the 
Labour Member aware that, in spite of the cessation of hostilities, 
there is still a great dearth of accommodation in Delhi and New 
Delhi ? 

(b) Is he aware that, in spite of the promulgation of the 
New Delhi Rent Control Order and the Delhi Rent Ordinance, 
landlords are still 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 11th February 1946, p. 753. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-1 1-2013 


951 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 951 

harassing tenants and taking advantage of every possible loophole 
in the law? 

(c) Do Government propose to consider the desirability of 
keeping the aforesaid enactments in force until normal conditions 
prevail at least and until this Assembly enacts some law to 
regulate the relations between landlords and tenants in the 
Delhi Province? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) I have not received any complaints recently. 

(c) It is the intention of the government of India that rents 
should continue to be controlled in New Delhi and Delhi until 
normal conditions returns. 


369 

* British and Non-Indian Public Utility Concerns 

172. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state the number of public utility concerns 
owned by British and other non-Indian interests in India, 
indicating the amount of the capital involved in such concerns, 
and the policy of Government in the matter of acquiring these 
concerns on behalf of the State or Municipal or other statutory 
bodies in India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The question will be 
answered by the Honourable Member in charge of the Planning 
and Development on the 18th February, 1946. 

370 

@ Operation of Scheme for Training of 
Technicians Abroad 

173. Mr. K. C. Neogy : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to lay on the table of the House a comprehensive 
statement regarding the operation of the scheme for sending 
technicians already employed in Industries abroad for further training 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 11th February 1946, p. 769. 
@ Ibid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


952 


952 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

or for enlarging their industrial or professional experience, 
announced last year, giving particulars specially as regards 
the number of technicians who have already proceeded to the 
different countries, the different course they are going to take 
up, the processes of selection of the said technicians, and the 
consideration governing such selection ? 

(b) How many applicants, if any, arc yet to be sent from 
among those who have already been selected, how many if any, 
more technicians are likely to be sent out likewise in the current 
year, and in what subjects are these technicians likely to be 
trained and in which countries ? 

(c) What will be the estimated cost to the Central Government 
involved in the training of these technicians, and what will be 
the cost, if any, to the Provincial Governments concerned? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) A statement is 
laid on the table of the House. 

(b) 152 candidates have yet to be sent amongst those 
already selected. Particulars of the training facilities required 
for each candidate have been sent to the authorities concerned. 
Arrangements are made for sending the candidates as soon as 
intimation is received that the training facilities required by 
him will be available. It is not possible at this stage to say how 
many more candidates over and above those already selected 
will be sent in the current year or the subjects in which they 
may be trained. This will depend on the availability of training 
facilities abroad. 

(c) Under the scheme the training and other expenses of the 
candidates are borne by the respective employers i.e., private 
industry, Central and Provincial Governments and the Indian 
States, as the case may be. The scheme also provides for financial 
assistance from the Central Government to candidates from 
private industry where the training is in a new industry or 
an industry whose development is considered desirable in the 
national interest and the employer is unable to bear the full cost. 

The cost to the Central Government during 1946-47 in 
respect of candidates selected from amongst Central Government 
employees and a few cases from private industry where such 
assistance may be given is estimated to be Rs. 1,01,680. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


953 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 953 

The estimated cost to the Provincial Governments in respect 
of candidates selected from amongst Provincial Government 
employees during 1946-47 will be about Rs. 3,60,000. 

371 

Accounts Re: Gorakhpur Labour in Coal Mines 

31. Mr. K. C. Neogy: (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether all the expenditure incurred 
on account of the recruitment and employment of the Gorakhpur 
labour in coal mines has been regularly audited and has been 
found by audit to be entirely in order ? Up to which date have 
such accounts been audited? 

(b) What is the name and designation of the Officer in-charge 
of the Labour Force and what is the name of his Secretary ? 
What are the emoluments to which they are respectively entitled, 
and what is the extent of the financial authority of the Officer- 
in-charge. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) First part, Yes, 
and the accounts have been reported to be in order. 

(b) First part — Mr. H. J. Walsh, Deputy Director, Labour 
Supply (Coal). There is no Secretary attached to him. 

Second part — His scale of pay is 1,925 — 50 — 2,075. He has 
been authorised to incur expenditure at an overall rate not 
exceeding Rs. 60 per labourer per month, to cover the pay of 
labourers, pay of clerical, inferior and medical staff, cost of 
rations, and expediture on T. A. and contingencies. In all cases 
expenditure incurred must be in accordance with scales approved 
by Government. 


372 

* Expenditure on Gorakhpur Labour in Coal 

Mines 

32. Mr. K. C. Neogy : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state: 

(a) the amount so far spent on the Gorakhpur labour 
employed in coal mines, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 11th February 19-16, p. 773. 

@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


954 


954 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) the amount realised so far from the owners of mines 
who employed the Gorakhpur labour, 

(c) the number of members of the Gorakhpur labour force 
employed in (i) Railway-owned collieries and (ii) collieries 
owned by public companies and individuals, and 

(d) the names of those mines where the Gorakhpur labour 
has been employed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Rs. 1,91,05,386 
upto the end of January 1946. 

(b) Rs. 22,52,311 actually recovered upto the end of December 
1945. Rs. 29,48,302 are still outstanding for the period upto the 
end of December and estimated amount to be billed for January 
1946 is Rs. 16 lakhs. 

(c) Number employed in — 

(i) Railway Collieries 7 per cent, 

(ii) Collieries owned by Public companies 83 per cent, and 

(iii) Collieries owned by individuals 10 per cent. Total labour 
force as on 19th January 1946 — 17,391. 

Greatest number employed in any one month. — 30,600. 

(d) A statement is placed on the table. 

STATEMENT 

List of Mines Surface 


(1) 

Madhuband 

(14) 

South Tisra 

(2) 

Diamone Tisra 

(15) 

East Bararee 

(3) 

Model Jharia 

(16) 

Pure Joyrampur 



(17) 

North Bararee 

(4) 

A. G. Tisra 

(18) 

G. P. C’s. Jinagora 

(5) 

Lower Upper Jharia 

(19) 

Basudev ‘ A ’ Plot 
Colliery 

(6) 

Indian Jharia 

(20) 

Pathardih Sudamdih 

(7) 

Bagdigi Kujama 

(21) 

Pure Tasra 

(8) 

K. P.’s Dobari 

(22) 

New Tasra 

(9) 

Bhalgora 

(23) 

Central Bhowra 

(10) 

Ghanuyadih 

(24) 

Bhowra 

(11) 

Bagechi’s Dobari 

(25) 

Mohulboni 

(12) 

Pandalbcrra 

(26) 

East Ekra 

(13) 

Khas Jharia Dobari 

(27) 

Busserya 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


955 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 955 


(28) 

North Ekra 

(57) 

Alkusa Nayadcc 

(29) 

Kankanee 

(58) 

Jairandih 

(30) 

Scndra Bansjora 

(59) 

Swang 

(31) 

Ekra Khas 

(60) 

Parhelia 

(32) 

Ekra Khas No. 12 quarry 


Underground 

(33) 

Mudidih 

(1) 

Parhelia 

(34) 

Tctulmari 

(2) 

Sodepur 

(35) 

Tata’s Sijua 

(3) 

Seetalpur 

(36) 

Angarpathra 

(4) 

Banksimullah 11 and 12 
pits. 

(37) 

Jharia Khas Angarpathra 



(38) 

Koiludih 



(39) 

Agardih 

(5) 

Banksimullah 7 and 8 
pits. 

(40) 

North Damuda 



(41) 

Isabella 

(6) 

Damra 

(42) 

Shampur 

(7) 

Adjai II Colliary 

(43) 

Pure Laikdih 

(8) 

Shecbpur 

(44) 

Sanctoria 

(9) 

Chapui Khas 

(45) 

Chapui Khas 

(10) 

S.E. Barboni 

(46) 

Khas Jamchari 

(11) 

Digwadih 

(47) 

Jote Dhcmo 

(12) 

Jitpur 

(48) 

Sirka 

(13) 

Pure Joyrampur 

(49) 

Rcligarah 

(14) 

Bhatdce 

(50) 

Junkunda 

(15) 

Gaslitand 

(51) 

Jambad 

(16) 

Standard 

(52) 

Dhansar 

(17) 

Ekra Khas 

(53) 

Bright Kusunda 

(18) 

Swang 

(54) 

North Bhuggatdih 

(19) 

Jairandih 

(55) 

Godhur 

(20) 

Dhemo Main 

(56) 

Pure Kustore 

(21) 

Model Jharia. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


956 


956 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


373 


* Extension in Service to 
C.P.W.D. Officers 

44. Shri Sri Prakasa : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) the number of persons, who have retired from, but have 
been re-employed in the services of the Central Public 
Works Department as Superintending, Executive and 
Assistant Engineers, respectively, since 1939; 

(b) the number of those persons who have been given 
extensions to their original terms together with the 
instalments of each term of extension; 

(c) if it is a fact that the Finance Department of the 
Central Government, has expressed itself against 
the grant of extensions to the original term ; if so, 
the reasons for any action in this behalf against the 
instructions of the Finance Department; 

(d) if such extensions interfere with the recruitment of 
new hands and the advancement of young officers ; 
if so, whether any provision is made to compensate 
those whose prospects are blocked; and 

(e) if Government propose to take any action in the matter 
of the termination of such extensions and bettering 
the prospects of younger officers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Three. 

(b) Since 1939, extension of service under Fundamental 
Rule 56 was granted in three cases, the periods of extension 
being 6 months, 3 days and 1 month respectively. 

(c) The answer to the first part of the question is in the 
negative ; the second part does not arise. 

(d) and (e) No. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 20th February 1946, p. 1214. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


957 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 957 

374 


* Instrument for the Amendment 
of the Constitution of the 
International Labour 
Organisation 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): Sir, 
I lay on the table a copy of the Instrument for the amendment 
of the constitution of the International Labour Organisation 
adopted by the Conference at its twenty- seventh session at Paris 
on the 5th November 1945 together with a statement of the 
action proposed to be, taken thereon. 


375 


@ Indian Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move for leave to introduce A Bill further to amend the 
Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926. 

Mr. President: The question is : 

“ That leave be granted to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Indian Trade Union Act, 1926”. 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central) Vol. I of 1946, 21st February 1946, p. 1214. 

@ ibid., p. 1292. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


958 


958 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


376 


* Stopping of Women Working in Coal Mines 

406. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) When Government propose to stop women working in 
Coal Mines now that the war is over; and 

(b) Whether they have any schemes ready to provide these 
women who have been brought away from their villages 
any alternative employment or to provide them free 
return passages and to free them also from any debts 
that they may have incurred while at work in the mines 
in the hope of repaying them through their savings at 
the mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Government have 
no intention of entirely prohibiting the employment of women in 
Coal Mines. Their employment underground has, however, been 
prohibited from the 1st February, 1946. 

(b) The Welfare Fund of the Central Government has decided 
to open vegetable farms in the coalfields and the various Mining 
Associations of employers and the Provincial Governments 
of Bengal and Bihar were asked to do everything possible to 
provide at once alternative employment for women released from 
underground work. Majority of these women have already been 
provided with surface work in the coal fields. 


377 


@ Recommendations of Indian 
Labour Conference 

467. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state: 

(a) the recommendations made by the Indian Labour 
Conference that met in November 1945 ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p. 1427. 
@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


959 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 959 

(b) the conclusions or decisions reached by government 
thereon ; and 

(c) what steps the Government of India propose to take to 
implement them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) None. 

(b) and (c). Do not arise. 


378 


* Government’s House Building Programme 
for Big Cities 

469. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Has the attention of the 
Honourable the Labour Member been drawn to the editorial 
remarks of the Statesman of the 23rd January, 1946, that “ Yet 
it must be remembered that almost no dwelling has been built 
in any Indian town during the last six years,” and is he in a 
position to contradict this statement ? 

(b) What steps have Government taken to encourage building 
in congested cities like Bombay and Calcutta ? 

(c) Are the controls operating still to prevent structures 
going up, or are they going out of their way to smoothen out 
difficulties of builders ? 

(d) Have the Government of India received from, or sent to, 
Provincial Governments any concrete plan in order to bring into 
existence increased number of buildings in India ? 

(e) Are Government aware that the building trade is the most 
promising one for the absorption of those who may be retrenched 
from Government service ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. As we have 
no information regarding the number of buildings constructed 
during the last six years by private persons, it is impossible either 
to support or to contradict the statement as it is worded; but I 
should like to point out that the controls for the use of building 
materials were not imposed till about the latter half of 1941. 

(b) Presumably the Honourable Member has in mind private 
building. The Government of India have recently taken some steps 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p. 1428. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


960 


960 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of a general nature to encourage private building all over India 
and not only particularly in Bombay and Calcutta. 

They have withdrawn the instructions which they issued to 
Provincial Governments regarding the exercise of control over 
building construction. They have advised Provincial Governments 
generally to encourage private building by all means in their 
power. They have issued specific instructions about the release 
of bricks and increased quantities of other building materials 
like cement, steel, timber, etc. which are under the control of 
the Government of India,) have been made available to private 
builders. 

Government of India have further decided to convene a meeting 
in Delhi in the first week of March 1946, of representatives of the 
building trade in order to discuss with them the factors that are 
still impending the progress of private building in this country. 

(c) The Government of India believe that the relaxations are 
going to make it easier for builders to put up structures in future. 

(d) The Government of India have addressed provinces in 
regard to a short term scheme for the encouragement of the 
construction of housing for industrial labour and those other 
workers in urban areas who are unable to pay an economic 
rent. The scheme involves a subsidy from the Centre provided 
provinces make an equivalent subsidy and will be referred to 
by the finance Member in his Budget speech. 

379 

* Government’s Policy re : Residential use of 
Wartime Temporary Structures 

470. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Is the Honourable the Labour 
Member aware of the special measures being taken in the United 
Kingdom to increase activity in house building ? If so, what are 
those measure ? 

(b) Do Government propose to indicate their policy with regard 
to the following suggestion made by the Statesman of the 23rd 
January, 1946. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p.1427. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


961 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 961 

“The Government would be, therefore, well advised to 
consider if until the law of supply and demand has reasserted 
itself, residential use is possible of the temporary structures 
put up during the war”? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. These 
measures have been fully explained in the British Ministry of 
Information pamphlet No. R. 520, a copy of which will be found 
in the Library of the House. 

(b) The suggestion made by the Statesman of the 23rd 
January, 1946, was in respect of the temporary buildings 
constructed in Calcutta and I take it that the Honourable 
Member wants to know the policy of Government in respect 
of those buildings. I am concerned only with the buildings 
constructed for Central Government Civil Offices which will 
no doubt be retained for use until they have become surplus 
to our requirements. 


380 

* Working Hours of Factory Workers in India 

481. Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai: Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member kindly state : 

(a) the actual daily working hours of factory workers 
in India according to different industries including 
collieries and plantations ; 

(b) the total number of factories coming under the purview 
of the Indian factories Act, 1934; 

(c) how many of them are working one shift, how many 
of them two shifts and how many of them three shifts; 
and 

(d) the working hours in each shift ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Two satements 
showing the daily working hours in industries and plantations 
are placed on the table of the House. No detailed information 
about the actual working hours in collieries is available. 

(b) Total number of factories under the Factories Act was 
14,922 in 1944, the last year for which figures are available. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p. 1428. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


962 


962 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) and (d). No information available. 


Statement showing hours of work per day in factories 


1. Cotton 

... 7 1 /2— 10 

2. Jute 

... 9—12 

3. Silk 

... 7 54. -9 

4. Woolen 

... 9—10 

5. Engineering (including railway workshops) 

... 754, — 12 for shift workers 
(in some cases night 
shift workers work for 7 
hours). 

6. Matches 

o 

T— 1 
1 

00 

7. Potteries 

... 8 for shift workers 

8. Printing Presses 

... 7 1 /2,-8 1 / 2 

9. Glass 

... 754, — 9 for shift workers. 
10 for general workers. 

10. Chemical and Pharmaceutical works 

... 7—10. 

11. Sugar 

... 8 for Manufacturing section. 

8 — 9 for Engineering 
section. 

12. Cotton ginning and bailing 

... 9—10. 

13. Rice Mills 

... 7—10. 

14. Cement 

... 754 — 8 for shift workers. 
8 — 9 for general workers 

15. Paper 

... 7 — 8 in continuous process 
shifts. 

16. Mica Factories 

... 9. 

17. Shellac Manufacture 

... 8—10. 

18. Bidi, Cigar and Cigarettes 

... 11 — 12 for bidi and cigar. 

8 — 9 for cigarettes 

19. Carpet Weaving 

... 9—10. 

20. Tanneries and Leather goods Manufacture ... 

... U. P. Madras — 854 
9 Day shift. 

8 — 9 Night shift. 

21. Coir Matting 

... 9 for men. 

6 for women. 

5 for children. 

Statement showing daily hours of work in Plantations. 

Assam and Bengal — 


Tea Gardens — 


Hazaria basis (normal working time) 

5—6 

Ticca basis (overtime;) 

3—4 

Pluckers 

10—11 

Kangra Valley 

8—9 

Dehra Dun 

8 

Almora 

6 

Tea and Coffee Estates in South India 

8—9 

Rubber Estates 

5—7 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


963 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 963 

381 

* Utilisation of Temporary Building 
in New Delhi 

495. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the 

Honourable the Labour Member please state: 

(a) if all the temporary buildings, built for the War 
Department and other requirements including the returned 
American buildings on Queensway and other places are going 
to be utilized solely for office accommodation; 

(b) if he will consider the desirability of using at least 
some of these buildings for housing the government of India 
personnel, single persons or others, after making slight 
modifications in those buildings for residential purposes, and 
thus relieving the present housing shortage in Delhi; and 

(c) Whether, if Government is not prepared to undergo 
the necessary expense, he will let these buildings out on 
contract with the stipulation that they should be let out to 
the Government servants in the first instance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) Yes — if and when any temporary buildings constructed 
for office purposes are no longer required as offices — and the 
sites on which they are constructed are not required for other 
purposes. 

(c) This will be considered, but it is likely that Government 
will require the buildings for their own staff and in such case 
be likely to keep them under Government control. 

382 

@ Governments Policy re: Mica Trade 

499. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) the policy and object of Government in regulating 
the Mica business and trade; 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p. 1446. 
@ Ibid., p. 1447. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


964 


964 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) the probable date by which the report of the Mica 
Enquiry Committee is to be printed and published; and 

(c) the length of time to be taken by Government in 
considering the desirability of altogether removing or at least 
modifying the ban on the sale of Crude and Bima Mica under 
the Mica Control Order ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) The 

Government of India wish to improve the working conditions 
in the industry and to organise it on sound commercial lines 
so that Indian mica gets a fair price in the market. 

(b) The report is under print and will be published as 
soon as printed copies are available. 

(c) It is not possible to fix any date by which Government 
will take decisions on the recommendations of the Mica 
Enquiry Committee. Every endeavour will be made to do 
it as quickly as possible. 


383 

* Unemployment Due to 
Mica Control Order 

500. Babu Ram Narayan Singh: (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether Government are 
aware that several lakhs of people in the Hazaribagh District 
have been thrown out of employment as a result of the 
introduction of the Mica Control Order ? 

(b) Are Government aware that several lakhs of people 
of the Hazaribagh District have Mica Business as their 
only means of livelihood ? If so, do Government propose to 
regulate the Mica business and the Mica Trade so as to 
safeguard their interests ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) The 

Government of India have no information that the 
introduction of the Mica Control Order has resulted the 
unemployment of several lakhs of people in the Hazaribagh 
District. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. I of 1946, 25th February 1946, p. 1447. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


965 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 965 

(b) Government are aware that a large number of people are 
engaged in the Mica business and in any scheme of improvement 
of the industry Government hope that their interests will not 
be ignored. 


384 

* Superintending Engineers 
in Headquarters 

599. Mr. Muhammad Rahmat-Ullah : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please slate if it is a fact that Rai Sahib 
C. P. Malik is given officiating chances for the post of 
Superintending Engineers in the Headquarters? 

(b) Is it not a fact that there are a number of Muslim 
Executive Engineers senior to him but have not been given a 
single chance to officiate ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. Rai Sahib 
C. P. Malik has been appointed temporarily to carry on only the 
current duties of die post of superintending Engineer, Second 
Circle, Delhi, purely as a meaure of administrative Convenience. 

(b) Yes. But they have not yet become due for promotion to 
die grade of Superintending Engineer. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : In view of the fact mat out of 
13 Superintending Engineers only one is a Muslim, why was not 
a Muslim appointed for this particular post ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If the Honourable 
Member will refer to my reply, he will see that the appointment 
is not of an officiating character — he is merely asked to carry 
on the duties. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Without being called a 
Superintending Engineer and without any remuneration ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: This is a third method of 
avoiding the appointment of Muslims, in addition to the two I 
suggested yesterday, efficiency and seniority — you do not call a 
post by the name which is given to it — you simply ask a man 
to carry on the duties ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 28th February 1946, p. 1668. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


966 


966 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is free to draw any inference he likes. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Does the Honourable Member 
know that there is a feeling abroad that in the matter of 
appointment of Muslims the Government always meets out 
stepmotherly treatment to the Muslims ? 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: In reply to part (a) the Honourable 
Member said “as a measure of administrative convenience”. 
Is it the convenience of the Honourable Member to make it a 
convenience to avoid appointments of Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think it is so 
simple an expression that everybody ought to understand it. 

Mr. President: Order, order — next question. 


385 


* Muslim Gazetted Officers in Labour 
Department Secretariat 

600. Mr. Muhammad Rahmat Ullah : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state the proportion of Muslim 
Gazetted Officers in the Labour Department Secretariat ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There are 49 
Secretariat Gazetted Officers in the Labour Department, of 
whom 9 are Muslims. 

Mr. Ahmad E. H. Jaffer: Docs it not mean that the 
proportion of Muslims is not maintained, according to the 25 
per cent ratio ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know 
that that rule applies. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : 9 out of 49 — is it fair to the 
Muslim community that they should have this low percentage ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I understand that 
is not a matter governed by the communal representation ratio. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 28th February 1946, p. 1668. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


967 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 967 

386 


* Muslim Administrative Officers 
in Central P.W.D. 

601. Mr. Muhammad Rahmat-Ullah : (a) Has the attention 
of the Honourable the Labour Member been drawn to the article 
published in the Dawn of the 26th January, 1946, regarding 
the appointment of a Muslim administrative Officer in the 
Central P.W. D. ? 

(b) Are the facts stated therein regarding his Department 
correct ? 

(c) Is it not a fact that the three Assistants of the 
Administrative Officer as well as the Financial Adviser are all 
Hindus ? 

(d) Is it not a fact that the Honourable Member is 
contemplating to appoint a non-Muslim Administrative Officer ? 
If so, why should the Mussalmans be excluded from this branch 
of the Central P.W.D. ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) The question of filling the post of Administrative 
Officer in the Central Public Works Department is still under 
consideration. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: How long will it be under 
consideration, because his attention has been drawn several 
times ? Will he make the appointment after the Assembly 
session is over ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : He will be 

appointed in due course. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Why don’t you call a spade a 
spade ? Why do you not call this a Hindu Labour Department, 
or rather a Scheduled Caste Department ? 

(No answer was given) 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 28th February 1946, p. 1670. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


968 


968 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


387 


* Trade Unions in India 

54. Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai: (a) Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state the number of trade unions in India and 
the total membership thereof since 1939 up to date year by year 
totally and as between different provinces ? 

(b) What are their total funds as between provinces and how 
much of the same comes by subscriptions and how much by 
donations since 1939 up to date year by year? 

(c) How many of the total members as between provinces did 
not pay their subscriptions and still continue to be the members 
from 1939 upto date year by year ? 

(d) What has been the proportion of outsiders in the office 
bearers of trade unions ever since 1939 onwards year by year ? 
Is it a fact that this proportion is recently on a decline? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
showing the number of registered trade unions, the number of 
unions that submitted returns and the membership of the latter, 
during the years 1939-44, is placed on the Table. Statistics for 
1944-45 are not yet available. 

(b) A statement showing the income, expenditure, opening 
and closing balances of trade unions during 1939-44 is placed 
on the Table. Government has no infonnation on the second part 
of the question. 

(c) and (d) The information is not available. 


388 


@ Industrial Workers in India 

55. Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai: Will the Honourable Member 
for Labour please state : 

(a) What is the total number of industrial workers in India 
and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 28th February 1946, p. 1670. 
@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


969 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 969 

their distribution in individual industries including collieries 
and plantations since 1939 upto date year by year. 

(b) What are the monthly earnings of the factory workers 
in India in different industries since 1939 up to date, year 
by year, exclusive of dearness allowance and bonus ? 

(c) What are the figures of dearness allowance and bonus 
paid to industrial workers in India since 1939 up to date, 
year by year, according to (i) different industries and (ii) 
different industrial centres? 

(d) Will he please illustrate the effect if any, of war 
time increase in earnings of industrial workers on the total 
membership of trade unions and their monetary funds either 
way? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
is placed on the table. Statistics for 1945 are not yet available. 

(b) A statement showing the figures of monthly average 
earnings of factory workers during 1939, 1940, 1941 and 
1943 is placed on the table. These are inclusive of dearness 
allowances paid in cash, figures exclusive of these not being 
available. The figures are only approximate is they are 
compiled from statistics of total payments made and do not 
allow for factors like number of working days in the year, 
number of working hours etc. 

Figures of 1942 are not furnished as it is not clear which 
of the figures available are inclusive of dearness allowances 
and which are not. 

(c) Full information is not available and Government 
do not consider that the time needed for collecting and 
tabulating this will be commensurate with the result. 

(d) Figures of average earnings of factory workers have 
been furnished in connection with part (a) of this Question. 
Statements showing the membership and general funds of 
trade unions are placed on the table. Government are not 
in a position to say whether the increase in membership 
and in the income is attributable to increased wages or to 
other causes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


970 


970 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


389 

* Muslim Administrative Officer in 
Central Public Works Department 

715. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state: 

(a) the number of posts of Assistant Administrative Officer 
in the Central Public Works Department, 

(b) how many of these posts are occupied by Muslims, and 

(c) if the reply to (b) is in the negative, what steps he has 
taken to fill the vacant post of Administrative Officer 
by a suitable Muslim ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Three. 

(b) None. 

(c) The inference implicit in tills question does not necessarily 
follow from (a) and (b) because the Central Public Works 
Department cadre is and must be treated as one. The subject 
is however, now under consideration. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Since the reply to (b) is none, 
may I ask the Honourable Member why a Muslim should not 
be appointed to the post of Administrative Officer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not quite 
follow. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Since there are no Muslim 
Assistant Administrative Officers, may I ask the Honourable 
Member why should not the post of Administrative Officer be 
filled by a Muhammadan ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is a matter for 
consideration. I cannot give a guarantee that the post will be 
reserved for a particular community. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Have applications been received 
for this post? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Applications will 
not be called for. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan: Has it been advertised ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not necessarily. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1929. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


971 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 971 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Why will not a Muslim be appointed. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said that I cannot 
give an assurance. Besides, the Government of India cannot accept 
the principle that any community has a vested right in any particular 
post. 

Mr. Ahmad E. H. Jaffer : Particularly in view of the fact that 
the Honourable Member’s Department is the worst in the Government 
of India 

Mr. President: Order, order. The Honourable Member will 
please put the question. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : In view of the fact that the Labour 
Department is not sufficiently representative of Muslims, may I ask 
the Honourable Member to consider the appointment of a Muslim 
to the post? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I deny the assumption 
of the Honourable Member. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : May I 

Mr. President: I believe there is one misunderstanding under 
which the Honourable Member is putting his questions. Will he 
resume his seat ? What the Honourable Member of Government said 
was that he makes a distinction between a particular post and the 
quota in the departmental posts. Am I right ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

Mr. President: He said he cannot assure a particular post being 
filled by a particular community. That is different from the quota. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : My submission is that in view of the 
fact that his Department has not the required quota of Muslim of 
25 per cent., will he consider the question of appointing Muslims 
up to the minimum quota ? 

Mr. President: Yes, that is proper. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not accept the 
principle that that is the only method. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Does the Honourable Member deny 
that his Department has in the services the 25 per cent, quota of 
Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I deny it. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : With what result ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot help the result, 
if there are not sufficient Muslim candidates. That is not my fault. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : May I tell the Honourable Member that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


972 


972 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

this is nothing but a lame excuse on the part of the Honourable 
Member to say that there are not ‘sufficient Muslim candidates’ 
when they are really available ? 

Mr. President : Order, order. That will be a criticism. The 
Honourable Member may put his question. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : May I tell the Honourable Member 
that sufficient Muslims are forthcoming but their claims are 
overlooked intentionally. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing to 
add to what I have said. 


390 

* Communal Representation in 
Labour Department 

718. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state the exact number of joint Secretaries, 
Deputy Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Superintendents, 
Assistants, Clerks, etc., in the Establishment Branch of the 
Department of Labour (Main Secretariat) ? 

(b) How many Muslims and Non-Muslims are there in each 
grade ? 

If the reply to (b) regarding the Muslims is in the negative, 
what are the reasons therefor? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b) A statement 
giving the information is placed on the table. 

(c) Does not arise. 


STATEMENT 



Total 

Muslim 

Non-Muslim 

Joint Secretaries 

3 

1 

2 


Deputy Secretaries 

4 

1 

3 


Assistant Secretaries and Under 
Secretaries 

13 

2 

11 

(including 1 European, 
1 Anglo-Indian and 
1 Scheduled Caste) 

Superintendents 

21 

6 

15 

(Including 1 Sikh and 
1 Indian Christian) 

Assistants in Establishment Branch 

9 

2 

7 


Clerks in Establishment Branch 

9 


9 

(Including 1 Scheduled 
Caste) 


^Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, pp. 1933-35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


973 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


973 


Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Sir, I did not ask for a statement 
to be laid on the table of the House, but I want the number to be 
stated on the floor of the House, as I want to ask supplementary 
questions. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: May I, Sir, give 
the figures ? 

Mr. E. H. Jaffer: There are no figures to give. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, there are. My 
learned friend need not assume a threatening attitude. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : I am only reciprocating the 
threatening attitude of the Honourable Member himself. 

Mr. President: If the list is not too big the Honourable 
Member may read. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: 

Total Muslim 


Joint Secretaries 

Deputy Secretaries 

Assistant and under Secretaries 

Superintendents 

Assistants in Establishment Branch 
Clerks in Establishment Branch 


3 

4 
13 
21 
9 
9 


Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Do these figures include Muslim 
representation in the Resettlement and Employment Directorate ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I must have notice 
of that question. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : I asked for the figures of the Labour 
Department of the Main Secretariat. Cannot the Honourable 
Member say ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, whether these figures include the figures 
of Muslim representation in the Resettlement and Employment 
Directorate or not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I must have notice 
of that question. 

Haji Abdus Sattar Haji Ishaq Seth : Will the Honourable 
Member kindly tell us what Department in answer to the question 
in the establishment branch of the Department. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is the Main 
Secretariat. As I said I want notice in order to be accurate in 
my information. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


974 


974 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is the Honourable Member aware 
that the Resettlement and Employment Directorate is quite 
separate from the Main Secretariat? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Of course I am 
aware. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Why is this large army of Joint 
Secretaries, Deputy Secretaries, Assistant and Under Secretaries 
necessary for the Labour Department and may I know whether 
my Honourable friend would not satisfy my Muslim friends by 
reducing some of the other communities in order to restore the 
Muslim proportion which they want? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not want to 
express any opinion on the Honourable Member’s question. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga: Muslimise the whole Department. 

Shri Sri Prakas : May I submit in all humility that the 
Government may lay on the table before the beginning of every 
session a full list of all the various communities in the various 
departments, so that the necessity for most of these questions 
may be obviated and temper kept under control ? 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : In view of the Government 
Resolution of the Home Department of 1934 fixing a 25 per cent. 
Quota for the Muslims and in view of the fact that there is 
shortage of Muslim representation in accordance with this 
resolution in the Labour Department, will the Honourable Member 
rectify and make up the quota by employing more Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The posts to which 
I have made reference in the course of my reply are not posts 
which are governed by communal representation. They are 
promotion posts. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : May I take it that the resolution 
does not apply to his Department? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member ought to read the Government Resolution more carefully 
than he seems to have done. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : The other day in reply to Dr. Sir 
Ziauddin Ahmed the Honourable the Home Member said that 
Government Resolution does apply to the Labour Department will 
he transfer the resolution to the Honourable Labour Member ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


975 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 975 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I know the resolution 
very well. 

Mr. President: Next question. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : One more question, Sir, Is the 
Deputy Secretary’s post a Class I post. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: There is no such 
thing as a Class I post there. 

391 

* Loss of Public Money in the ‘Delhi Store 
Sub-Division Embezzlement Case’ 

719. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please give the approximate amount of loss of 
public money in the ‘ Delhi Store Sub-Division Embezzlement 
Case? 

(b) Who were the culprits, and what action has so far been 
taken to bring them to book ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) There is no 
such case as “Delhi Store Sub-Division Embezzlement Case”. If 
the Honourable Member has in mind the case of alleged over 
payment in cartage of cement in Stores Sub-Division under 
Construction Division No. I, I can inform him that the matter 
is under investigation. 

(b) Does not arise. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is it a fact that the S. D. O. in 
question who embezzled two lakhs is still in service ? 

Mr. President: Order, order. The Honourable Member has 
already stated that there was no embezzlement 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: I entirely agree with the Honourable 
Member’s reply. The point which he refers to is the same that 
a sum of two lakhs was overpaid. 

Mr. President: My point is that the Honourable Member has 
replied that there is no case of embezzlement but only a case 
of overpayment. In his next question the Honourable Member 
need not again presume embezzlement — he can put a question 
on the over payment. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, pp. 1935-36. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


976 


976 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: The matter is under 
investigation and unless and until the result of that investigation 
is known Government cannot take any action against the officer. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: I ask whether the S. D. O. concerned 
who is responsible for this over-payment of 2 lakhs is still in service. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Of course he is. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Because the case is 
not yet proved against him. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : In such cases where matters are 
under investigation is it not the practice to keep the officer concerned 
under suspension? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Not unless we receive 
the report of the investigation. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Is it because he is of the Scheduled 
Caste ? 

Haji Abdus Sattar Haji Seth: With regard to part (a) about 
the amount involved-cannot my friend tell me what the amount 
involved is? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of the question. As regards Mr. Jaffer’s question, I would like to 
inform the Honourable Member that the man does not belong to 
the Scheduled Castes. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Even if he did belong to the Scheduled Caste, 
is it wrong not to suspend a man when there is a case against him ? 

Mr. President: Order, order — No argument. 

Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : How long has this been 
under investigation and is it departmental or by the police ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : So far as I remember — 
I cannot say definitely — the matter of course is investigated by the 
C. D. 


392 

* Grievances of Muslims Re: Appointments as 

Superintending Engineers 

720. Mr. Muhammad Rahmat-Ullah: (a) Has the attention 
of the Honourable the Labour Member been drawn to the articles 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1936. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


977 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 977 

published in the Dawn of the 27th October, 12th November 
and 19th December, 1945 ? What action has been taken to 
redress the grievances of the Mussalmans ? If not, why not ? 

(b) Is it not a fact that out of the fourteen Superintending 
Engineers only one is a Muslim ? 

(c) Are Government aware that there are three qualified 
Executive Engineers in the Headquarters who are competent 
to hold the office of Superintending Engineer? 

(d) Are Government aware that persons of less 
qualifications and standing of other communities have been 
appointed Superintending Engineers, if so, why were the 
claims of the Mussalmans ignored ? 

(e) Are Government aware that an I. S. E. Muslim 
Executive Engineer was ignored and the chance of a 
Superintending Engineer in the Headquarters Office was 
given to an officer who has risen from the ranks and is to 
retire very shortly ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I have 
seen the articles. The posts in the Central Public Works 
Department which are subject to the operation of the 
communal representation rules, are duly filled in accordance 
with the requirement of those rules. It is, however, not 
possible to earmark individual posts for officers of a 
particular community. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) It is not clear which Executive Engineers the 
Honourable Member referring to. None of the Executive 
Engineers of the Central Public Works Department who are 
posted in Delhi have, however, become due for promotion 
to the rank of Superintending Engineer. 

(d) and (e) The posts of Superintending Engineer are 
Selection Posts and appointments to these are made purely 
on the basis of merit. In filling these posts the claims of all 
eligible Executive Engineers are considered and the officer 
who is considered to be most suitable is appointed. The case 
of the I. S. E. Muslim Officer mentioned by the Honourable 
Member was also duly considered. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


978 


978 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


393 


* Grant of Money for Taming River Kosi 
in Bihar 

734. Shri Satya Narayan Sinha: (a) Is the Honourable 
the Labour Member aware that the Governor General, during 
his last tour of Bihar, had flown to the area devastated by 
the vagaries of the river Kosi and that he was so much 
impressed with the pitiable situation obtaining there that 
he decided to move the Central Government for granting an 
adequate amount for taming the river and thus to save the 
lives and properties of the millions of the people concerned ? 
If so, what is being done in that regard ? 

(b) Has any project been made ready ? If not, what steps 
are being taken to expedite the matter which concerns the 
question of life and death for millions of people ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Governor 
General during a recent tour did fly over the area devastated 
by the Kosi floods and did cause a communication to be sent 
to the Labour Department emphasising the importance of 
controlling the river as early as possible. 

(b) The Central Waterways, Irrigation and Navigation 
Commission are conducting the investigations. They 
have with the permission of the government of Nepal 
started aerial and ground surveys and the geological and 
hydrological investigations for the purpose. Investigation is 
being conducted with a view to planning the control of the 
Kosi by means of a storage dam in the Nepal Himalayas. 
Such dam will not only store surplus flood water and the 
large volumes of coarse silt carried by it and so prevent the 
damage at present caused by Kosi floods but it is hoped 
will also provide water for perennial irrigation of an area 
estimated at 3 million in both Nepal and Bihar and also 
will offer opportunities for the generation of cheap hydro- 
electric power. The investigation is being treated as one of 
high priority. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1949. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


979 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 979 

394 


* Loss to Junior Copyholders in Government 
Press, New Delhi 

740. Maulana Zafar Ali Khan: (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state whether it is a fact that 
in the Government of India Press, New Delhi many Junior 
Readers are sustaining a loss of Rs. 10 or Rs. 5 per month 
in their promotion from the post of a Copyholder to that of 
a Junior Reader, and that the rate of increment too is Rs. 5 
per annum in the case of Copyholders whereas Rs. 3 only for 
Junior Readers ? 

(b) What steps do Government propose to take to compensate 
them for their monetary loss and redress the anomaly in the 
existing rates of pay of a Copyholder and a Junior Reader ? 

(c) Is it also a fact that the arrears of the unified scale of 
pay to Copyholders sanctioned in the month of July, 1945, still 
remain unpaid, in spite of there being several representations 
in person ? 

(d) What are the reasons therefor, and do Government 
propose to give any compensation for such delay under the 
Payment of Wages Act ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes, in the 
case of those Copyholders who chose the unified scale of pay 
and were later promoted as Junior Readers. 

(b) The question is under consideration. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Although issued in July 1945 the orders had retrospective 
effect from September 1st 1944. Time had to be allowed to 
the employees concerned to elect for the unified scale. Then 
the pay of those who chose the scale had to be fixed allowing 
each the benefit of past service to the extent of three years. 
The accounts authorities are pre-auditing the bills. Payment 
will be made shortly. The reply to the latter portion of the 
question is in the negative. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1952. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


980 


980 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


395 

* Muslim Gazetted Officers in Estate Office 

741. Khan Bahadur Makhdum Al-Haj Syed Sher Shah 
Jeelani: 

(a) Will the Honourable the Labour Member kindly state the 
existing number of the Gazetted posts in the Estate Office, 
New Delhi ? 

(b) How many out of them are being held by Muslims ? 

(c) Is the Honourable Member aware of the fact that in 1943 
it was decided by the Labour Department in consultation 
with the Home Department that the posts of the Assistant 
Estate Officers will be filled by promotion from amongst 
the highly qualified Superintendents of the Central Public 
Works Department ? If so, does the Honourable Member 
propose to see that the policy once laid down is adhered to ? 

(d) Do Government propose to see that the post now vacant 
which was reserved for a Muslim is under the rules filled 
by another Muslim in replacement ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Five. 

(b) None at present. 

(c) Although prior to the separation of the Estate Office from the 
Central Public Works Department Organisation, the normal method 
of recruitment to the post of Assistant Estate Officer in the office of 
the Chief Engineer was by selection and promotion from among the 
Superintendents in that office, this position has since changed. The 
Estate Office now is not a part of Central Public Works Department 
but is directly under Labour Department. The Superintendents in 
the Chief Engineer’s Office have therefore no claim now as of right 
for promotion to the post of Assistant Estate Officer in the Estate 
Office, but their cases may also be considered on merits when filling 
any of these posts. 

(d) The question as to how the post which is now vacant should 
be filled is still under consideration. 

Mr. Muhammad Nauman : With reference to Part (b) may I 
know how these five posts were filled and were there no Muslims 
who could be considered fit to occupy these posts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I must have notice of 
this question. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1952. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


981 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 981 

396 

* Stoppage of Employment of Forced Labour 

743. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the extent of forced labour in this country, 

(b) what steps, if any, Government propose to take to stop 
the employment of forced labour in this country, 

(c) whether any steps have been taken by Government to 
fix a minimum standard of wages for agricultural and 
industrial labourers in several parts of this country, 
and 

(d) whether Government is proposing to take any steps 
either by legislation or otherwise to see that labour is 
adequately and regularly paid, if so, what, if not, why 
not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) No detailed 
information is available. 

(b) The attention of the Honourable Member is drawn 
to the reply given to Starred Question No. 381 of Professor 
N. G. Ranga, on 20th February 1946. 

(c) Proposals for minimum wage legislation for agricultural 
and industrial labour are under consideration. 

(d) The proposed minimum wage legislation will provide for 
fixing minimum wages and for ensuring payment of wages at 
not less than the rates fixed. 

397 

@ Muslims for Advance Training in 
Electrical Engineering 

747. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state — 

(a) the number of Electrical Engineers selected by the Electrical 
Commissioner on behalf of the Labour Department and deputed 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1955. 
@ Ibid., p. 1957. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


982 


982 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
overseas for advance training in the Electrical Engineering last year, 

(b) the number of Muslims thus selected, 

(c) if it is a fact that this selection was made without the 
publicity being given through the Press, if so, why, and 

(d) if the Muslim quota has not been kept up in the last batch, 
whether the Honourable Member proposes to give an assurance that 
a larger number of Muslims will be included in the next selection ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Selected — 10, 
Deputed 

overseas — 9 

(b) One. 

(c) The Provinces and major States were apprised of the scheme 
for training of Indians abroad and asked to make a preliminary 
selection of suitable candidates. 24 names were put forward by 
them of whom 22 appeared for interview and ten selected. 

There was therefore no necessity to give publicity to the scheme 
in the Press. 

(d) The Provinces and Major States recommended only one 
Muslim for selection and he was selected by Government. As such, 
the latter portion of this part of the question does not arise. 

398 

* Appointments to the Post of 
Administrative Officer, Central P.W.D. 

752. Sardar Mangal Singh: Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state — 

(a) the number of persons who have sucessively held the 
post of Administrative Officer, Central Public Works 
Department so far, 

(b) to which community each one belonged, 

(c) whether it is a fact that no Sikh or a Hindu has so far 
been appointed to this post, if so, why, and 

(d) if he proposes to consider the advisability of appointing 
a Sikh to the post which is now lying vacant, if not, why 
not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Four. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March, 1946, p. 1959. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


983 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 983 

(b) The communities to which the Officers belonged were as 
follows — 

(1) Anglo-Indian 

(2) Muslim. 

(3) Anglo-Indian 

(4) Muslim. 

(c) Yes. The orders regarding communal representation in the 
public services are not applied singly to the post of Administrative 
Officer but to all Class I posts in the Central P.W.D. taken 
together. It is, therefore, not possible to ensure that the post 
of Administrative Officer is filled by a member of a particular 
community. 

(d) The question of filling the post is still under consideration. 

399 

* Application of Payment of Wages Act to 
Jodhpur Railway 

756. Seth Sukhdev : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state — 

(a) whether it is a fact that the provisions of the Payment 
of Wages Act IV of 1936 apply to the portion of the 
Jodhpur Railway running through British India, if 
so, why the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and the 
Supervisor of Railway Labour’s annual reports for three 
years 1941-44., published in the Indian Labour Gazette, 
contain no reference to Jodhpur Railway, and 

(b) if the information in regard to the inspection of the 
British portion of the Jodhpur Railway is available for 
these years whether the Honourable Member proposes 
to lay a statement on the table of the House giving the 
following information for the Jodhpur Railway — 

(1) the number of staff (i) adults, (ii) children, (iii) 
substitutes and (iv) total wages paid to them, 

(2) the number of employees fined and the amount of 
fine recovered, 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March, 1946, p. 1961. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


984 


984 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(3) the number of employees debited with loss or 
damage of goods and the amount so recovered, and 

(4) the number of inspections held and irregularities 
noted ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The answer to 
first part of the question is in the affirmative. The note published 
in the Indian Labour Gazette contains of the Payment of Wages 
Act on Railways. 

(b) (1) to (3) A statement containing the available information 
is placed on the table of the House. 

(4) The information is not readily available. 

Statement showing the staff employed by the Jodhpur Railway 
Administrations in factories and otherwise than in factories in the 
British Section of the Railway according to the returns submitted 
in pursuance of the provisions of Rule 17 of the Payment of 


Wages (Federal Railway) Rules 1938. 


1941-42 

1942-43 

1943-44 

Total number of persons employed — 




Adults 

1901 

1933 

2024 

Children 

Nil 

Nil 

Nil 

Total wages paid 

.. Rs. 5,82,379 

Rs. 6,35,938 

Rs. 6,21,433 

Number of employees fined 

128 

102 

140 

Amount of fine recovered 

Rs. 41 

Rs. 31 

Rs. 48 

Number of employees debited with 
loss or damage of goods. 

1,102 

1,127 

1,303 

Amount recovered for damage 

Rs. 1,287 

Rs. 1,129 

Rs. 1,985 


400 

* Disposal of U. S. Army Chapel in New Delhi 

764. Sri S. T. Adityan : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether the U. S. Army Chapel, Parliament 
Street, New Delhi, is going to be surrendered to Government, if 
so, what Government propose to do with it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, the matter is 
now under consideration. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1971. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


985 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 985 

401 

* Release of Personnel from 
Government Departments 

769. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the total number of men, temporary and 
permanent, who are to be released in 1946 from (i) the War 
Department, including Army, Navy and Air Force (ii) Railways, 
and (iii) other Departments of Government ? 

(b) Is it a fact that some of them have put in exemplary 
service and are being now released ? 

(c) What steps are Government taking for getting them re- 
absorbed in other Departments ? 

(d) What special works do Government propose to set up for 
getting these men re-absorbed ? 

(e) Is it a fact that, simultaneously while Indians from 
various services are being thrown out of work, Britishers are 
being recruited for other services ? 

(f) Have Government considered the desirability of stopping 
such recruitment and taking Indians by giving them an 
opportunity to adapt themselves for other work for which fresh 
recruitment is started ? 

(g) 70 per cent of posts ordinarily filled by direct recruitment 
occuring in Central Government and in the various Provincial 
Governments, and what is the machinery devised by Government 
to make necessary arrangements ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The information 
is not readily available. It is being collected and will be laid on 
the table in due course. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Instructions have been issued requiring Departments 
to arrange for the registration at Employment Exchange of 
discharged personnel and directing them to fill vacancies as far 
as possible through Employment Exchanges. 

(d) Central and Provincial Governments are embarking on 
schemes selected out of the five-year plans with the special object of 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1972. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


986 


986 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

counteracting any tendency to deflation and unemployment. 
These include productive schemes and schemes of economic 
importance which may not be self-financing, e.g. minor irrigation, 
roads, anti-errosion, agricultural measures, forests, etc. The two 
categories will provide inter alia considerable scope for building 
works, training and research, resettlement of ex-servicemen. 
Some other schemes, outside the five-year plan, e.g. public health 
schemes, especially anti-malarial measures, water supply and 
drainage schemes, which will provide a considerable volume of 
employment, are also being taken up. 

(e) No, except in those cases where specialists are required for 
particular appointments or the number is small and is required 
in the public interest. 

(f) Does not arise. 

(g) 70 per cent of posts ordinarily filled by direct recruitment 
occuring between the 20th June 1942 and 31st December 1945, 
have been reserved for ‘war service’ candidates. Information 
regarding proportion of vacancies reserved by various Provincial 
Governments is not readily available. Applications for war 
reserved Vacancies in the superior services have been invited 
from candidates and the last date of the receipt of applications 
was 15th February 1946 in respect of vacancies in non-technical 
services and 1st April 1946 in respect of vacancies in technical 
services. Candidates for technical services will be interviewed 
by the Federal Public Service Commission who will make a 
final selection. Candidates for the non-technical services will 
be first tested by Selection Boards of the type used by the 
War Department for recruiting officers for Commissions and 
subsequently interviewed by the F.P.S.C. who will make a final 
selection. In respect of vacancies in the Subordinate and Inferior 
Service arrangements have been made to receive applications 
from ex-servicemen after they are demobilised. . 

402 

* Conditions of Service of Staff in Viceregal 
Estates Division 

70. Sardar Mangal Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state the detailed conditions of service, i.e., scale of 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1974. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


987 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 987 

pay, other free concessions granted and the place of duty, etc., 
under which the clerical and subordinate staff used to be employed 
in the Viceregal Estates Division at Simla or Delhi prior to the 
14th July 1946 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A statement is laid 
on the table. ( See p. 988). 


403 

* Application of Hours of Employment 
Regulations to Jodhpur Railway 

71. Seth Sukhdev : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the Hours of Employment Regulations apply 
to the Jodhpur Railway portion running through die 
British India, 

(b) if the reply to (a) above be in the affirmative, why no 
reference to it is made in the Conciliation Officer and 
Supervisor of Railway Labour’s report for three years 
1941-44, published in the issue of the Indian Labour 
Gazette for December 1945, and 

(c) whether the Honourable Member will please lay on the 
table of the House a statement showing the following 
information for the British portion of the Jodhpur 
Railway, separately, for three years, 1941-44 — 

(i) the number of staff employed, 

(ii) the number of staff affected by the regulations, 

(iii) the number of staff classed as continuous workers, 

(iv) the number of staff classed as ‘essentially 
intermittent workers’, 

(v) the number of staff excluded, 

(vi) the percentage of staff enjoying calendar day’s rest, 

(vii) the number of inspections held, 

(viii) the number of cases in which the classification was 
challenged by the Labour Inspectorate, 

(ix) the number of doubtful cases which were referred 
to the Labour Department of the Government of 
India for decision, and 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1976. 


( See S. No. 403, reply by Dr. Ambedkar to Q. No. 70) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


988 


988 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



T5 

P T3 

<X> _ <X> 

.a g .a 

4J 

(D 3 d) 

Ph 03 P3 

r-J (N CO 


£ 

I 


more in the Viceregal Estate Division. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


989 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 989 

(x) the number of employees discovered working beyond 
rostered hours (i) habitually and (ii) occasionally ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The answer is 
in the negative. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) Information is not readily available. 


404 


* Statutory Rules re Inspections of Railway 
Contractors’ Labour 

72. Seth Sukhdev : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state : 

(a) whether his attention has been drawn to a remark in the 
report of the Conciliation Officer (Railways) and Supervisor of 
Railway Labour, for the years 1941-44, published in the Indian 
Labour Gazette for November, 1945 to the effect that the Labour 
Inspectorate appointed under the Payment of Wages Act, was 
handicapped in the inspection of Railway Contractor’s Labour 
Establishments in the absence of statutory rules requiring 
contractors to maintain registers of wages, fines and deductions, 
and 

(b) whether it is proposed to amend the statutory rules, if 
so, when, if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The answer is 
in the affirmative, (b) The matter is under consideration. 


405 


@ Factories (Amendment) Bill Presentation of 
the Report of the Select Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I present the Report of the Select Committee on the Bill 
further to amend the Factories Act, 1934. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. Ill of 1946, 6th March 1946, p. 1998. 
@ Ibid., p. 1999. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


990 


990 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


406 


* Housing Conditions of Labourers Employed 
by Central P.W.D. and Building Contractors 
in New Delhi 

867. Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of labourers employed directly under the 
Central Public Works Department and by building 
contractors in New Delhi for the construction of buildings 
in New Delhi and near about, 

(b) if it is a fact that these labourers are housed in miserable 
ill-ventilated hovels, exposed to the vagaries of the 
weather all the time in sun, and rain and cold, and 

(c) if the answer to (b) above is in the affirmative, what 
steps he proposes to take in order to provide them with 
cheap and sanitary housing arrangements, if none, why ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) About 12,000 
labourers are employed directly under the C. P.W.D. whereas the 
number of labourers employed by the building contractors varies 
with the magnitude of the building programme. 

(b) Some of the C. P.W.D. labourers have been allotted 
Government quarters and others have made their own 
arrangements for residential accommodation. 

As regards the labourers employed by the contractors, about 
9,0001ive in their houses in the urban area of Delhi. The remaining 
labourers who come from outside either come to the work daily 
from their villages or are accommodated by the contractors at 
the site of the works in thatched huts which give them a certain 
amount of protection against sun, rain and cold. 

(c) The Government have already considered the question of 
providing permanent accommodation to the labourers employed by 
the contractors and are considering the development of model bustees 
in the villages near Delhi, from which labour comes. Government’s 
scheme for subsidised housing for the poorer sections of the people 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 12th March 1946, p. 2224. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


991 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 991 

should also assist in the provision of better housing for contractors’ 
labourers. 

The question of providing housing facilities to C.P.W.D. 
labourers who have not been provided with Government 
accommodation is under Government’s active consideration. 


407 


* Making Mica a Central Subject 

890. Shri Satya Narayan Sinha : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state whether it is a fact 
that the British Parliament is going to amend the Government 
of India Act in such a way as to make Mica a Central subject? 

(b) If so, will the Honourable Member kindly have it postponed 
till the representative Government is ushered in Bihar, which 
is a question of a few weeks ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A bill has been 
introduced in the British Parliament to amend the Government 
of India Act in such a way as to give the Centre power to 
make laws in regard to certain matters including Mica for the 
transitional period from War to Peace. 

(b) For the long period Government are considering the 
introduction of legislation in this House with reference to Item 
36 of List I of the Government of India Act to bring certain 
aspects of Mica under Central Control. 


408 


@ Grievances of Employees of Government 
Press, Aligarh 

896. Pandit Sri Krishna Dutt Paliwal : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the employees of the Government Press, 
Aligarh, have given notice of strike, if so, what are 
their grievances and demands, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 12th March 1946, p. 2236. 
@ Ibid., p. 2238. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


992 


992 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) if Government intend to give them a minimum living 
wage, if so, when, and how much, 

(c) the amenities provided to them such a bathing facilities, 
outdoor games, education of children, provision of 
quarters and medical aid, 

(d) their working period per week, and whether Government 
propose to reduce these hours to 40 per week, 

(e) if Government propose to supply them foodgrains at 
concession rates similar to those enjoyed by the Delhi 
Press and other Government Departments, and 

(f) whether Government intend to abolish the piece wage 
system and introduce monthly pay on the basis of the 
wages earned by the employees at present ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. The 
grievances are : 

(i) reduction made by the Government of U. P. in the 
rationing of wheat, 

(ii) revision of pay and grades, 

(iii) concessional rates of foodgrains on the lines of concession 
allowed to Government servants in Delhi, 

(iv) abolition of piece rates, 

(v) revision of working hours, and 

(vi) provision of quarters. 

The immediate cause of the notice of a strike is the reduction 
in wheat rationing. 

(b) The question is a general one which is engaging the 
attention of Government. 

(c) No facilities exist at present other than for outdoor games 
and medical attendance. The question of granting other facilities 
is under consideration. 

(d) The weekly working hours are 48. The question whether 
a reduction is advisable is being considered. 

(e) No. The Employees of the Aligarh Press get foodgrains at 
concession rates on the lines of the U. P. Government’s orders. 

(f) The present policy of Government is to substitute gradually 
time scales of pay for both piece rates as opportunities occur. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


993 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 993 

409 

* Certain Promotions of Junior Readers in 
Government of India Presses 

900. Hajee Chowdhury Mohammad Ismail Khan : (a) 

Will the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the 
basis on which Junior Readers in all the Government of India 
Presses are promoted to the post of Senior Readers ? 

(b) Is it a fact that certain departmental employees who passed 
the Readership Examination at an earlier date and entered the 
Junior Reader’s grade earlier have been superseded not only in 
the Junior Reader’s grade but also in the Senior Reader’s grade, 
by those who entered the Junior Reader’s grade later, in any of 
the Government of India Presses ? 

(c) Is it also a fact that certain qualified Copyholders who have 
greater length of total service as Junior Readers at their credit, 
have been declared Junior in the Junior Reader’s grade, to those 
who have lesser length of total service as Junior Readers and 
who failed to qualify in the Readership Examination in which 
they appeared along with the former? 

(d) Is it a fact that Copyholders who have put in greater 
length of total service in copyholder’s posts have been treated 
as Senior ? 

(e) Does the Honourable Member propose to consider the 
desirability of filling up Senior Reader’s posts on the basis of 
total length of service in the Junior Reader’s grade ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Except for the 
post of Head Reader which has been declared a “selection post”, 
the basis for the promotion of Readers from one grade to another 
is seniority cum fitness. 

(b) and (c) Yes, in those cases where Senior Copyholders 
qualified in the readers’ examination before the confirmation as 
reader of their juniors who qualified earlier. The examination 
being a qualifying one, it is the length of service and not the 
date of passing the examination that determines seniority for 
the purpose of appointment as readers. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 12th March 1946, p.2240. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


994 


994 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(d) Yes, upto April 1943, after which seniority is determined 
by the length of continued service. 

(c) As stated in (a) above, this is already being done except 
in certain selection posts of Head Readers in different Presses 
which are filled by selection on merit. 

410 

* Muslim Section Holders and Overseers in 
Government Press, New Delhi 

904. Hajee Chowdhury Muhammad Ismail Khan : (a) 

Will the Honourable the Labour Member please state the total 
number of permanent and temporary posts of Overseers and 
Section holders in the Government of India Press, New Delhi, 
and how many of them are at present held by Muslims ? 

(b) What are the duties and functions of the various 
Overseers in the said Press ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 7 Overseers, 
12 Section holders. Of the seven Overseers’ posts, two are 
held by Muslims. One is vacant. Four out of the 12 posts of 
Section holders are held by Muslims. 

(b) An Overseer is entirely responsible for — 

(i) maintaining quality and quantity of the outturn of 
the operatives working under him, 

(ii) keeping the sections under him fully occupied with 
work, 

(iii) expeditious handling and economical production of 
work, 

(iv) careful scrutiny of all overtime requisitions and 
keeping overtime down to a minimum, and 

(v) ensuring equitable distribution of work among the 
operatives. 

A non-technical Overseer is responsible for strict supervision 
over most secret and confidential work at all stages in the Press. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. Ill of 1946, 12th March 1946, p. 2242. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


995 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 995 

411 


* Officiating Promotion of Rai Sahib C. P. 

Mallik as Superintending Engineer 

907. Dr. Sir Zia Ahmad : (a) With reference to his reply to 
starred question No. 599, dated the 28th February 1946, regarding 
Rai Sahib C. P. Mallik carrying on the work of Superintending 
Engineer will the Honourable the Labour Member please state 
the significance of asking an Executive Engineer to carry on the 
work without appointment ? 

(b) Does the person so invited carry on the duties of his 
substantive appointment as Executive Engineer ? If so, does 
he send his reports as an Executive Engineer to himself as 
Superintending Engineer ? If not, to whom are his reports sent ? 
If not, will the Honourable Member explain the di ff erence between 
appointment and carrying on the work ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) and (b). The 
significance of the arrangement is that officer does not draw 
the pay of a Superintending Engineer but draws only a small 
extra allowance for holding current charge of the routine duties 
of the higher post in addition to his own duties as Executive 
Engineer. His reports as Executive Engineer are submitted to 
the next higher officer, i.e., the Chief Engineer. 

This arrangement has the full sanction of administrative 
Rules and usage. 


412 


@ Efforts to Find Muslims for Certain Posts in 
Administrative Side of Central P.W.D. 

908. Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state whether he has approached a 
person of the Scheduled Class to accept the office of Administrative 
Officer ? If so, who is the person, and what was his reply ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 12th March 1946, p. 2244. 
@76 id. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


996 


996 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Did he make any attempt to find a suitable Muslim ? 

(c) Has the Honourable Member decided to fill up all the posts 
of officers in the Administrative side of the Central Public Works 
Department by Hindus and members of the Scheduled Caste ? If 
not, what steps has he taken to find out suitable officer to fill 
up the post of Administrative Officer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. Does not 
arise. 

(b) Does not arise. 

(c) No decision has been reached. The question of filling the 
post is under consideration. 


413 

* Employment of Unemployed Women 
in Coal Mines 

1008. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether any efforts are made and if so, what they are to 
provide alternate employment to those women who had 
been working in coal mines and who are unemployed 
since the 1st February, 

(b) why Government allow employers to utilise the services 
of contractors to provide some work for some of those 
unemployed women, 

(c) the wages paid to these women by Contractors, and 

(d) why Government refuse to continue the grant to their 
families on the account of these women, of the additional 
half a seer of free rice, half a seer of free milk and 
concessions in purchasing rice and dal, in view of the 
fact that male members of their families are working 
in the mines ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Attention of the 
Honourable Member is invited to the answer given in reply to 
part (b) of starred question No. 466, on the 25th February 1946. 

(b) Contractors are employed for building, sand loading and 
unloading, brick making, etc., and some women excluded from the 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946. 15th March 1946, p. 2458. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


997 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 997 

underground working have been employed on these classes of 
work, which are always let on contract. 

(c) The earnings of women so employed are between 10 to 
12 annas a day excluding half a seer free rice and a bonus of 
two annas for each attendance. 

(d) The additional ration concessions are only given to coal 
mine workers. 

The concession regarding free supply of milk to women 
workers employed underground in coalmines was prescribed as a 
compensatory measure in connection with the removal of ban on 
their employment underground. Consequent on the reimposition 
of the ban from 1st February 1946, the concession has ceased to 
be in force from that date. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : In regard to the question of concession 
in purchasing rice and dal, why should it not be continued now 
in regard to those women who are now to work on the surface 
but who previously used to work underground ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said in my reply 
those privileges were given when they used to work underground. 
As soon as the ban has been re-imposed, there is no justification 
for giving them this compensatory allowance. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : The other day the Secretary to the 
Honourable Member was saying that some protective measures 
were being taken in order to protect the workers from the 
vagaries of these contractors. Are we to understand that from 
being exploited ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not understand 
who said that. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : The Honourable Member’s Secretary, 
Mr. Joshi, said that the contractors are being entertained here 
and through those contractors these women are being employed. 
Are we to understand that sufficient measures are being taken 
by Government to protect these women from being exploited by 
these contractors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : All I can say is 

that if the Honourable Member will put down a specific question, 
I will get an answer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


998 


998 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Diwan Chaman Lall: Has the Government insisted on a fair 
wages clause in the contract ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : So far as my 

information goes, that clause has been inserted in the contracts. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What steps Government are taking 
generally to examine the problem that the contractor may be 
eliminated and the labour should work directly for the employer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That matter is under 
examination. 

Diwan Chaman Lall: My question related to the fair wages 
clause being inserted in the contracts of these women workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That has not been 
done so far, it may be considered. 

414 

* Construction of a Dam Across the 
Laxmanatritha River 

1009. Shri D. P. Karmarkar : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether the construction of a dam across the Laxmanatritha 
river in Coorg is contemplated, and whether the said project 
is being taken up in expectation of irrigation about 30,000 
acres of land, 

(b) whether the Mysore Government have raised objections 
to the said scheme, 

(c) whether the Government of India have been addressed in 
this matter by the Chief Commissioner of Coorg, and 

(d) whether the Government of India have arrived at a decision 
in the mailer, if so, what that decision is, if not, whether 
Government propose to arrive at an early decision to 
enable the Coorg Government to proceed with the speedy 
execution of the project ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes, but the project 
as prepared in 1942 was estimated to irrigate only about 3,000 acres. 

(b) Information is not available, it is being called for. 

(c) and (d) The project was examined but it was found to be 
wanting in certain technical aspects. The Chief Commissioner, Coorg, 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 15th March 1946, p. 2459. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


999 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 999 

was asked to revise the project in the light of the technical 
advice and also to enquire of the neighbouring State whether 
they had any objection to its execution. The revised project has 
not so far been received from the Chief Commissioner, Coorg, 
though it is included in the five year post-war plan of the Coorg 
Administration. 


415 


* Allocation of Expenditure for Employment and 
Resettlement Directorate 

1017. Mr. Vadilal Lallubhai : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state : 

(a) the expenditure allocated for the Employment and 
Resettlement Directorate, separately, as between the 
centre and regional centres, 

(b) the strength of the staff at these different centres, 

(c) the total number of ex-servicemen that have registered 
their names at these centres for employment and 

(d) for how many of these ex-servicemen suitable alternative 
employment has been found by the Directorate ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The question 
is not clear but presumably the Honourable Member wants to 
know the annual estimated expenditure on the Directional and 
Administrative staff of the Directorate-General of Resettlement 
and Employment during the year 1946-47. It is as follows : — 

Rs. 

Headquarter ... 27,14,800 

Regional Centres ... 1,08,32,500 

Total ... 1,35,47,300 


For details reference is invited to the Budget estimates 
for 1946-47. The expenditure on Regional and Sub-Regional 
Employment Exchanges will be shared between the Centre and 
Provinces in the proportion of 60 and 40 respectively. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. TV of 1946, 15th March 1946, p. 2468. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1000 


1000 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) Detailed statements showing the number of posts 
sanctioned for the Central and Regional sections of the 
organisation and the number of posts filled so far are given at 
Appendix I to the Progress Report of the Directorate-General 
of Resettlement and Employment for the period 18th July to 
31st December 1945 a copy of which has been placed in the 
Library of the House. 

(c) The Employment Exchanges are responsible for the 
registration and placement of not only demobilised services 
personnel but also discharged war workers. The total number 
of persons registered at the Employment Exchange and the 
Resettlement and Employment offices up to 31st December 
1945, was 50,658 out of which 29,925 were Ex-Servicemen. It 
may be pointed out in this connection that the second phase 
of demobilisation started only on the 15th November 1945. 
According to the forecast of Army Release nearly 15,00,000 
persons will be demobilised up to the end of March 1947. It 
is difficult at this stage to estimate as how many out of these 
persons will require Resettlement and Employment assistance. 

(d) The total number of persons placed in employment 
up to 31st December 1945 by Employment Exchanges and 
Resettlement and Employment offices was 9,516. Out of these 
2,841 were Ex-Servicemen. 


416 


* Contract Works to Muslims and Non-Muslims 
by Central P.W.D. 

1021. Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly place on the table of the House a 
comparative statement showing the amount of contract works 
given by tenders and by work orders, separately, to Muslim 
and Non-Muslim contractors in the construction Division No. 
Ill New Delhi ‘A’ Division, New Delhi ‘B’ Division, Provincial 
Division and Special Division No. I, of the Central Public Works 
Department in New Delhi, during the last three years by the 
present Executive Engineers, or by their predecessors. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 15th March 1946, p. 2472. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1001 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1001 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for is not readily available and the time and labour involved 
in collecting it would be incommensurate with the value of the 
result. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : May I know from the 
Honourable Member why is he not prepared to reveal this 
information. I have definite information that the contracts given 
to Mussalman in this Branch were very low. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If my Honourable 
friend has the information, I do not know why he is troubling me. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : I am troubling the Honourable 
Member because our cause is being hit and Muslims are being 
ignored by the Honourable Member’s Department, and I want 
to reveal that case on the floor of the House. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have nothing to 
add to the reply I have given. 

Seth Yusuf Abdoola Haroon : Will the Honourable Member 
see his way to place this information on the table of the House 
at a later stage ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot do it. 

Shri Sri Prakasa : Has the Honourable Member lost his 
temper ? 

Mr. President : Order, Order. Next question. 

417 

* Sale by Government of India of Eastern and 
Western Houses in New Delhi 

1131. Seth Govind Das : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state: 

(a) Whether Government have noticed the news in the 
Hindustan Times of the 4th February 1946, that the 
White Hall was putting pressure on the Government 
of India to purchase the Western House and the 
Eastern House on the Curzon Road and Asoka Road, 
respectively, if so, what reply, if any, has been given 
by the Government of India, and 

(b) Whether the Government of India consider that the price 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2689. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1002 


1002 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

obtained for the material would be only a fraction of the purchase 
price ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. In this 
connection I would refer the Honourable Member to my answer 
to parts (a) and (b) of the Honourable Mr. Venkatasubba Reddiar 
short notice question No. 23 of the 8th February, 1946. 

(b) The purchase price has not yet been settled but the price 
of the materials on the demolition of the building will necessarily 
be very small as compared with the price of the building. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : In reply to part (a) the Honourable 
Member said ‘y es - Does that mean that pressure was brought 
to bear from Whitehall ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : What does the answer ‘y es ’ to 
part (a) mean ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It means that I 
have noticed the news in the Hindustan Times. 

Mr. President : Next question. 

418 

* Threatened Strike in Government Press, 

Aligarh 

1134. Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state if he is aware of a notice of 
strike given by the employees of the Government Press, Aligarh ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the employees are being paid Rs. 12, Rs. 14 
and Rs. 15 per month ? 

(c) Is he also aware of their oilier grievances with regard to 
pay, amenities, working hours and supply of rations ? 

(d) What action has the Government of India taken or propose 
to take to meet the demands of the workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes, certain categories of employees. 

(c) Yes. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st Match 1946, p. 2691. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1003 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1003 

(d) The grievances are receiving attention. Attention of the 
Honourable Member is invited in this connection to the reply 
given to the starred question No. 896, on the 12th March, 1946. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : With reference to part (b) of this question, 
how many hundreds of these workers are being paid only 12 or 
14 or 15 rupees per month ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am afraid I have 
not got the facts here. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it one of the proposals of the 
Government to increase the salaries of these people who are so 
low paid ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend knows that the Government has appointed a salaries 
commission which look into this case generally. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Is the Honourable gentleman 
aware of the fact that the University of Aligarh pays a minimum 
salary of Rs. 30 per month to the low paid staff? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I congratulate my 
Honourable friend on that. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : It is no question of congratulation 
to me or condolance to you — this is the minimum standard for 
living — we cannot starve our own employees. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Why is it necessary for the Government 
to wait until that particular commission reports about the salaries 
in general of all employees and servants in the Government of 
India, before they can think of increasing these pitiful salaries 
of 12 and 14 and 15 rupees per month ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government’s 
intention is that they should have a general policy based on some 
uniform principle, and that policy cannot certainly be brought into 
execution unless the matter has been examined by a Commission. 

Seth Govind Das : By what date is the report of this 
Commission bring in ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to say 
but Government propose to expedite this matter. 

Seth Govind Das : By that time these people will be starving. 
Docs Government think that till then these people should go on 
getting this 12 or 14 or 15 rupees per month ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1004 


1004 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Government 
has no such intention. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Will Government consider the 
advisability of giving them some temporary relief until the 
recommendations are received ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, the 
grievances are receiving attention. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : How long will they take to 
decide ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The matter is 
under active consideration. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Is it not a fact that press 
employees have gone on strike in other places ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, that is so but 
they are working elsewhere, I understand. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Will the Honourable Member 
see that temporary relief is granted before they are forced to 
resort to a strike ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I cannot give any 
time limit. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is it not a fact that the words 
“under active consideration” usually indicate that there is no 
time limit, as far as my Honourable friends are concerned ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think so. 

419 

* Surface Work for Women Workers in Coal 

Mines 

1138. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) how many of the twenty thousand women workers 
withdrawn from underground in coal mines have been 
provided with work on the surface; 

(b) whether he will enquire how many of the women withdrawn 
from underground in the State Railway collieries have been fully 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2696. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1005 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1005 

employed on the surface on a permanent basis, and how many 
with six days employment in the week; and 

(c) how many of these women have come to be employed by 
the Welfare Fund mentioned in answer to starred question No. 
466, dated the 25th, February, 1946 and how many by Provincial 
Governments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Exact figures 
are not available but approximately 50 per cent of the women 
workers withdrawn from underground in coal mines have been 
provided with work on surface. Of the remaining 50 per cent 
about half have gone to their villages while some of the remainder 
are sitting down at collieries because they are refusing contract 
work, e.g. coal loading. 

(b) All women withdrawn from underground in the State 
Railways’ Collieries have been fully employed on surface works 
on a permanent basis; 1,060 women employed on six days per 
week basis. 

(c) No women have yet been employed by the Welfare Fund 
but sites are being requisitioned for the establishment of vegetable 
gardens and farms in the Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields and after 
requisition it is intended that women excluded from underground 
works will be employed under Head “Malis” appointed by Welfare 
Fund. The number of women which will be employed by the 
Provincial Governments is not known at present. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : In regard to the women who are obliged 
to stay at home because they do not like to work under the terms 
of contract work, what steps do Government propose to take in 
order to help these women with some employment without the 
mediation of these contractors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot give an 
off hand answer. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Why do Government fail to provide 
work without the mediation of these contractors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This practice has 
been going on for a long time in State railway collieries. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that the Royal Commission 
on Labour reported very strongly against the system of contractors. 
Will the Honourable Member devise some system to control the 
vagaries of these contractors ? Do not Government take urgent steps 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1006 


1006 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to devise some other means of providing employment to these 
women ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I hope we shall be 
able to deal with that matter. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the Honourable Member 
consider the question of submitting this to the Coal Commission 
that is about to tour India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not know 
that I can do so. I can bring the matter to the notice of the 
Department concerned. 


420 

* Ban on Contractors Related to Officers of 
C.P.W.D. 

1143. Shri Satya Narayan Sinha : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member be pleased to state if it is a fact that in the 
Central Public Works Department, orders have been issued that 
contracts for works should not be awarded to any contractor who 
is a close relative of any officer employed in the Department ? 

(b) Is it a fact that near relatives include cousins, brother-in- 
law, etc. and that officer includes for the purpose of this order 
Head Clerks, clerks, draftsmen, surveyors, etc. ? 

(c) Why was the order issued, and how many contractors have 
been put out of the list as a result of this order ? 

(d) Docs any such rule exist in the working of Public Works 
Departments in provinces or other countries or in Departments 
like Military Engineering Service, Railways, Municipal or District 
Boards in India ? 

(e) Was the order issued under directions of the Government 
of India or by the Chief Engineer, Central P.W.D. on his own 
initiative ? 

(f) In view of the obvious hardship on persons being penalised 
for the sin of being related to others working in the Department, 
do Government propose to reconsider the order and withdraw 
it ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2700. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1007 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1007 

(b) The term ‘close relative’ includes also first cousin and 
brother-in-law. 

The term ‘officer’ does not include for the purpose of the order 
non-gazetted staff. 

(c) The object was to ensure greater public confidence in the 
Central Public Works Department. 

Names of 25 contractors have so far been removed from the 
approved list of Contractors. Cases of others are under consideration. 

(d) Enquiries on this matter have not been made and the 
Government of India are not aware whether such rule exists in 
other Departments or Countries. 

(e) By the direction of the Government of India. 

(f) The matter is under the examination of Government. 

421 

* Report on Family Budget Enquiries 

1156. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state when he intends to 
publish reports on the Family Budget Enquiries which started 
nearly three years back ? 

(b) Will the Honourable Member place before the House the 
dates on which the first and the last Family Budget were collected 
in every centre where such enquiries were conducted and state 
why such an extraordinary period was chosen, for the conduct of 
such enquiries ? 

(c) Are Government aware that the whole purpose and results 
of these enquiries have been most seriously vitiated by leaving 
out of account the factor of qualities of items consumed by the 
workers from the questionnaires of the Family Budget Enquiries 
altogether ? 

(d) Will the Honourable Member please state if an Experts 
Committee was appointed to ensure uniformity and correct 
procedure in such Family Budget Enquiries ? If so, how many 
times did it meet ? Is it a fact that sampling techniques and other 
important decisions on methods and principles of obtaining and 
compiling data applied in these enquiries, were approved by the 
said Experts Committee either before or after their application ? 
If not, why not ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2710. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1008 


1008 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Reports on 
the Family Budget Enquiries are expected to be completed and 
published by the end of September 1946. 

(b) A statement containing the information required is placed 
on the Table of the House. 

As cost of living index numbers constituted an essential basis 
for adjustment of dearness allowance, which was urgently required 
during the war period and as no reliable data in this respect 
were available, a beginning had to be made without waiting for 
conditions to return to normal. 

(c) The answer is in the negative. 

(d) An Expert’s Committee was appointed to discuss methods 
of preparing cost of living indices. It met once and laid down 
general principles regarding the methods of investigation, which 
were generally followed. 


Statement showing the dates of starting and closing the 
Family Budget Enquiries at the various selected centres 



Name of Centre 

Date of starting the 
collection of budgets 

Date on which the 
work was finished 

I. 

Ajmer (1) 

15-11-43 

15-11-44 

II. 

Bengal (4) — 

1. Howrah & Bally 

28-7-43 

28-7-44 


2. Kharagpur 

28-7-43 

28-7-44 


3. Narayanganj 

28-7-43 

28-7-44 


4. Calcutta 

1-8-44 

317-45 

III. 

Bihar (4) — 

1. Monghyr & Jamalpur 

9-5-44 

31-10-44 


2. Dehri-on-Sone 

1-11-44 

31-1-45 


3. Jamshedpur 

1-2-45 

30-6-45 


4. Jharia 

1-7-45 

25-11-45 

IV. 

Bombay (4) — 
1. Bombay 

22-1-44 

28-2-45 


2. Ahmedabad 

22-1-44 

28-2-45 


3. Sholapur 

22-1-44 

28-2-45 


4. Jalgaon 

22-1-44 

28-2-45 

V. 

C. P. & Berar (2) — 
1. Jubbulpore 

10-4-44 

15-4-45 


2. Akola 

2nd week of July 1944 

15-4-45 

VI. 

Delhi (1) 

13-10-43 

31-10-44 

VII. 

Punjab (3) — 
1 . Lahore 

1-1-44 

30-4-45 


2. Ludhiana 

1-1-44 

30-4-45 


3. Sialkot 

1-1-44 

30-4-45 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1009 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1009 



Name of Centre 

Date of starting the 
collection of budgets 

Date on which the 
work was finished 


VIII Khewra (2)— 


1 . Khewra 

1st week of April 1944 

10-1-45 

2. Dandot & A.C.C.I. 

15-10-44 

10-1-45 

IX Sind (1)— 



1 . Karachi 

1-8-44 

31-7-45 

X Orissa (2) — 



1. Cuttack 

15-12-44 

15-9-45 

2. Berhampur 

15-1244 

15-9-45 

XI U.P. (1)— 



1. Cawnpore 

January 1945 

Enquiries are proceeding. 

XII Assam (3) — 



1 . Tinsukia 

April 1944 

15-10-45 

2. Silchar 

April 19-14 

15-10-45 

3. Gauhati 

April 1944 

15-10-45 


Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will such enquiries be made at least 
in few test cases in regard to agricultural labour? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will bear that in 
mind although I cannot commit myself. 

422 

* Compilation of Unweighted Retail Price Index 

Number 

1155. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the purpose 
behind the compilation of unweighted Retail Price Index Number 
by groups about industrial cities and town of this country 
published in the indian Labour Gazette ? 

(b) Were the items and their qualities constituting the groups 
for which Retail Price Index Numbers are worked out ever made 
known to the public ? If not, why not ? 

(c) Will the Honourable Member place before the House total 
number of items for each group of every centre for which Retail Price 
Index Numbers arc being released by the Labour Department ? In this 
connection, will he also slate what the criterion was for fixing upon 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2708. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1010 


1010 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

items, their qualities and numbers, on which these unweighted 
group index numbers are based ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The Government 
of India decided in 1942 to undertake a scheme for the 
compilation of cost of living index numbers on uniform lines. As 
the preparation of such index numbers was likely to take some 
time, it was felt that retail price data should be available as this 
might be of some value in wage disputes. Government, therefore, 
decided as an interim measure, after consultation with Provincial 
Governments to collect price data for certain selected centres in 
the country and to prepare index numbers based on such data. 

(b) The items constituting the groups are not published. 
There is no particular reason except the desirability of limiting 
space in the Gazette. 

(c) A statement regarding the number of items included 
in each group in the Retail Index Number for each centre is 
placed on the table of the House. The main criteria adopted for 
deciding upon the list were the consumption habits of the class 
of the community concerned and the availability of comparable 
price data. 

Statement showing the number of items included in the 
various groups for each centre for which retail price index 
numbers are being published in the Indian Labour Gazette. 

I— URBAN CENTRES 



Cere- 

als 

Pulses 

Other 
Arti- 
cles of 
food 

All 

food 

Fuel 

& 

Light- 

ing 

Cloth- 

ing 

Miscel- 

laneous 

Total 

1 Ajmer 

7 

5 

15 

27 

3 

9 

2 

11 

2. Hubli 

2 

4 

13 

19 

3 

5 

6 

33 

3. Surat 

... 3 

3 

11 

17 

3 

7 

6 

33 

4. Dohad 

... 3 

3 

12 

18 

3 

6 

4 

31 

5. Akola 

... 3 

3 

14 

20 

4 

8 

6 

38 

6. Delhi 

... 9 

3 

16 

28 

5 

5 

6 

44 

7. Rawalpindi 

4 

3 

16 

23 

3 

5 

5 

36 

8. Amritsar 

4 

3 

15 

23 

3 

6 

4 

36 

9. Ludhiana 

4 

3 

17 

24 

3 

6 

4 

37 

10. Sialkot 

4 

3 

15 

22 

3 

5 

4 

34 

11. Lucknow 

... 9 

3 

10 

22 

3 

9 

7 

41 

12. Agra 

... 9 

3 

10 

22 

3 

9 

7 

41 

13. Bareilly 

... 9 

3 

10 

22 

3 

9 

7 

41 

14. Gauhati \ 

... 3 

4 

19 

26 

3 

6 

7 

42 

15. Tinsukia I 

16. Dehri-on-Sone 

... 5 

3 

11 

19 

4 

3 

6 

32 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1011 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1011 



Cere- 

als 

Pulses 

Other 
Articles 
of food 

All 

food 

Fuel 

& 

Light- 

ing 

Cloth- 

ing* 

Miscel- 

laneous 

Total 

17. Patna 

5 

3 

12 

20 

4 

4 

6 

34 

18. Cutuck 

1 

4 

17 

22 

3 

4 

8 

37 

19. Berhampore 

3 

2 

19 

24 

3 

3 

5 

35 

20. Khewra 

4 

3 

16 

23 

3 

5 

4 

35 

21. Karachi 

4 

2 

16 

22 

4 

4 

2 

32 

22. Benares 

4 

3 

10 

17 

3 

9 

7 

36 

23. Meerut 

24. Howrah 

25. Budge-Budge ... 

26. Kankinara 

27. Narayanganj 

9 

3 

10 

22 

3 

9 

7 

41 

28. Serampore 

29. Gauripore 

30. Kancharapara ... 

31. Kharagpur 

32. Calcutta 

33. Ranigani ... 

4 

4 

16 

24 

5 

5 

7 

41 


* In the Indian Labour Gazette, it has already been stated that due to changes in 
clothing grades, it has not been found possible to work out the index numbers for 
the clothing group. 


II— RURAL CENTRES 




Cere- 

Als 

Other 
Pulses Articles 
of food 

All 

food 

Fuel 

& 

Lighting 

Cloth- 

ing 

Miscel- 

laneous 

Total 

1 . 

Burma 

1 

2 

8 

11 

2 

3 

5 

21 

2. 

Maibang 

1 

2 

10 

13 

2 

6 

5 

26 

3. 

Rajapur 

1 

2 

14 

17 

3 

6 

5 

31 

4. 

Shankargarh . . . 

7 

3 

8 

18 

2 

3 

4 

27 

5. 

Sonaili 

3 

3 

12 

18 

2 

6 

5 

31 

6. 

Multapi 

2 

4 

9 

15 

2 

5 

4 

26 

7. 

Nana 

4 

2 

13 

19 

3 

5 

3 

30 

8. 

Salamatpur 

3 

4 

12 

19 

2 

4 

3 

28 

9. 

Shujabad 

5 

4 

11 

20 

4 

6 

3 

33 

10. 

Gujarkhan 

2 

4 

12 

18 

3 

6 

2 

29 

11. 

Krishna 

2 

2 

14 

18 

2 

6 

4 

30 

12. 

Lakh 

2 

3 

10 

15 

2 

5 

3 

25 

13. 

Malur 

3 

4 

13 

20 

2 

4 

5 

31 

14. 

Muniguda 

2 

3 

13 

18 

2 

4 

4 

28 

15. 

Kudehi 

2 

2 

13 

17 

3 

7 

4 

31 


Prof. N. G. Ranga : Are figures being collected of the actual 
prices being paid by the working classes, or only the prices that 
are supposed to be scheduled to be paid in the retail shops ? 


The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I think if my 
Honourable friend waits there will be an answer to the next 
question by Mr. Ayyangar in which you will find the information 
about family budget. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1012 


1012 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : What information have Government 
collected and kept in their possession of the prices which are 
actually prevailing in the blackmarket in which alone the ordinary 
working class people in towns are able to purchase most of their 
necessities ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think 
Government have any information on blackmarket prices. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will Government collect that information ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That suggestion, I 
must say, does not commend itself to me. 

Mr. President : Order, order. Next question. 

423 

* Alternative Employment to Women Previously Working 
Underground in Mines 

152. Miss Maniben Kara : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) how many women were employed underground in coal 
mines in India before the last day that the ban on the 
employment of women underground in mines was re- 
imposed ; 

(b) how many of the women mentioned in (a) have been given 
alternative employment since the imposition of the ban 
on women working underground; 

(c) the nature of alternative employment provided to them ? 

(d) how their earnings in the new employment compare with 
their earnings while working underground ; 

(e) apart from wages what the other concessions are that they 
have lost as a result of ceasing to work underground; and 

(f) what steps Government, propose to take in order to 
compensate them for their loss of earnings and other 
concessions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) About 20,000. 

(b) No exact figures are available but approximately 50 per cent of 
the women mentioned in (a) have been given alternative employment 
since the re-imposition of ban. Of the remaining 50 per cent, about 


^"Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 21st March 1946, p. 2716. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1013 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1013 

half have gone to their villages while some of the remainder are 
sitting down at colleries because they are refusing contract work 
e.g. coal loading ? 

(c) Loading of coal on surface, loading and unloading of sand 
and removing of overburden in quarries. 

(d) The earnings of women so employed are from ten to 
twelve annas per day (excluding half seer free rice and bonus of 
two annas for each woman) as against twelve annas to fourteen 
annas per day paid to underground workers. 

(e) Women so employed have lost the concession of free supply 
of milk which was granted only by reason of working underground. 

(f) Attention of the Honourable Member is invited to the 
answer given in reply to part (b) of starred question No. 466 on 
the 25th February 1946. 


424 

* Amendment in the Rent Control Orders 
in Delhi 

1239. Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that prior to January, 1944, the 
Rent Control Orders in Delhi permitted a landlord to 
get a tenant ejected if the house was required for his 
own use ; 

(b) whether it is a fact that the above mentioned orders 
were amended in January, 1944, and the revised order 
precluded landlords residing in Delhi from ejecting 
tenants even if the houses were required for their own 
use ; if so, the reasons for the amendment ; 

(c) whether their attention has been drawn to a letter from 
a house-owner in the Hindustan Times of the 22nd 
December, 1945 ; 

(d) whether Government propose to consider the advisability 
of restoring to landlords the right to eject a tenant in 
case they required their houses for their own use ; and 

(e) if it is a fact that house situation has become easier than before 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 27th March 1946, p. 2964. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1014 


1014 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in Delhi and that Government have consequently decided 
to demolish temporary Government building constructed 
during the war? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes; a landlord 
could get a tenant ejected, under the New Delhi House Rent Control 
Order, 1939, only when the Rent Controller was satisfied that the 
house was reasonably and in good faith, required by the landlord. 

(b) Yes ; the expressions ‘reasonably and in good faith’ occurring 
in the Old Clause of the New Delhi House Rent Control Order 1939 
gave unscrupulous landlords an opportunity of forcing tenants to 
pay more than the controlled rents. It was also found necessary 
to debar landlords from evicting tenants of long standing (whose 
presence in Delhi was essential), especially when the landlords 
were already residing in Delhi. Consequently clause 11-A of the 
New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939, was enacted. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) No. Not till the housing position in Delhi improves. 

(e) The answer to the first half of the question is in the negative. 

Government propose to demolish buildings only when they 
are no longer required for any essential purpose, or where it 
is considered essential in the interests of the housing position 
itself that temporary structures should be replaced by permanent 
buildings. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : May I enquire whether Government will 
look into the question: when a tenant rents out to a subtenant, 
even then do Government propose to leave the tenant secure in 
the possession of his house, even when the tenant is profiteering ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall consider that 
question. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : We are not interested in the demolishing 
of these temporary Government buildings. Are these house owners 
or the Government themselves interested in their demolition ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not follow the 
question. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Part (e) of the question says, “If it is a 
fact that the house situation has become easier than before in 
Delhi and that Government have consequently decided to demolish 
temporary Government buildings constructed during the war ?” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1015 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1015 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I did not say that 
Government has decided. I said that the government will not 
demolish temporary buildings unless it is found that they are 
not required for essential purpose. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Are Government considering the 
advisability of renting out these buildings to the local public who 
are in need of housing accommodation as soon as their official 
use is over ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : If they are not 
essential for the purposes of Government and if the public is 
prepared to take them on hire, Government will be pleased to 
consider that. 

Sir Mohammad Yamin Khan : How long is this Rent Control 
Ordinance of June 1944 going to remain in force ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend knows that it will last as long as the emergency lasts. 

Mr. President: Next question. 

425 

* Abolition of Bricks Control Order in Delhi 

1242. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if his attention has been drawn to the news item in 
the Hindustan Times of the 3rd March, 1946, regarding 
revised brick prices ? 

(b) if he is aware of the statement in the budget speech 
of the Honourable the Finance Member regarding the 
immediate necessity of putting up buildings as rapidly 
as possible for housing accommodation and the necessity 
of releasing all controlled materials in this regard ? 

(c) Why the sale of bricks is still controlled, and why it is 
necessary that so long after the cessation of hostilities 
permits should be taken for purchase of bricks in Delhi; 
and 

(d) if he proposes to consider the desirability of 
abolishing all controls in his Department before 
the end of this financial year, that is, 1st April, 
1946, in view of the urgent necessity for additional 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 27th March 1946, p. 2967. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1016 


1016 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

house accommodation for the vastly increased population 
of Delhi and New Delhi, if not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) and (d). Continuance of price control and distribution 
control was considered necessary in order to ensure that the 
price of bricks was maintained at a reasonable level and that 
the disposal of the bricks from the Government and private 
stocks was carried out in an orderly manner. The entire subject 
is, however, now under further consideration. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is not the Honourable Member responsible 
for the building of houses and all these things in the centrally 
administered areas, and if so, will he try to apply the same 
consideration to the other towns in the centrally administered 
areas also ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall bear in 
mind what has been said by my Honourable friend. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : In view of the fact that all control orders 
have been abolished in Bombay, will Government inquire why 
they could not be abolished all over India, and why particularly 
in the centrally administered areas the Honourable Member 
should not now abolish them? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall made 
inquiries. 


426 


* Requisitioned Houses in Qarol Bagh, Delhi 

1258. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state if it is a fact that the undermentioned 
houses in Karol Bagh, Delhi which were requisitioned by 
Government for allotment to Government servants, have been lying 
vacant or unoccupied for a period varying from one to six months ? 


1 . 

15-A/39 

First Floor 

I. 

2. 

15- A/9 

Ground Floor 

I. 

3. 

15- A/9 

Ground Floor 

II. 

4. 

6/73 

First Floor 

III. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 27th March 1946, p. 2977. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1017 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1017 


5. 

6/73 

Ground Floor 

I. 

6. 

24-25 

First Floor 


7. 

No. 19 

Birla Flat 


8. 

53/7 

Ground Floor 

I. 

9. 

15- A/2-3-4 

Ground Floor 

I 

10. 

Birla Building 

Ground Floor 

II. 

11. 

Birla Building 

Ground Floor 

I 

12. 

6/75-76 

First Floor 

VI 

13. 

642 

B.D. 


14. 

25310 

M. C. 


15. 

15-A/39 

Ground Floor 

II 

16. 

15-A/39 

Ground Floor 

I 

17. 

6/75-76 

First Floor 

V 

18. 

Ganesh Bhawan 



19. 

6/64 

Ground Floor 



(b) Is it also a 

fact that most of such houses were 

successively 


allotted, but refused by various allottees, mostly because of lack 
of proper living conditions and privacy ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
showing the position of the requisitioned houses in question is 
placed on the table of the House. 

(b) Some of these houses proved unpopular and were refused 
when offered and were thus lying vacant for some time as shown 
in the statement laid on the table of the House. 

Statement showing the position of the leased houses in question 


Sr. Name of the 
No. House 

1 15-A/39 F.F. I 


2 15 -A/9 G.F. I 


3 15 -A/9 G.F. II 


4 6/73 F.F. II 


Date from which 
lying vacant 


Remarks 


26th June 1945 It was offered to officials on 261h June 1945, 
15th August 1945, 121h November 1945, 
21st November 1945 and 31st January 
1946 but was refused successively by all. 
It has been released from 8th March 1946. 


14th January 1946 The allotment made to the previous allottee 
was cancelled from 14th January 1946. It 
was re-allotted on 28th January 1946 and 
accepted on 7th February 1946. 

1 5th November The house was re-allotted to officials on 20th 
1945 Nov. 1945, 21st Dec. 1945, 28th Jan. 1946 

and 16th Feb. 1946 but was refused by 
all in turn. It has been re-allotted from 
14th March 1946. 


September 1945 The house was offered to different officials 
on 4th Oct. 1945, 26th Oct. 1945 and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4- 10-2013/YS-18-1 1-2013 


1018 


1018 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



Sr. 

No. 

Name of the 
House 

Date from which 
lying vacant 

Remarks 


4th Dec. 1945 but was refused by all. It 
was finally accepted on 3rd Jan. 1946. 


5 6/73 G. F. I 


6 24/26 (Should 

be 22/6) 


7 No. 19 Birla Flat 

8 53/75 G.F. I 


9 15-A/2, 3, 4 G.F. I 


10 Birla Flat G. F. 

II (Represents 
Birla Flat No. 
11 ) 

11 Birla Flat G. F. I 

(Represents 
Birla Flat 
No. 7) 

12 6/75-76 F. F. VI 


13 B. D./642 


14 25310-M.C. 

(should be 
2531 M. C.) 


15 15-A/39 G. F. II 

16 15-A/39 G.F. I 

17 Ganesh Bhawan 

(should be 
R a m e s h 
Bhawan) 

18 6/64 


5th February 
1946 

November 1945 

January 1946 
23rd Dec. 1945 

7th Dec. 1945 
31st January 1946 

31st January 1946 

20th January 
1946 

January 1946 
18th August 1945 

3rd July 1945 
9th Aug. 1944 
28th Feb. 1946 

28th Feb. 1946 


The allottee was declared ineligible from 
getting Government accommodation and 
he vacated the house on 5th Feb. 1946. 
It was re-allotted on 22nd Feb. 1946. 

The house was offered to different officials 
on 19th Oct. 1945, 26th Nov. 1945, 21st 
Dec. 1945 and 28th Jan. 1946 but was 
refused by each allottee. It was finally 
accepted on 16th Feb. 1946 and has 
been occupied by the allottee. 

Reserved for casual visitors. 

Surrendered by the previous allottee on 
23rd Dec. 1945. It was re-allotted on 
28th Dec. 1945 and accepted on 3rd 
Jan. 1946. 

It was offered on 30th Jan. 1946 and 16th 
Feb. 1946 but was refused. It has been 
re-allotted from 14th March, 1946. 

The house stands allotted to an Officer 
who is in occupation of flat No. 22 by 
mutual exchange. He has been asked 
to shift to his flat. 

This flat was occupied by mutual exchange 
by the allottee of Hutment No. 164. He 
has been asked to vacate the Hutment 
and to go to his flat. 

The house was vacated by the previous 
allottee on 20th January 1946 due to 
resignation. It has been re-allotted from 
4th March 1946. 

Vacated by the previous allottee in Jan. 
1946. It has been recommended for 
release. 

This house was offered to officials on 26th 
June 1945, 15th August 1945, 131h Sept. 

1945, 19th Oct. 1945, 261h Nov. 1945 and 
21st Dec. 1945, but was refused by all 
in turn. It has been released from 15th 
March, 1946. 

Both these sets proved unpopular and were 
refused when offered. 

These sets were released from 8th March 

1946. 

Fell vacant due to the allottee being 
declared ineligible for Government 
accommodation. The house has been 
realloted from 4th March, 1946. 

The house has been allotted elsewhere from 
4th March. 1946. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1019 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1019 

427 

* Requisitioned Houses in Qarol Bagh, Delhi 

1259. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state if Government are aware 
that in most cases where the requisitioned houses in Karol 
Bagh, Delhi, were accepted by the allottees, they were sub- 
let by the respective allottees, on black-market rents to the 
general public who were driven to pay high rents on account 
of grave shortage of living accommodation in Delhi ? 

(b) Are Government also aware that this practice of sub- 
letting is so prevalent that on an enquiry by the Estate 
Office, three flats out of four in house No. 6 / 73 in Karol 
Bagh, were found to be sub-let ? 

(c) Is it a fact that most of the unoccupied houses in 
Karol bagh are being utilised by the local staff of the Central 
Public Works Department for their private ends ? 

(d) In view of these facts, do Government propose to 
consider the advisability of terminating the lease of the 
houses referred to in part (a) of the preceding question to 
save them from black market transactions and misuse and 
making them available to the needy general public among 
whom many are Government employees on the waiting list 
for Government accommodation ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. 

(b) It is a fact that two flats out of the four in house 
No. 6/73 Karol Bagh were found to have been sub-let, but 
it does not follow from this one case, that sub-letting is 
widely prevalent. 

(c) No. 

(d) Government have already de-requisitioned a few 
houses in the Karol Bagh area, and have always under their 
examination the de-requisitioning of houses not required by 
them or which they are unable to utilise. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 1259. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1020 


1020 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


428 

* Strike in Indian School of Mines 

1265. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state whether 
there has been a strike in the Indian School of Mines ? 

(b) Has the strike ended ? 

(c) Is it a fact that recently a deputation of the students 
waited upon the Honourable Member ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the graduates of the Indian School of 
Mines are not permitted by the Coal Mines Regulations to hold 
any responsible position in coal mines ? 

(e) Will Government consider the advisability of amending the 
Coal Mines Regulation so as to make the diploma of the Indian 
School of Mines equivalent to the Second Class Mine Manager’s 
Certificate of competency subject to the holder obtaining practical 
experience in coal mines for a further period of one year ? If 
not, why not ? 

(f) What steps do government propose to take to remedy the 
grievances of the students ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: (a) Yes. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Yes. The certificate or diploma holders of the Indian 
School of Mines must secure a Second Class or First Class 
Colliery manager’s certificate before they can be appointed to a 
responsible position in a coal mine. 

(e) and (f). The matter is under consideration. Government 
are considering the extent to which the regulations under the 
Mines Act can be altered to give some weightage under those 
Regulations to the Diploma of the School of mines, but they do not 
consider that it is possible to treat that diploma as a substitute 
for the Second Class mine manager’s certificate granted under 
those regulations. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : When Government are responsible for both 
certificates as well as diploma, what is it that prevents the Government 
of India to see that diploma holders are given training which will be 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 2981. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1021 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1021 

considered equivalent to the training or efficiency which certificate 
holders are expected to possess ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have discovered in 
my examination of the subject that there are certain anomalies 
and I am taking steps to rectify them. 

429 

* United States Army Chapel, New Delhi 

1268. Sri S. T. Adityan : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state whether it is a fact that the United States 
Army Chapel, New Delhi, is proposed to be converted for secular 
purposes ? 

(b) What are the names of applicants who have offered to 
purchase this Chapel ? 

(c) Are Government aware that it would the religious 
susceptibilities of a large section of Christians if a Church 
is converted for any other use except religious worship in a 
Christian form ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The matter is 
under consideration. 

(b) The Government have not received any offer for the 
purchase of this Chapel. 

(c) It is understood that the Chapel has not been consecrated 
and its use for purpose other than religious worship in a Christian 
form should not therefore wound the religious susceptibilities of 
a large section of Christians. 


430 

@ Thorium and Uranium Deposits in India 

1276. Diwan Chaman Lall : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether there are, and if so, to what 
extent, Thorium and Uranium deposits anywhere in India ? What 
steps are being taken to exploit the existing resources ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No deposit of 
economic value has yet been found. 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 27th March 1946, p. 2985. 
@Ibid., p. 2987. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1022 


1022 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The mineral monazite (one of the Thorium bearing minerals) 
does occur along the southern coast line of India notably on the 
Travancore coast. 


431 

* Import of Typewriters 

1279. Mr. Manu Subedar : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please slate how many typewriting machines have been 
imported in India since the 1st of April, 1940 ? 

(b) How many of these have been released for the Civil 
population and in which Provinces, and by what test ? 

(c) Is it a fact that there is a great shortage in India of 
these machines and that business firms are put to very great 
incovenicnce ? 

(d) What steps have Government taken in order to increase 
the availability of these machines ? 

(e) Did this constitute one of the articles, about which the 
Hydari Mission negotiated ? 

(f) What is the general position about the availability of 
typewriting machines, and what is the forecast of Government 
during the next twelve months ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) About 76,000 
up to December 1945. 

(b) From April 1940 to October 1943 — information not available. 

From October 1943 to the end of 1945 — about 2950. 

The test by which releases were made was one of essentiality. 
These releases were made to commercial and industrial concerns, 
public utilities, educational institutions, professional people and 
businessmen and preference was given to war industries or 
agencies engaged in work connected with the war effort. 

(c) Yes, there has been a great shortage of typewriters in India. 

(d) Since the end of the war, typewriters for public use 
are being imported through commercial chanels as in pre- 
war days. Government have impressed upon the various 
importing firms the desirability of importing typewriters in 
as large a number as possible. The firms have been invited 
to come up for Government assistance, if necessary, after 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 2988. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1023 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1023 

ascertaining the supplying capacity of their principals in America. 
Import licences for large quantities of typewriters have been 
issued. For the period July to December 1945 alone, licences 
for import from U.S.A. were issued for 11,717 typewriters. The 
acute shortage of typewriters in India was also brought to the 
notice of the American authorities in August last and they were 
requested to accord high priority to the releases of at least 15,000 
typewriters for shipment to India by the end of June 1946. 

(e) No. 

(f) Only 4,400 typewriters (excluding Hermes “Baby” 
typewriters from Switzerland which are unsuitable for regular 
office work) were imported into this country during the six 
months from September 1945 to February 1946 against India’s 
minimum yearly requirements of 15,500 machines. The present 
position is, therefore, unsatisfactory but some improvement is 
expected during the next twelve months. 


432 

* Contract Works given by Horticultural Division 
Central P. W. D., New Delhi 

1381. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly place on the table of the House a 
comparative statement showing the amount of contract works 
given by (i) tenders and (ii) work orders, separately, to Muslims, 
Hindus and Scheduled Caste Contractors in the Horticultural 
Division of the Central P. W. D., New Delhi, during the period 
from 1st November, 1943, to the 28th February 1946, by the 
present Superintendent, Horticultural Operations, New Delhi? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for is not readily available and the time and labour involved 
in collecting it would be incommensurate with the value of the 
result. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : What are the reasons why the 
information is not readily available ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It is not available 
in the form in which my Honourable friend wants it. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 19-16, p. 3133. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1024 


1024 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is any effort being made to give additional 
opportunities for scheduled caste contractors to have their share ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They can get their 
share in accordance with the rules laid down. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : There are only very few from the 
scheduled castes, because they are so poor. 


433 

* Muslim Horticultural Subordinates in 
Central P. W. D. 

1382. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state if it is a fact that three B. Sc. 
Muslims were appointed in the Central P.W.D. as Horticultural 
Subordinates on the 28th February 1945, 19th March 1945, and 
23rd May 1945, but they were not given charge of Sections till 
the 28th November 1945 ? 

(b) On what duties were they put during the intervening 
period ? 

(c) If they were not required for specific work expected of 
them, why has public money to the amount of Rs. 5,000 been 
wasted in this way, who is responsible for that and what action 
do Government propose to take against the officer concerned ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) and (c) As the men were fresh from college and had no 
practical experience, they were given preliminary training as 
probationers before being placed in formal charge of sections. 


434 

@ Scales of Pay and Increments to Chowdhries 
and Assistant Chowdhries in 
Horticulture Division 

1383. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the honourable the Labour 
Member kindly state the scales of pay and increments allowed to 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3133. 
@ Ibid,., p. 3134. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1025 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1025 

Chowdhries and Assistant Chowdhries in the Horticulture 
Division ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The scales of pay 
with rates of increments are as follows : 

Chowdhries — Rs. 20 — 1 — 35 — 2 — 55 (for old entrants). 

Rs. 25 — 1 — 45 (for new entrants). 

Assistant Chowdhries — Rs. 20 — 1/2 — 30 (for old and new 
entrants). 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : What is the particular post of a 
Chowdhri ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A sort of head mali. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Do Government expect a Chowdhri 
to live on Rs. 20 a month in the present day living conditions ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They get dearness 
allowance also. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What do they get ? Rs. 14 or Rs. 8 ? 
How much ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not got the 

information with me. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Will the Government go into the 
question as to whether industrial class Government employees 
can really exist on the pay they are getting ? 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : How much are the malis paid ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 

435 

* Appointments Made by Superintendent Horticultural 
Operations, Central P. W. D. 

384. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member kindly state, communitywise, viz., Hindus, 
Muslims, Other Minority Communities and Scheduled Castes, 
the number of persons appointed by the present Superintendent, 
Horticultural Operations, Central P. W. D., New Delhi, from 
the 1st November, 1943, to the 28th February, 1946, as clerks, 
chowdhries, assistant chowdhries, lorry drivers, fitters, time- 
keepers and mechanies ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central). Vol. IV of 1946,29th March 1946, p. 3135. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1026 


1026 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A statement is 
laid on the table. 


Statement showing the number of persons appointed by the 
Superintendent, Horticultural Operations, New Delhi from 
1st November 1943 to 28th February 1946 



Hindus 

Muslims 

Schedule 

Castes 

Other 

Minority 

Community 

Clerks 


9 

2 


1 

Chowdhries 



1 



Assistant Chowdhries 


1 




Lorry Drivers 


2 




Fitters 


2 

1 



Time-Keepers 


1 

1 



Mechanies 


1 





436 

* Muslim Officers in Labour Department 

1385. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state if it is a fact that in the 
Labour Department the Secretary, Joint Secretary and the 
Deputy Secretary are all Hindus ? Does the Honourable Member 
propose to appoint a Muslim Officer in charge of the staff in 
that Department ? If not, why not ? 

(b) How many subordinates in the Central Public Works 
Department were promoted as Sub-Divisional Officers during 
the last five years ? Are there any Muslims ? If so, how many, 
and in what proportion ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) No. The Secretary 
is a European and there are two Muslims, one ex-officio Joint 
Secretary and one Deputy Secretary. These two officers also deal 
with staff questions. The latter part of the question does not arise. 

(b) During the last five years 385 subordinates were promoted 

as S.D.Os out of which 56 were Muslims. This works out 

to 14.5 per cent. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3135. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1027 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1027 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : When will the Honourable Member 
consider the appointment of an Indian Secretary to this 
Department, in view of the fact that for a number of years past, 
there has been no Indian Secretary in this Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : This is a matter 
which rests with the Selection Committee. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Who selects the Secretaries of 
Departments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is there a selection committee which 
deals with this question ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : There is a committee 
to which the matter must be referred and the selection is made 
only from an approved list. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Does it mean that the Honourable 
Member has no hand in the appointment ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not until there is 
a vacancy, I am sure. 


437 

* Seniority of Certain Officers for Purposes of 
Allotment of Government Residences 

1389. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour member be pleased to state if it is a fact 
that during the period of emergency certain offices of the Central 
Government (Secretariat and Attached Offices) were moved from 
Delhi/Simla to outstations, for want of office accommodation ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the staff on return with the offices have 
not been allowed to count their previous service for purposes of 
entitlement to Government quarters on the ground that they 
moved to a station other than Delhi/Simla and that in their cases 
their seniority for entitlement to accommodation was reckoned 
from the date of subsequent arrival at Delhi ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Secretariat Staff working at Calcutta 
have been allowed to count offices in regard to allotment of 
residential accommodation been made ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th Match 1946, p. 3140. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1028 


1028 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(d) If so why has this sort of discrimination between the staff 
of the secretariat and attached Offices in regard to allotment of 
residential accommodation been made ? 

(e) Are Government aware that these people have been 
penalised for no fault of their own in regard to allotment of 
quarters, as they had to move under orders of the labour 
Department in the interest of the State ? 

(f) Do Government propose to consider the desirability of 
restoring the suspended lines in respect of these individuals 
and allot them accommodation according to their date of joining 
offices at Delhi / Simla ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The correct position is as follows : 

Some of the staff were allowed to count their previous service 
if the period of absence from Delhi was not more than one year 
and if they hold liens on Government residences in Delhi. This 
qualifying period was subsequently reduced to a maximum of 
six months. 

(c) Yes, but only the staff posted in a Secretariat Department 
at Calcutta or transferred from a Secretariat Department in 
Delhi/Simla to a Secretariat Department in Calcutta prior to 
April 1st, 1945. 

(d) There has been no discrimination between the staff of the 
Secretariat and attached offices except in the case of Calcutta 
where a Branch Secretariat of a Government of India Department 
was located and transfers between the Headquarters and the 
Branch Secretariat were frequent. With the issue of the revised 
rules, this concession has been withdrawn w.e.f. 1st April, 1945 
and persons transferred to a Secretariat Department at Calcutta 
after this date are not allowed to count their previous service 
for allotment in Delhi. 

(e) Government are aware that some officers have been 
prejudicially affected by the Rules, but this is inevitable in the 
working of Rules designed formally to secure the efficiency of 
administration by reducing movements to a minimum. 

(f) Government do not propose to alter the rules in this respect. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1029 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1029 

438 

* Supply of Material to Sardar Sobha Singh to 
build Quarters in New Delhi 

1390. Sri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : (a) Will the 
Honourable the Labour Member please stale whether it is a fact 
that Sardar Sobha Singh was given material by Government to 
build quarters in New Delhi ? 

(b) What is the cost of the material supplied, and under what 
arrangement ? 

(c) How many flats has he built ? What is the rent of each 
flat, how many of these flats are occupied and how many are 
empty ? 

(d) Are Government granting any subsidy ? If so, in what 
manner and where it is granted to the said Sardar Sobha Singh ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) I presume that 
the Honourable Member refers to the residential flats on the 
junction of Cornwallis Road and Humayun Road, New Delhi, built 
by S. B. Sir Sobha Singh. If so, the reply is in the affirmative. 

(b) The cost of material supplied is about Rs. IV 2 lakhs. The 
contractor is to bear the entire cost of the material supplied to 
him. 

(c) The number of flats so far constructed is 72. There are 
two types of flats ? A two-bed-room flat and a single-bed-room 
flat. The rent of the former has been provisionally fixed at Rs. 
220 p.m. and of the latter at Rs. 175 p.m. Provisional rent has 
been fixed as complete information about the cost of construction 
has not been supplied by the landlord. Out of the 72 flats, 
Government have taken over 65 flats of which 59 are already 
occupied and 6 have been allotted to officers on the waiting list. 

(d) No. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Why have Government a soft corner 
for this prince of contractors Sardar Bahadur Sir Sobha Singh ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not see any 

soft corner here. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946. p. 3141. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1030 


1030 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that they have been 
favouring him in preference to so many other contractors ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Not at all, Sir. 

439 

* Supply of Essentials and Other Facilities to 
Workers in Mica Mines at Hazaribagh 

1409. Sjt. Seth Damodar Swroop : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state : 

(a) if Government are aware that there is no proper 
arrangement of water for the workers in the Mica mines 
at Hazaribagh and that no medical aid is available for 
them in spite of the fact that the area is a well-known 
epidemic place; 

(b) if Government are aware that though the cost of living 
has increased from six to nine times, no dearness or 
any such allowance is being paid to the workers and 
that there is no proper arrangement for sale of rice 
and other foodgrains at control price at a time when 
foodgrains have almost disappeared from the market; 
and 

(c) whether Government are aware that the Sub-Divisional 
Officer of the place has ordered the sale of rice at the 
rate of two seers and four chataks per rupee while the 
control price is three seers and eight chataks per rupee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Water supply 
arrangements are not satisfactory and the medical aid now given 
is not adequate and there is scope for improvement which the 
Government of India hope to undertake shortly by means of 
Legislation. 

(b) So far as Government is aware, in some cases wages have 
been increased to include the dearness allowance while some 
important concerns are paying dearness allowance in addition 
to wages. 

Proper arrangement for sale of rice and other foodgrains at 
controlled price is a matter for the Provincial Government, and 
I would suggest the Honourable Member takes up the matter 
with the Provincial Government. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3157. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1031 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1031 

(c) Here again the matter is for local authorities, and Provincial 
Government. 


440 


* Grievances of Workers in Mica Mines at 
Hazaribagh 

1410. Sjt. Seth Damodar Swroop: Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether Government are aware that 
the money paid by the Joint Mica Mission was never distributed 
amongst the workers in the Mica Mines at Hazaribagh ? 

(b) Are Government aware that the factory rules and 
regulations are mostly disregarded by the Mica Mines Companies 
and that the highly objectionable and illegal practice of deducting 
one anna per rupee from the workers’ wages in the name of 
Dastoori is openly prevalent there ? 

(c) Are Government aware that because of the grievances 
referred to above the Mica Mazdoor Sangh has been forced to 
give a clear notice of strike ; if so, what steps Government are 
intending to take to satisfy the workers’ demands and avert the 
danger of a strike ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) It is not clear 
what the Honourable Member is referring to. If the reference 
is to the additional cost allowance on the price which the Joint 
Mica Mission was paying to the suppliers; I may inform the 
Honourable Member that the distribution of the allowance was 
purely a matter between the employers and the workers. 

(b) The Factories Act and the Payment of Wages Act do not 
apply to Mica Factories. The prevalence of the illegal practice 
referred to by the Honourable Member has been brought to 
Government’s notice. The practice will, I think disappear if the 
Government’s proposal to bring mica under Central Control 
materialises and the Mica Enquiry Committee’s recommendations 
in this respect are implemented. 

(c) Yes. The matter is under investigation. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3157. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1032 


1032 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

441 

* Ban on Giving Works to Contractors Related 
to Employers of Central P.W.D. 

1411. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the circumstances which led 
to the issue of the Labour Department Circular Memo No. M.S. 
21, dated the 14th November, 1944, prohibiting the award of 
works to contractors whose relation are working in officers, 
etc., under the Central Public Works Department ? 

(b) Is he aware that this circular has caused great discontent 
and hardship to many highly reputed and old-established 
contractors ? 

(c) Do similar orders exist in any other Department of 
Government ? If so, will he place a copy of such orders on the 
table of the House ? 

(d) Was Legal Department of the Government of India 
consulted before the Labour Department issued these orders ? 
If so, what was their opinion ? 

(e) Cannot the purpose of the orders be served if a relation 
of a contractor who happens to work in the same Division is 
transferred to some other Division or other station ? If not, 
how ? 

(f) Will he please consider the advisability of cancelling 
these orders ? If not, what are the reasons ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a), (b), (c), (e) 
and (f) The Honourable Member’s attention is invited to the 
reply given to starred question No. 1143, on 21st March, 1946; 

(d) No. It is purely an administrative matter. 

442 

@ Revision of Allotment Rules of 
Government Accommodation 

1412. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state when the present allotment rules regarding 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3158. 
@ Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1033 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1033 

allotment of residences in New Delhi during the war are to be 
revised so as to provide for change of residences within the same 
class or group as was permissible under the former allotment 
rules, since the war is now over? 

(b) Is he aware that some of the allotees who have not been 
fortunate to get quarters according to their choice are, much to 
their dissatisfaction, forced to continue in their present quarters ? 

(c) Is he also aware of the fact that under the existing 
rules, senior officers moving down from Simla have been at a 
disadvantage as compared with the junior officers stationed here 
in securing allotment of quarters ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The question 
of the desirability of the revision of the present allotment rules 
will be taken up shortly, when the question of making provision 
in the rules for change of residences will also be examined. 

(b) That is a matter of opinion. 

(c) Yes, in a few cases senior officers have been at a 
disadvantage but that is no sufficient reason for disturbing a 
large number of officers who are already in occupation of these 
quarters. 


443 


* Loss of Revenue due to Allotment of Lower 
Class Accommodation to Higher Paid Servants 

1413. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the number of officers residing in 
lower type of clerks quarters in New Delhi but who are entitled 
to the allotment of (i) bungalows reserved for officers drawing 
Rs. 600 per mensem or more, (ii) A’ and (iii) ‘B’ class quarters 
intended for officers drawing less than Rs. 600 per mensem ? 

(b) Is he aware of the fact that Government are losing a good 
amount in the shape of rent by not providing these officers with 
the class of accommodation to which they are eligible or even 
lower than that ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3159. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1034 


1034 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) What steps does he propose to take to avoid this loss of 
Government revenue, and are there any proposals to build more 
quarters of the higher class ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) (i) 98, (ii) 57, 
(iii) 138. 

(b) Government are not losing. Officers occupying lower type 
of quarters are paying the maximum rent and no quarters are 
lying vacant. 

(c) Part I — Does not arise. 

Part II. — The matter is under consideration as part of 
the general proposal, for the provision of more residential 
accommodation for officers. 


444 

* Supply of Unfiltered Water in Quarters in 
D.I.Z. and Minto Road Area in New Delhi 

1415. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether there has been any 
proposal for the installation of pipes for the supply of unfiltered 
water in the courtyards of the Orthodox quarters in the D.I.Z. 
and Minto Road areas in New Delhi ? 

(b) Is he aware of the fact that gallons of filtered water are 
being wasted every day in every quarters in the washing of 
floor, W.C., watering of flowers, plants or vegetables and in the 
sprinkling of water on the khus ki tatties during the hot weather? 

(c) In view of the approaching hot weather will he please 
consider advisability of installing, the unfiltered water supply 
in the quarters, in the wider interest of service and economy ? 
If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. A bend and a gland cock are provided on the hydrants 
of unfiltered water at convenient places near these quarters at 
the beginning of every summer season to enable the occupants to 
draw unfiltered water and I do not think that the consumption 
of filtered water for these purposes during the remaining part 
of the year is excessive. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3159. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1035 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1035 

(c) No. The Government have already considered this 
suggestion very carefully in the past and dropped it mainly on 
account of the excessive expenditure involved. 

445 

* Non-Promotion of Certain Qualified Executive 
Engineers, etc., Working as Sub-Divisional 
Officers and Overseers 

1416. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether he is aware that there 
is a shortage of Engineers for filling up the posts of Executive 
Engineers and Superintending Engineers in the Central Public 
Works Department both in the Buildings and Roads and in the 
Electrical Branches ? 

(b) Is he aware that there are many foreign qualified and 
experienced Engineers working as Sub-Divisional Officers and 
even overseers who are not being promoted to hold Divisional 
charge or higher because they are yet junior to unqualified 
subordinate Sub -Divisional Officers and others ? 

(c) Is he also aware that Government are sending students 
for overseas studies to make available foreign qualified hands 
to fill up higher appointments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) There are some foreign qualified Engineers in the Central 
Public Works Department who have not yet been promoted to 
Divisional or higher charges, because they are either still junior 
to other qualified Engineers in the Department or are unfit for 
such promotion. 

(c) Yes. 


446 

@ Non-Promotion of Certain Qualified Executive 
Engineers, etc., Working as Sub-Divisional 
Officers and Overseers 

1417. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : (a) Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please place on the table of the House a list of foreign 


* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3160. 
@ Ibid., p. 3160. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1036 


1036 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

qualified and experienced Sub-Division Officers with full 
qualifications and total experience and length of service of each 
and their respective dale of appointment in the Central Public 
Works Department ? 

(b) What is the number of officers appointed directly as 
Executive Engineers or Superintending Engineers since 1940 ? 

(c) While making appointments mentioned in part (b) were 
the cases of each of the individuals mentioned in reply to part (a) 
considered for such appointments ? If not, what are the reasons ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
is laid on the table. 

(b) Superintending Engineers — Nil. 

Executive and Electrical Engineers — 28, 

(c) With the exception of those mentioned below, the cases 
of all the others were duly considered. 

(1) Mr. B. S. Krishnaswami He is a temporary Subordinate, while 

all the others promoted as Executive 
Engineers are either permanent 
Subordinates or gazetted temporary 
engineers. 

(2) Messrs. A. K. Sen and Nasir Their cases have not yet come up for 

Hussain. consideration as they are not sufficiently 

high up in the seniority list, all those 
so far promoted as Electrical Engineers 
being senior to them. 


(d) No such undertaking can be given, as the officers mentioned 
in the reply to part (a) are either inexperienced or are unfit for 
Dvisional charge. 


List of Foreign Qualified Sub-Divisional Officers in the Central 
Public Works Department. 


Sr. 

No. 

1 

Name 

2 

Date of 
appointment 
in Central 
P.W.D. 

3 

Qualification 

4 

Previous experience, if 
any 

5 



I.— ENGINEERING SIDE 


1. 

Mr. N. N. Mehla 

17-9-1935 

B.A., B.Sc. (Eng.) 
Sheffield A.M.I.E 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1037 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1037 




Date of 



Sr. 

No. 

Name 

appointment 
in Central 

Qualification 

Previous experience, if 
any 



P.W.D. 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

2. 

Mr. Gurbachan 

5-3-1942 

B.Sc. (Civil) 

15 months’ apprentice- 


Singh 


Edinburgh. 

ship in Central Public 
Works Deptt. 12 years 
as Superintendent, 
P.W.D. Kheotri State. 

3. 

Mr. R. R, Tomar 

18-5-1942 

Diploma Holder 
of Bettersca 
Polytechnic. 
London. 


4. 

Mr. B. S. 

13-6-1942 

B.Sc. (Eng.) 



Krishna- swami. 


Rangoon (Burma). 


5. 

Mr. S. V. 

20-7-1942 

B.A., B.Sc. (Hons.) 

1 years’ Previous 


Subbarao 


Civil Engineering, 
(Edin.). 

experience. 

6. 

Mr. A. K. Das 

1-1-1943 

B.Sc., Civil 

Engineering, 

(Edin.). 


7. 

Mr. M. Rahman 

19-4-1943 

B.Sc., (Delhi); 

Has had some 




B.Sc. (Civil), 

experience with a firm 




Durham. 

in England. 

8. 

Mr. Abdul 

11-2-1942 

B.Sc, Civil 



Ghafar 


Engineering 

(Edin.). 


9. 

Mr. Mohd. Shaffi 

15-3-1944 

C. E. (Bristol) 


10. 

Mr. Narinjan 

4-4-1944 

B.Sc. (Civil), 

15 years’ experience in 


Singh Bisarkhi 


Glasgow (Edin.). 

M. E. S., etc. 

11. 

Mr. S. A. Hakim 

30-8-1944 

Casual Overseer; 

15 years’ in Punjab 




C. E. (Shsffield), 

P. W. D. and 8 years’ 




A. M. I. E. 

(Ind.), C. I. S. E. 
(London) 

District Board Service. 



II— ELECTRICAL SIDE 


12. 

Mr. B. K. 

4-5-1942 

Diploma in 

Served for 2 years as 


Mazumdar 


Mech. & Elec. 

Apprentice Engineer 




Engineering 

to Messrs. Crossley 




from Faraday 

Bros., Ltd., Manchester 




House, Electrical 

and Southern Elec. 




Engineering 

Buildings, London. 




College, London. 

3 years’ term with 
the Calcutta Supply 
Corporation. 

13. 

Mr. M. N. Dutt 

23-9-1942 

B.Sc. (Glasgow) 

Has had some previous 
experience. Details not 
available. 

14. 

Mr. A. K. Sen 

13-3-1943 

—Do— 


15. 

Mr. Nasir 

1-5-1945 

B.Sc. AMIEE 



Hussain. 


(London). 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1038 


1038 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


447 


* Terms of Appointment and Conditions of Service 
of Ministerial Staff Appointed by Superintendent 
Viceregal Estates 

1419. Sardar Mangal Singh : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please place on the table of the House a 
sample copy of the terms of appointment and conditions of 
service offered to the ministerial staff appointed directly by 
the Superintendent, Viceregal Estates, for specific duty in 
Simla and or Delhi prior to the 14th July, 1936 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : No particular 
form was prescribed for sending out offers of appointment 
to the staff. A copy of one of the appointment letters issued 
during this period is laid on the table. 

Copy of letter No. 1031-M, dated the 25th February 1920 from the Nukutart 
Secretary to His Excellency the Viceroy, Delhi to the Superintendent, Viceregal 
Estates. 

Your letter No. 279-M, dated the 20th February 1920. 

I sanction the appointment on probation for 6 months of Lala Dewan Chand 
as Store Keeper, Viceregal Estates, Simla, on Rs. 50-5-70, with effect from the 
1st January 1920 vice S. Amir Chand resigned and also authorise the recovery 
from him of Rs. 350 of his security deposit at Rs. 10 a month. 

The agreement bond is returned herewith. 


448 


@ Revision of Allotment Rules of 
Government Residences 

1420. Sardar Mangal Singh : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state whether it is a fact that 
an officer who is transferred from Delhi to Simla or a 
Secretariat Department at Calcutta after the 1st April 1945, 
on re-transfer to Delhi, loses the benefit of his previous 
service, and has to cam his seniority afresh for the purpose 
of allotment of quarters ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3162. 
@ Ibid. p. 3163. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1039 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1039 

(b) What object has been achieved by not giving to such 
officials, seniority from the original date of qualifying posting vis- 
a-vis those who have remained on duly in Delhi, when transfers 
are ordered in the interest of public service? 

(c) As the situation with regard to residential accommodation 
is acute, and the persons affected are those who have put in 
quite a number of years in Government service and have large 
families, does the Honourable Member propose to examine the 
necessity of rescinding this decision ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The objection aimed at was to give relief to relatively junior 
people whose stay in Delhi had been continuous and who had 
suffered more from the rigours of the Delhi housing conditions 
than offices stationed in Simla or Delhi. 

(c) The Rule will be re-examined when the general revision 
of the Allotment Rules is undertaken. 

449 

* Permission to Build more Sugar Factories 
in Certain Canal Irrigated Deccan Area of 
Bombay Province 

1421. Sir. B. S. Hiray : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) whether it is a fact that canals in the Deccan area of 
the Bombay Province were constructed for protective 
purposes ; 

(b) whether it is a fact that the same purpose is served, if 
not, whether Government propose to extend the areas 
under Sugar Factories for sugar cane crop ; 

(c) how many acres of land are irrigated by Canal water 
in this area, and how many of it are utilised by Sugar 
Factories for their purposes ; and 

(d) whether Government propose to allow the construction 
of more Sugar Factories in this area ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
has been called for from the Government of Bombay and will 
be laid on the table of the House in due course. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946, p. 3163. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1040 


1040 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


450 


* Desirability of Extending Concessions 
Enjoyed by Staff of Viceregal Estates, 

Simla, to Staff of Simla Central 
Division of Central P.W.D. 

165. Sardar Mangal Singh : With reference to the reply 
to part (b) of unstarred question No. 136, answered on the 
9th April, 1945, regarding the desirability of extending to the 
ministerial and inferior staff of the Simla Central Division, the 
same concessions as are enjoyed by such staff of the Viceregal 
Estates, Simla, will the Honourable the Labour Member please 
state whether any decision has so far been arrived at ? If so, 
will he please place a copy of the orders issued on the subject 
on the table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A copy of the 
orders embodying the final decision arrived at in the case is 
laid on the table. 

Copy of letter No. E-6, dated the 6th December 1945 from the Assistant Secretary 
to the Government of India, Department of Labour, New Delhi, to the Additional 
Chief Engineer, Central Public Works Department, Western Zone, New Delhi. 
Subject . — Grant of compensatory allowances to the staff of the Simla Central 
Division and of the Rent Control Office of the Central Public Works Department 
at Simla. 

Reference your letter No. 01171-E, dated 7th June, 1944. 
The Governor-General in Council sanctions the grant of 
Compensatory allowances to the non-gazetted staff of the Simla 
Central Division and of the Rent Control Office of the Central 
Public Works Department at Simla at the rates shown below : — 

(a) Non-gazetted Ministerial and Technical staff, other 
than inferior servants — 15 per cent of pay subject to 
a minimum of Rs. 15 (fifteen) and maximum of Rs. 
35 (thirty-five) per mensem. 

(b) Inferior Staff — Rs. 2 (two) per mensem fixed. 

2. These orders will have retrospective effect from the 1st 
July, 1945. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946, 29th March 1946. p. 3165. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1041 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1041 

451 

*Damodar Valley Development Scheme 

1503. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member please state: 

(a) the present stage of the Damodar Valley Development Scheme; 

(b) if the preliminary survey is complete; 

(c) the total amount of cultivated land acquired and to be acquired 
in all the districts concerned ; 

(d) the number of villages in all the districts to be affected; 

(e) the number of people (i) who will be deprived of their homes ; 

(ii) who will be deprived of their lands, and (iii) who will be 
deprived of both their homes and lands ; 

(f) if there is any scheme for the rehabilitation of the people to 
be ejected; 

(g) if he is aware of the feelings of the people of all the localities 
to be affected and also of the resolution of the Bihar Provincial 
Congress Working Committee on the scheme; and 

(h) if he has considered the desirability or otherwise of postponing 
the working of the scheme till popular Governments begin 
functioning in Provinces and at the Centre ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : (a) A premilinary 
investigation is in progress. 

(b) No. 

(c) , (d) and (e). Detailed information on these points is now being 
collected. 

(f) No scheme has yet been finally drawn up but the matter is under 
the active consideration of Government and I can asure the Honourable 
Member that Government will keep prominently in mind the necessity 
of adequate rehabilitation of those dispossessed. 

(g) Government have seen some press communications on this 
subject. 

(h) Only preliminary investigations are now carried out and 
Government do not consider it desirable to postpone them or such action 
as may appear necessary on a consideration of them. 


*Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 3rd April 1946, p. 3422. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1042 


1042 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : What will be the process of the 
rehabilitation of the people ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am unable to make 
any definite statement. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : Will not the Honourable Member keep in 
mind the necessity of all those people, especially the peasants who 
will be ejected, for the grant of alternate pieces of land, where they 
can carry on their agriculture ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I certainly have that 
in mind. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : May I know whether two or 
three years’ notice will be given to these people who will have to 
leave their homes in the acquired area, so that they may build 
their houses in the new places and occupy them when they have 
to vacate their original homes ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I cannot commit myself 
to any particular period, but I am prepared to say that we shall 
certainly give long enough notice. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : May I know, Sir, whether as a part 
of this Damodar Valley development scheme some big embankments 
are to be constructed on rivers in Santal Parganas District ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I am unable to say 
that at this stage. 

Maulana Zafar Ali Khan : Arising out of part (c) of the 
question may I know whether it is a fact that many villagers have 
been turned out of their homes in Assam, their houses have been 
demolished, they have been put to great inconvenience and their 
lands also have been taken away ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I do not see how this 
arises out of this question. 

Mr. President : He says in connection with the scheme. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : That does not affect 
Assam at all. 

Babu Ram Narayan Singh : May I know whether this scheme 
has been finally decided upon ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : Is it not a multi-purpose scheme ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1043 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1043 


452 

*Strike in Indian School of Mine, Dhanbad 

1504. Babu Ram Narayan Singh : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state whether there is a strike in the Indian 
School of Mine at Dhanbad ? If so, why, and has the strike come to 
an end ? If so, how ? 

The Honourable Dr, B.R, Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member’s attention is invited to the reply given to Starred Question 
No. 1265, on 26th March, 1946. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : Have the Government come to any conclusion 
regarding the recognition of the diplomas about which they were 
complaining ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : The matter is under 
consideration. 


453 

@ Number of Indians Employed in International 
Labour Office 

1511. Prof. N.G. Ranga: Will the Honourable the Labour 

Member be pleased to state : 

(a) the number of Indians employed by the I.L.O. at its 
headquarters; 

(b) the total amount spent by the I..L.O. on Indian members of 
the I.L.O. offices and that contributed by the Government 
of India to the I.L.O. 

(c) whether there are any proposals to strengthen the I.L.O. 
office in India and to open its Branches in all the provincial 
capitals to keep the I.L.O. in touch with Provincial 
Governments; 

(d) whether Government are doing any thing to increase India’s 
representation at the I.L.O. headquarters, and if so, with 
what results; and 

(e) whether Government propose to send some members of 
their secretariat to the I.L.O. headquarters for a few months 
in order to enable them to study the Labour Legislation 
and its working countries and be in touch with the I.L.O. 
work ? 

*Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 3rd April 1946, p. 3429. 

@ Ibid., p. 3429. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1044 


1044 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : (a) It is understood 
that three Indians are employed at the International Labour 
Office headquarters. In the Indian Branch of the International 
Labour Office the personnel of which is wholly Indian, there is 
a Senior Officer with a sanctioned strength of seven members 
for 1946. 

(b) The expenditure by the International Labour Organisation 
on Indian members in their various office for 1946 is as follows : 

Headquarters ... ... 60,000 Swiss Francs or 

Rs. 45,900 approximately 

Indian Branches ... ... Rs. 44,640 


India does not directly contribute to the I.L.O. funds but a 
portion of the contribution paid by India to the League of Nations 
is given to the I.L.O. The table below gives the details : 


YEAR 

Total 

Contribution 
to Leage of 
Nations (gold 
francs) 

Portion 
allotted to the 
International 
Labour Office 
(gold francs) 

1943 

893,044,24 

300,731,88 

1944 

815,024,64 

300,960,18 

1945 

1,99,033,39 

895,200 
(Swiss Francs) 

1946 

1,302,938,67 

Not known 


Information obtained from Director, International Labour Office Indian Branch. 


N.B . — Exchange rates : — 

Rs. As. Ps. 

1 gold franc ... 1 15 approximately. 

1 Swiss franc ... 0 12 4 

(c) Government have no information. 

(d) The answer is in the affirmative. 

(i) A few suitable candidates arc being selected by Federal 
Public Service Commission (India) for appointment to 
the International Labour Office ministerial staff at 
Montreal. 

(ii In the higher posts the question of the appointment of an 
Indian as an Assistant Director is under consideration. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1045 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1045 

(c) The question is under consideration. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : What is the rupee value of a gold 
franc ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ainbedkar : It is Rs. 1-1-5. This 
information has been given to us by the International Labour Office 
but I cannot vouch for it. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : With regard to part (c), will Government 
consider the advisability of suggesting to the I.L.O. to open its 
branches in all the Provincial Capitals to keep the I.L.O. in touch 
with Provincial Governments ? 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : I will look into the 
matter. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that the Asiatic countries 
and also the coloured countries are not given adequate representation 
on the governing body of the I.L.O. ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ainbedkar : That is the general 
impression but I cannot exactly say what the situation is. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : What steps do Government propose to take 
to sec that India as wcl! as the other coloured peoples arc given 
adequate representation on the governing body of the I.L.O. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We are always pressing 
the claim of India. . 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : With what result? Has there been any 
improvement at all ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We hope some day 
we will be successful. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that our position on the 
governing body is weaker man it used to be three years ago ? 

The Honourable Dewan Bahadur Sir A. Ramaswami 
Mudaliar : May I answer this question ? My recollection is that 
both on the Government side and on the labour side there has been 
representation for a number of years. Our late colleague in this House, 
Mr. Joshi, was a member of the governing body for well over 10 or 
12 years. Sir Atul Chatterjee was a member of the governing body on 
behalf of the Government and Chairman of the governing body on one 
occasion. The present High Commissioner, Sir Samuel Ranganathan is 
a member of the Governing body and was Chairman of the constitution 
making body of the governing body at the last International 
Labour Conference. At present, I believe, after Mr. Joshi ceased to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1046 


1046 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be a member of the governing body during the last one year, 
there is no representative of the employees from India on the 
governing body. That is the only degeneration of the position, 
if it can be called a degeneration. So far as the Government is 
concerned, the High Commissioner is a member of the governing 
body. I cannot say anything about other coloured peoples but 
certainly India has been throughout a member of the governing 
body both from the Government side and from the employees side. 

Sjt. N. V. Gadgil : Is it not a fact that certain changes have 
been recommended in the constitution of the governing body and 
they have been laid on the table of the House ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : That is a matter 
which will come up for discussion in connection with a Resolution 
I propose to move. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : When is the Honourable Member 
moving it? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In the course of 
this Session. 

Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar : Now that there is a 
proposal to abolish the League of Nations, is there a proposal to 
have direct contribution to the I.L.O. from the Indian exchequer ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say. That 
will be a matter for the I.L.O. to decide. 

454 

* Strikes in Central and Provincial Government 

Presses 

1526. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) for how long the strike in the Government of India 
Press at New Delhi has been going on; 

(b) the grievances and demands of the workers which were 
brought to the notice of Government. 

(c) when these demands were brought before Government 
and what action was taken thereon to satisfy the 
legitimate needs of the workers ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 3rd April 1946, p. 3443. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1047 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1047 

(d) how many workers are now involved in the strike; 

(e) whether it is a fact that this strike has spread to or similar 
strikes are in progress in, other Presses of the Central or 
Provincial Governments; 

(f) whether it is a fact that such a strike is in progress in Bombay, 
vide page 4 of the Hindustan Times, of the 21st March, and 

(g) what steps are being taken by Government to come to a 
settlement with the workers ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The strike lasted for 
19 days from the 6th March to 24th March, 1946. 

(b) The demands were : 

(1) Fixation of a fair living wage at a rate not lower than Rs. 50 

p.m. 

(2) Revision of existing scales of pay on an equal footing in all 
the Government of India Presses. 

(3) Revision of the Contributory Fund Rules so as to bring them 
into line with State Railways Provident Fund and grant of 
gratuity on retirement or death. 

(4) Increase in dearness and war allowances. 

(5) Revision of leave Rules. 

(6) Reduction in working hours from 48 to 40 a week. 

(7) Allowance to the men working in the night shift. 

(8) Increase in the class rates of pieceworkers. 

(9) Casual leave and holidays with pay to pieceworkers. 

(10) Retention of temporary workers. 

(c) and (g) The demands were brought to Government’s notice in 
February last. The last five demands have since been conceded in 
part and the concessions announced. The first five demands, being of 
a general nature affecting all classes of Central Government servants, 
cannot be granted without due consideration and will have to wait the 
recommendations of the Pay Commission in regard to salaried hands. 
Government have also granted the following additional concessions 
to all pressworkers. 

(i) The increased rates of dearness and war allowances would 
be given retrospective effect from the 1st July, 1944 instead 
of from 1st January, 1946 to all those now drawing them. 

(ii) Half the dearness allowance will count as pay for the purpose 
of calculating the amount of pension of all workers in receipt 
of such allowance. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1048 


1048 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(iii) Those classed as inferior will draw pension up to the 
limit of half average pay. 

Government also propose to appoint an Officer on special duty 
to report on the anomalies existing in the pay and conditions of 
service of the various categories of pressworkers in the different 
Government of India Presses, 

(d) 775 industrial workers were involved. 

(e) Yes, to the Government of India Forms Press, Aligarh, the 
employees of which are on strike from the 15th March, 1946. The 
industrial workers of the Government of India Press, Calcutta 
and Forms Press, Calcutta, also gave notice of a strike but it 
has not yet been resorted to. 

(f) Government have no information other than what has 
appeared in the Press. The Press in question is under the 
Provincial Government. 


455 

* Requisitioning of Residential Property in 
New Delhi 

1530. Diwan Chaman Lall : (a) In view of the War 
Department’s declared intention to proceed as fast as possible 
with the de-requisitioning of private residential properly as 
stated in this Flouse in the reply to starred question No. 924 en 
the 131h March, 1946, will the Flonourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state whether the Labour Department intend to 
refrain likewise from requisitioning any more private residential 
property in New Delhi for accommodating the officers of the 
Central Government ? 

(b) Do Government still intend to take possession in New Delhi 
of any residential property (for example No. 4, Ratendone Road) 
which was previously requisitioned by Government but which 
was not actually taken over by them? What are the reasons, if 
any, why it is still considered necessary to obtain possession of 
such requisitioned property ? 

(c) In view of the general de-requisitioning programme, have 
Government considered the advisability of allowing the existing 
tenants of the residential accommodation referred to in part (b) above to 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central) Vol. V of 1946 3rd April 1046 p. 3445. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1049 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1049 

continue in occupation thereof? If so, do Government propose to 
issue early orders accordingly ? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Since the 
cessation of hostilities with Japan, Labour Department have given 
up requisitioning fresh residential property for accommodating 
officers of the Central Government. 

(b) It is not possible to lay down any general rule. Where 
Government have permitted one of their servants to occupy a 
bungalow already requisitioned for the pool, Government must 
have the right to use the bungalow for the pool. No. 4, Ratendone 
Road is a case of this type. 

This is necessary to secure the best utilization of 
accommodation in the pool for Government purposes. 

(c) Each case will have to be decided on its merits from the 
point of view of the best utilization of accommodation in the pool. 

456 

* Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I beg for leave to introduce a Bill to constitute a fund for the 
financing of activities to promote the welfare of labour employed 
in the mica mining industry. 

Mr. President : The question is : 

“That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to constitute a 

fund for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of 

labour employed in the mica mining industry.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


457 

@ Factories (Amendment) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member) : 
Sir, I move : 

“ That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934, as 
reported by the Select Committee, be taken into consideration.” 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 3rd April 1946, p. 3457. 
@ Ibid. p. 3457. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1050 


1050 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I do not think it is necessary at this stage for me to make 
any very lengthy observations on the Bill as it has emerged from 
the Select Committee. The Bill had originally seven clauses. Out 
of the seven clauses it is only four clauses to which the Select 
Committee have made certain amendments. Those amendments 
are largely speaking in the direction of liberalising the original 
provisions contained in the Bill in favour of the workmen. 
Although I find that some of the amendments made in the Select 
Committee to the original draft of the Bill have gone somewhat 
beyond the intentions of the Government, I do not propose to 
raise any objections to the Bill as it has emerged from the Select 
Committee. I am prepared to accept it in the form in which it 
now stands. Sir, I move. 

Mr. Deputy President : Motion moved : 

“That the Bill further to amend the Factories Act, 1934 as 

reported by the Select Committee be taken into consideration." 

458 

* Monthly Grant to Indian 
Federation of Labour 

1632. Shri Satya Narayan Sinha : (a) Has the attention of 
the Honourable the Labour Member been drawn to the report 
published in the Sunday Morning Edition of the National Call, 
dated the 24th March regarding the data available in connection 
with the monthly grant of Rs. 13,000 for labour propaganda to 
the Indian Federation of Labour ? 

(b) Is it a fact that, when the pay of the propagandists had 
decreased, the cost of dissemination of news has proportionately 
increased ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the keeping of the accounts was severely 
criticised by the Auditor- General who has not satisfied with the 
accounting system ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) The statement of accounts of the Indian Federation of Labour 
which placed before the House on 19th March, 1946 shows that 
variations in the expenditure, resulting in decreases under the heading 
relating to the ‘pay of propagandists’ and corresponding increases 
under the heading relating to “dissemination of news” occurred in 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, p. 3645. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1051 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1051 

the months of May, June and July 1945. These variations 
were merely due to changes in the classification of headings of 
expenditure, introduced in April 1945, consequent on the transfer 
of control over the operations of the Labour propaganda scheme 
from the Information and Broadcasting Department to the 
Labour Department, whereby the expenditure on allowances to 
propagandists in charge of labour centres, workers clubs and other 
agencies of news dissemination, which was hitherto shown under 
the heading ‘pay of establishment’ was shown from May 1945 
onwards, under the heading ‘honoraria for news dissemination’. 
The overall expenditure under the heading relating to ‘pay of 
propagandists ’ and ‘ dissemination of news ’ during these months, 
however, remained almost the same as in the preceding months. 

(c) The attention of the Honourable Member is invited to 
my answer to first part of (b) and (d) of question No. 31, asked 
by Mr. Lalchand Navalrai, on 2nd November, 1945, and also to 
para. 68 of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the 
accounts of 1943-44. 

Shri Satya Narayan Sinha : What has happened after 
that ? Will the Honourable Member be pleased to place all these 
accounts before the Public Accounts Committee ? It is a waste of 
public money, I believe. 

The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar : It was considered by 
the Public Accounts Committee, and, as I have said in my reply, 
Honourable Member’s attention is invited to para 68 of the Report 
of the Public Accounts Committee on the accounts of 1943-44. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I ask my Honourable friend as 
to what the position is after 1945 and whether this grant has 
now been discontinued ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It has been 
discontinued. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : What was the position between 1945 
and its discontinuance ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have not got the 

information, but if my Honourable friend will put down a question 
I shall answer it. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Is it a fact that the accounts were 
vetted at the time when this grant was discontinued ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must have notice 
of that. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1052 


1052 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Diwan Chaman Lall : My Honourable friend does not know 
whether they were vetted after that ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I could not tell you. 

Shri Satya Narayan Sinha : Will the Honourable Member look 
into the whole matter? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have. What more 
can I do? 

Mr. Manu Subedar : What is the present amount of the 
expenditure on labour propaganda through Indian Federation of 
Labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I have said, the 
grant has been discontinued. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : May I know when was it discontinued? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Last year, if I mistake 

not. 

Miss Maniben Kara : Is it not true that the accounts were 
submitted by the Indian Federation of Labour according to the 
procedure laid down by the Department of Information and 
Broadcasting at the time that the grant was made ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I believe so. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it not a fact that the Indian Federation 
of Labour did not lay down their procedure for a long time even 
after the grant was made, and the Auditor General look very strong 
objection to the procedure followed by the Department itself? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said in the course 
of my reply, this grant was really administered by the Information 
and Broadcasting Department. It was at a later stage that the 
administration was transferred to the Labour Department. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Why? 

Miss Maniben Kara : Is it not true that prior to May 1944, the 
Federation was asked to dispense with submitting of the vouchers 
and they were asked merely to submit the accounts and also whether 
the Indian Federation of Labour did not do so according to the 
instructions of that Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am unable to say. 
The mailer was administered by another department. 

Miss Maniben Kara : Is it not a fact that the grant has now 
been stopped as a result of the termination of the war? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1053 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1053 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, I said so. 

Prof. N.G. Ranga : How many of those people who were 
formerly engaged as propagandists for ‘dissemination of news’ 
under this grant have come to be absorbed by the Information 
and Broadcasting Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The question ought to 
be put to the Honourable Member for Information and Broadcasting 
Department. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : May I know whether the grant 
terminated before the termination of the war or afterwards ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say exactly. 

Shri Mohan Lai Saksena : Was it not terminated last year 
in April 1945 ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I ask my Honourable friend 
whether the final accounts have been placed before the Public 
Accounts Committee ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : They will be placed 
before the public Accounts Committee in due course I am sure. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is it not a fact that this amount 
of Rs. 30,000 was misused ? It was not used for the purpose for 
which this Government had allotted this money; and that it was 
used for the Honourable Member’s party propaganda. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I must take strong 
objection to the statement made by my Honourable friend that this 
money was spent on party propaganda. You must withdraw that. 

Mr. President : Order, order. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : He did not say that. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes, he did. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Let the Honourable Member deny 
it on the floor of the House and not lose his temper. 

Mr. President : Order, order. Will the Honourable Member 
resume his seat ? The Honourable Member is not in order in saying 
that the Honourable Member for Labour was in temper. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : May I ask, is the Honourable Member 
entitled to lose his temper which he usually does in the House ? 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : The Honourable Member said that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1054 


1054 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

he strongly protests against such questions. Are these parliamentary 
words ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I said I strongly 
protest against the suggestion made by my Honourable friend that 
this money was used for the party to which I belong. I do not belong 
to the Indian Labour Federation. 

Mr. President : I have not been able to understand the objection 
of Dr. Sir Zia Uddin. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Can the Honourable Member say : 
‘I strongly protest against any particular question ?’ 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I ask whether it is a fact that this 
money was utilized for the propaganda of the Indian Federation of 
Labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I cannot say. So far 
as Government information goes, it was used for the purposes for 
which it was granted. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I ask my Honourable friend whether 
it is a fact that honest and decent organisations like the All-India 
Trade Union Congress refused to touch a single penny of such money ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is entitled to have his own opinion with regard to certain 
organisations. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Is it a fact that my Honourable friend 
approached the All-India Trade Union Congress in this respect and 
that the All-India Trade Union Congress refused to touch this money ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : We approched all 
organisations. It was a general circular addressed to all organisations 
that if they care to come and have a scheme for maintaining the 
morale of labour, the Government of India was prepared to help in 
this respect. The Government of India did not invite any particular 
organisation to join this scheme. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Is it a fact that the only organisation 
that did come to my Honourable friend and make use of this money 
was the Indian Federation of Labour ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is the Honourable Member now 
satisfied at any rate by the discussion that has taken place as a result 
of so many supplementary questions, that this money has not been 
properly used and that there is a suspicion. In view of this, will the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1055 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1055 

Honourable Member appoint a non-official auditor to look into the 
accounts of this amount ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not think it is 
necessary to do so. The matter will come before the Public Accounts 
Committee which is the committee appointed by this House. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : May I ask why has the Honourable 

Member delayed placing this matter before the Public Accounts 
Committee.... 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It has not been delayed. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : considering that this expenditure 

ceased last year? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : It has not been 
delayed. It has been put before the Public Accounts Committee. 

Diwan Chaman Lall : Why has it not been put before it so far ? 

Mr. President : Next question. 

459 

* Junior Readers in Government Presses 

1635. Hajee Chowdhury Mohammad Ismail Khan : (a) Will 
the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state the basis 
on which officiating Junior Readers are confirmed in the permanent 
posts of Junior Readers, in all the Government of India Presses ? 

(b) Is it a fact that the nature of the duties and the cadre of 
Copyholders are quite different from those of Junior Readers ? 

(c) Is it a fact that some officiating Junior Readers who entered 
the Junior Reader’s grade earlier, have been declared junior in 
the Junior Reader’s grade to some of the copyholders who failed 
to qualify in the Readership Examination in which they appeared 
along with the former in any Government of India Press ? 

(d) Is it a fact that the order by which the qualified copyholders 
are once allowed to work in the Junior Reader’s posts can be 
altered if they continue to maintain their efficiency to the utmost 
satisfaction ? 

(e) Do Government propose to consider the desirability of giving 
preference in the permanent posts of Junior Readers, to those 
qualified Copyholders who have more length of total service as 
officiating Junior Readers at their credit ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, pp. 3649-50. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1056 


1056 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ainbedkar : (a) Confirmation is 
made according to seniority in the rank of copyholders except, in 
the case of men who have qualified in the reader’s examination in 
the third chance for whom certain reservations have been made. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) Yes, unless the junior copyholder is confirmed earlier. 

(e) No. The present rules have been framed after full consideration. 

1636. * Hajee Chowdhury Mohammad Ismail Khan : (a) Will 

the Honourable the Labour Member be pleased to state whether 
the scale of pay of the New Scale Junior Readers is Rs. 55-3-85 
and that or Copyholders Rs. 45-4-60-EB-5-80 (in the ‘C grade of 
the United Scale), in the Government of India Press, New Delhi ? 

(b) Is it also a fact that anomalies still exist between the pay 
of Junior Readers and that of Copyholders because a permanent 
Junior Reader with four or five year’s service as such at his credit 
is getting Rs. 64 per month only, whereas a temporary Copyholder, 
officiating as a Junior Reader would be getting Rs. 67 per month ? 

(c) Is it a fact that the Manager of the said press had recommended 
‘B’ grade, after a very careful consideration, to Junior Readers, which 
being the only alternative of removing the existing anomalies ? 

(d) Does the Honourable Member propose to sanction ‘B’ grade 
of the unified scale for Junior Readers at an early date for the 
purpose of removing these anomalies? If not, why not ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) A permanent Junior reader on revised scale of pay is entitled 
to Rs. 64 p.m. after four years’ service and to Rs. 67 p.m. after five 
years’ service. In certain cases a temporary Copyholder in the unified 
scale, if appointed as reader is entitled lo Rs. 67 p.m. 

(c) Yes. 

(d) The unified scale is a temporary scale and was intended for 
the clerical staff of the Government of India. It was made specially 
applicable to the Copyholders and Junior Revisers of the Government 
of India Presses. The applicaiton of the ‘B’ Grade of the unified 
scale would create more anomalies and complications as there arc 
several grades of readers on different rates of pay in the various 
Government of India Presses. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, p. 3650. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1057 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1057 

460 

* Uses of Thorium 

1642. Sri M. K. Jinachandran : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member be pleased to state the uses to which Thorium 
could be put militarily ? Is the article capable of being used for 
any civil purpose ? If so, what ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : According to recent 
reports it seems possible that in the chain reactions which led 
to the release of atomic energy a part of the Uranium can be 
replaced by Thorium. Thorium is used in the manufacture of 
incandescent gas mantles, lamps, radio valves, etc. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Where is it to be found in India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Travancore. 

Sri A. Karunakara Menon : Only in Travancore or in any 
other part of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I want notice of that. 

Mr. Manu Subedar : Has Government been approached 
by His Majesty’s Government or by anybody outside India in 
order to control this supply of Thorium, and have Government 
committed themselves to any particular country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no knowledge 
of any such suggestion. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Are Government getting this thing 
examined by their geological experts ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will bear that 
suggestion in mind. 

Sri A. Karunakara Menon : Are they exporting this product 
to any foreign country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I have no 
information. If my Honourable friend wants any information, 
he must give me enough notice. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : Is it being exported? If so, every step 
possible should be taken to stop its export for national security. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I will find out. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, p. 3655. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1058 


1058 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


461 

* Muslims in Central P. W. D. 

1646. Mr. Muhammad Rahmat-UIIah : (a) Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member please state the ratio of Muslim employees in 
the following posts in the Central Public Works Department : — (i) 
Superintending Engineers, (ii) Executive Engineers, (iii) Assistant 
Executive Engineers, (iv) Sub-Divisional Officers, (v) Subordinates, 
(vi) Head Clerks, (vii) Divisional Accountants ? 

(b) Why is the Muslim ratio inadequate in gazetted posts ? 

(c) Why are not the Muslims given promotions on communal 
basis when the appointments are made on communal basis and 
when the ratio is hardly eight per cent ? 

(d) What will be the policy of Government on the confirmation of 
staff of the Central Public Works Department in the near future ? 
What steps will be taken to adjust the ratio in all posts? 

(e) On what basis are the construction and maintenance works 
allotted to Sub -Divisional Officers and Subordinates? If the Muslims 
are deprived of the above works and if the complaint is made to 
the Chief Engineer or the Superintending Engineers, what steps 
do they take to check communalism ? 

(f) Is it a fact that the Store or the Standard Measurement Books 
are allotted to the Muslim Subordinates? Is it a fact that they are 
not entrusted with the construction and the maintenance works in 
the Central Public Works Department in Delhi and outside ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : 

(a) (i) Superintending Enginccrs-6 per cent. 

(ii) Executive Engineers- 17 per cent. 

(iii) Assistant Executive Engineers- 14 per cent. 

(iv) Sub-Divisional Officers- 17 per cent. 

(v) Subordinatcs-22 per cent. 

(vi) Head Clerks-24 per cent. 

(vii) Figures for Divisional Accountants are not readily 
available. 

(b) The posts of Superintending and Executive Engineers are filled by 

promotion and the orders regarding reservation of appointments 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, p. 3656. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1059 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1059 

for minority communities do not apply to cases of promotion. It 
is not, therefore, possible to secure the 25 per cent, quota for 
Muslims in such posts. As regards Assistant Executive Engineers 
who are appointed both by direct recruitment as well as by 
promotion, the shortage of Muslims is due to the refusal of a 
Muslim candidate to accept the offer of appointment which was 
recently made to him. 

(c) As already stated, promotions are not made on communal 
considerations. 

(d) All confirmations of direct recruits and other temporary 
personnel holding no substantive appointments under Government 
will be made with due regard to the requirements of the orders 
regarding reservation of appoinments for minority communities. 
No adjustment of the ratio can, however, be made in the case of 
appointments made by promotion, but in effecting retrenchment, 
if any, the orders regarding observance of the communal 
representation rules will be duly followed. 

(e) Construction and maintenance works are not allotted to 
Sub-Divisional Officers and Subordinates on any communal basis. 

(f) No. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : May I ask, as regards the 
appointment of Superintending Engineer, if the Honourable 
Member said on the floor of the House that one place was vacant 
and he has appointed a person who is not even qualified to carry 
on the work as Superintending Engineer, while the Mussalmans 
who could be appointed as Superintending Engineer were not 
appointed ? I also pointed out to him on the floor of the House 
that the appointment will be made when the Assembly is over 
and we will have to come up with an adjournment motion. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is completely mistaken. I said that the Executive Engineer 
was called upon to do the current duties of the office. No 
appointment has been made. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : You said he can carry on the 
work of this Superintending Engineering. I cannot understand the 
work of this man when he is not carrying on for a day or two, but 
for months together. Is this the efficiency of this Department ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : My Honourable 
friend is entitled to have this opinion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1060 


1060 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: Our opinion is that the entire 
Department is very inefficient. As regards the other lists of 
appointments that he has for posts of Executive Engineer, there is 
not a single Muslim. 

Mr. President: Order, order. Will the Honourable Member put 
his question ? 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: I am putting this question. Is 
it not a fact that in the list now prepared, there is not a single 
appointment for Muslims ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : How does my 
Honourable friend know it ? The list has not come to me. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : The outcome is that not a single 
man is a Muslim. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I do not understand 
how my Honourable friend can make that statement. The Government 
has taken no action. 

Mr. President : Order, order. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : Can the Honourable Member deny 
that there is not a single Muhammadan in the list which he has 
prepared for Superintending Engineer? 

The Honorable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said, I have not 
the list. The file has not been sent to me. My Honourable friend 
will have to wait until the Department has taken action before he 
criticizes. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad: Then it will be too late. 

Mr. President: Order, order. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Is the Honourable Member prepared 
to agree that the percentage of Muslims in these appointments of 
Superintending Engineers and others falls far below the 25 per cent, 
reserved quota for Mussalmans under G. R. Home Department of 
1934, and if so is the Honourable member going to take steps to 
maintain the quota? 

Mr. President: Has not the Honourable Member already 
answered that? 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : No. Sir. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The figures are so 
obvious. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : It means that the Honourable Member 
agrees that the Muslim quota is far below the 25 per cent. May I ask 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1061 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1061 

the Honourable member whether he is prepared to take immediate 
steps to see that the Muslim quota is properly carried out ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member’s attention is invited to my reply to part (c) of the 
question. 

Dr. Sir Zia Uddin Ahmad : If that position is accepted no 
Muslims will ever be appointed. The Honourable Member will 
ask somebody else to carry on the work. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The real complaint 
is against the circular issued by the Home Department and not 
against the Labour Department. 

462 

* Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
I move for leave to introduce a Bill to require employers in 
industrial establishments formally to define conditions of 
employment under them. 

Diwan Chaman Lall (West Punjab : Non-Muhammadan) : 
May I, on a point of order enquire how this Bill can be moved 
when another Bill is being discussed ? Would it not be proper 
to take up this motion after the other Bill has been discussed ? 

Mr. President: We have not started with the discussion 
of the other Bill which was pending before the House. This is 
purely a formal matter. It is more convenient, and so far as I 
know there have been precedents also where a pending matter 
before the House has been postponed and another matter taken 
up. It is purely a matter of procedure and adjustment. 

The question is : 

“ That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to require employers 

in industrial establishments formally to define conditions of 

employments under them.” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 8th April 1946, p. 3667. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1062 


1062 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


463 

* Papers Laid on the Table 

Reports of the Labour Investigation Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I lay on the table a copy each of the following Reports of 
the Labour Investigation Committee: — 

(1) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in the 
Silk Industry in India. 

(2) Report on an Enquiry into conditions of Labour in the 
Cement Industry in India. 

(3) Report on Labour Conditions in Carpet Weaving. 

(4) Report on Labour Conditions in the Iron Ore Industry. 

(5) Report on Labour Conditions in Coir Mats and Matting 
Industry. 

(6) Report on Labour Conditions in the Mica Mining and 
Mica Manufacturing Industry. 

(7) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in 
Dockyards in India. 

(8) Report on Labour Conditions in the Shellac Industry. 

(9) Report on Rickshaw Pullers. 

(10) Report on Labour Conditions in the Rice Mills. 

(11) Report on Labour Conditions in the Glass Industry. 

(12) Report on an enquiry into conditions of Labour in the 
Bidi, Cigar and Cigarette industries. 

(13) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in 
Plantations in India. 

(14) Report on an enquiry into conditions of Labour in the 
Gola Mining Industry in India. 

(15) Report on Labour Conditions in Potteries. 

(16) Report on Labour Conditions in the Chemical Industry. 

(17) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in the 
Manganese Mining Industry in India. 

(18) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in the 
Mineral Oil Industry in India. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 9th April 1946, p. 3744. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1063 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1063 

(19) Report on an Enquiry into Conditions of Labour in the 
Woollen Textile Industry in India. 

(20) Report on an Enquiry into conditions of Labour in the 
Paper Mill Industry in India. 

Sjt. N. V. Gadgil (Bombay Central Division : Non- 
Muhammadan Rural): These papers are not circulated. Will the 
Honourable Member be good enough to supply them to those 
who apply for them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I shall certainly 
consider it, Sir. We have not got sufficient number of copies. 

Mr. President: The present request is to supply copies to 
those only who ask for them. 


464 


* Minimum Wages Bill 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for fixing 
minimum wages in certain employments. 

Mr. President: The question is : 

“ That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for 
fixing minimum wages in certain employments. ” 

The motion was adopted. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Sir, I introduce 
the Bill. 


465 


@ Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill 
Presentation of Report of Select Committee 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (Labour Member): 
Sir, I beg to present the report of the Select Committee on the 
Bill to constitute a fund for the financing of activities to promote 
the welfare of labour employed in the mica mining industry. 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 11th April 1946, p. 3842. 
@ Ibid. p. 3871 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1064 


1064 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


466 

* Deposits of Thorium 

1740. Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer : Will the Honourable the 
Labour member be pleased to state if deposits of thorium which is 
used for the manufacture of atomic energy have been discovered 
in many parts of India ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The Honourable 
Member’s attention is invited to the reply given in this House 
to starred question No. 1276, on 26th March, 1946. 

Mr. Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: Is it a fact that considerable 
deposits of thorium have been found in the Travancore State, 
and, if so, have Government taken any steps to control this in 
the matter of disposal ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is in an Indian 
State and the Government of India have no right to interfere 
in that. 

1743. Sardar Mangal Singh : Will the Honourable the 
Labour Member please state : 

(a) the number of refrigerators purchased by Government 
for installations at the residential buildings at Delhi 
and New Delhi; 

(b) the terms and conditions on which they are let on hire 
to the tenants of those buildings ; 

(c) the particulars of officials of the Estate Office and 
Public Works Department, who are provided with the 
temporarily and permanently; 

(d) whether they are not available for the use of the 
Honourable Members of the central Legislature during 
their occupation of those buildings of official duty in 
connection with Sessions and committees; 

(e) if it is a fact that most of the staff of the office and 
department not in occupation of those buildings are 
provided with them ; and 

(f) if Government propose to make them available for use 
of the Honourable members of the Central Legislature 
by withdrawing them from the staff of that office and 
of that department; if not, why not ? 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 12th April 1946, p. 3873. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1065 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1065 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) 334. 

(b) The terms and conditions of hire are laid down in the 
Rules for the allotment of refrigerators in Delhi and New Delhi, 
a copy of which is placed on the table of the House. 

(c) Only one officer, viz., Additional Chief Engineer, Central 
Public Works Department, has been allotted a refrigerator for 
the Summer Season 1946. 

(d) No. 

(c) No. 

(f) The question does not arise. 

k k k 

Diwan Chaman Lall: With reference to the answer to (d), 
may I ask whether they are not available to members of the 
Assembly. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Under the rules, 
they are not available. 

Mr. Manu Subedar: May I know what has happened to 
the refrigerators which were requisitioned by the Government 
during the war from private individuals ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I want notice. 

467 

* Requisitioning of House No. 42-B, Hanuman Lane, 

New Delhi 

1756. Mr. P. B. Gole : (a) Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state whether house No. 42-B, Hanuman 
Lane, New Delhi, requisitioned by Government is lying vacant 
for a long time ? If so, since when ? Are Government paying the 
rent of the house lying vacant? 

(b) Is it a fact that the house was occupied by Mr. Manoharlal 
Tuli before it was requisitioned by Government ? 

(c) Is it a fact that when the house was vacated by Mr. 
Manoharlal, it was in a damaged condition and, consequently, 
no allottee was prepared to occupy the same ? 

(d) Is it a fact that Government now propose to release the house ? 
* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 121h April 1946, p. 3886. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1066 


1066 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Why was not the house released earlier when nobody was 
prepared to occupy it ? 

(e) What is the approximate date when Government would 
release the house ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) The house 
was allotted to an officer on 15th September, 1945, but as he 
did not occupy it, it has been lying vacant ever since that date. 
Government are paying rent for the period the house has been 
lying vacant. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. 

(d) Yes. The latter part of the question does not arise in view 
of the answer given to part (c) of the question. 

(e) About the 15th April 1946. 

468 

* Application of National Labour Tribunal 
Ordinance to Officers of Merchant Navy 

1757. Miss Maniben Kara : Will the Honourable the Labour 
Member be pleased to state : 

(a) Whether the National Labour Tribunal Ordinance made 
applicable to certified officers on ships of Indian Registry 
in December, 1944, was an emergency measure; 

(b) whether Government consider that the same emergency 
still continues to exist; if so, for what reasons; and 

(c) whether in view of the restriction on the liberties 
of seamen that the Ordinance imposes, Government 
propose to revoke it at an early date, at least as far 
as the officers of the Merchant Navy are concerned ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) No. 

(c) The provisions of the National service (Technical Personnel) 
Ordinance 1940, have been generally relaxed since February 1946, and 
they are not being used to take technical personnel into the national 
service. Control over the movement of technical personnel has also 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 12th April 1946, p. 3887. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1067 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1067 

been relaxed except in the case of key technical staff engaged 
on work of national importance. In the case of ships pilots, 
the provisions of the Ordinance may be invoked to the extent 
necessary to keep them at their posts of duty until the end 
of April 1946, by which date it is hoped to withdraw control 
over their movements unless it is found that the control is still 
necessary in the interests of the quick handling of imported 
foodgrains at ports. It is proposed to withdraw all control over 
the movements of other technical personnel by the end of April, 
1946. 

Miss Maniben Kara : Is the Honourable member aware 
that the Ordinance is being used against the Indian Merchant 
Naval Officers particularly by Indian Companies, that under 
the threat of this Ordinance, the Merchant Navy Officers are 
harassed ? I am not talking of the pilots of the Indian merchant 
Navy. 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am not aware 
of it, but if particular instances are brought to my notice I will 
look into the matter. 

Miss Maniben Kara : Is it not a fact that some appeal was 
made by the Maritime Union of India against the use of this 
Ordinance by Scindia Company (India) ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : I am afraid I 
must have notice of that. 

Mr. President: He wants to have notice. 

469 

*Rates of Supply of Electricity in Delhi, New Delhi, 
Bombay and Calcutta 

1771. Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state: 

(a) the rates of supply of electricity in Delhi and New 
Delhi compared with those in Calcutta and Bombay. 

(b) the reasons why the rates in Delhi and New Delhi 
cannot be brought into line with those in Calcutta or 
Bombay ; and 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 12th April 1946, p. 3897. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1068 


1068 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(c) whether any lowering of rates can be expected in Delhi 
in the near future ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) A statement 
is laid on the table. 

(b) The rates for lighting and fans in Delhi and New Delhi are 
already uniform. The question of removal of the slight difference 
in the rates for power is under consideration. 

The reason for the difference between New Delhi and Delhi 
rates on the one hand and Calcutta or Bombay rates on the 
other is that the Supply undertakings at Bombay and Calcutta, 
having considerably larger loads both domestic and industrial, 
are able to maintain a very much better lead factor than smaller 
undertakings at Delhi and New Delhi. Apart from this, conditions 
vary from place to place and much depends upon the types of 
generating plant used and other facilities connected with such 
plant. 

(c) It is not possible to make any statement on this subject 
at present, but the Honourable member can rest assured that 
the matter is constantly under attention. 

470 

* Constitution of the Delhi Central Electric 
Power Authority 

1772. Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Will the Honourable 
the Labour Member kindly state: 

(a) the constitution of the Delhi Central Electric Power 
Authority Company, Limited; 

(b) if it is a fact that all the members of the Board are 
Europeans with the Exception of one Indian; 

(c) if it is a fact that the Delhi Municipality is represented 
on the Board; 

(d) if it is a fact that the Delhi Municipalty insist on having 
two representatives instead of one; 

(e) if Government propose to take over the Delhi Electric and 
Traction Company, Limited, and if the said Company had a 


Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 12th April 1946, p. 3899. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1069 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1069 

representative on the Board of the Delhi Central Electric Power 
Authority Company, Limited; and 

(f) what objections, if any, Government have got to give 
more representation to the Delhi Municipality by giving it 
the representation enjoyed by the Delhi Electric and Traction 
Company, Limited, when it is taken over in addition to the 
representation already given to it ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Presumably the 
Honourable member refers to the Delhi Central Electric Power 
Authority. Its membership is as follows: 

(1) Governor General in Council; 

(2) Delhi Factories Owners’ Federation; 

(3) Commander, Delhi Independent Brigade Area; 

(4) The Punjab Chamber of Commerce ; 

(5) The Delhi Electric Supply and Traction Company, Ltd., 

(6) New Delhi Municipal Committee. 

(b) Yes. 

(c) No. 

(d) This was the position of the Delhi Municipal Committee 
in 1938 when the Delhi Central Electric Power Authority was 
established. The question has not been raised since. 

(e) Yes. 

(f) As the Delhi Municipal Committee is not a member of the 
Delhi Central Electric Power Authority Limited, the question of 
giving it additional representation does not arise. 

471 

* Dr. Krishnan’s Suggestions re: Mineral 
Resources of India 

1773. Prof. N. G. Ranga : Will the Honourable the Labour 
member be pleased to state : 

(a) if his attention has been drawn to the report of a 
lecture delivered by Dr. M. S. Krishnan to the Geology 
Association of the Presidency College, Madras, on the 14th 
of March, as reported in the Hindu of the 141h March ; 

* Legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. V of 1946, 12th April 1946, p. 3899. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1070 


1070 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(b) What steps are being taken to obtain adequate quantities 
and build up reserves of copper, silver, nickel, platinum, 
tin, mercury, graphite and potash; 

(c) what steps are also being taken to develop and exploit 
hydraulic (electrical) power resources in all those 
Provinces which do not have coal mines within easy 
reach, so as to develop local industries; 

(d) whether any steps are being taken to draw power from 
wind through wind mills and to popularise the use of 
wind mills ; and 

(e) whether Dr. Krishnan’s suggestion of establishing 
“well-equipped laboratories” to “assess the quality and 
quantity of the various minerals” and also his suggestion 
that locally available minerals shall be utilised in 
preference to imports will be fully studied ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : (a) Yes. 

(b) During the war Government had a proposal under 
consideration to build up in India a strategic stock of certain 
important minerals and related substances; but it did not 
materialise. Government are considering a revision of its mineral 
policy and due attention will in that connection be paid to these 
minerals which are in short supply in India. 

(c) Generally speaking steps are being taken by Provincial 
and State Governments to develop and exploit Hydro-Electric 
Power Resources to the maximum extent of technical manpower 
at present available for such investigations. Central Technical 
Power Board is already assisting in certain cases subject to limit 
of its present strength in manpower and will do more when 
adequate technical staff is procured. Government of India are 
fully aware of the necessity for far greater measure of Hydro- 
Electric System development throughout the country than is at 
present being undertaken, particularly in areas which are remote 
from major coal deposits, but they consider that this cannot be 
achieved without a far greater body of experienced technical 
personnel than at present exists and to this end are doing their 
utmost to recruit Specialists Technical personnel on contract. 

(d) No special steps are being taken by Government of India to 
draw power from wind or to popularise use of Wind Mills at present. 
Government is advised that such installations, while useful in selected 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1071 


L. A. DEBATES (CENTRAL) QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 1071 

areas depending on meteorological conditions, are individually 
productive of only extremely small amounts of power and that 
too intermittently. 

(e) The Geological Survey of India has been lately reorganised 
and its laboratory facilities considerably expanded. Further 
expantion in the direction of providing free advice and information 
on mineral and mining matters is being taken up. The 
recently planned National Metallurgical and National Chemical 
Laboratories will be fully equipped to assess the quality of 
Indian minerals and in other ways prove of great assistance in 
the development of mineral industries. Domestic treatment and 
utilisation of India’s minerals and ores, in preference to their 
export in the raw condition, is being considered by Government. A 
number of industrial Panels, instituted since 1944, have collected 
valuable information and data under this head which are being 
studied for the framing of a new Mineral Policy. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : As regards part (c), the Honourable 
Member says they need many more specialists in order to develop 
these hydroelectric power resources. What steps are Government 
taking to get Indians of requisite abilities and qualifications to 
specialise in these directions so that their services may be made 
use of? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : A number of 
Indians have been sent abroad for training in these specialised 
occupations. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : As part of this new scheme of sending 
scholars ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : In addition to them, 
there are also other people who have been sent. 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : With reference to part (d), my Honourable 
friend threw cold water on the suggestion to utilise wind power 
by saying that it could only give intermittent power and nothing 
more. In view of the fact that thousands of peasants are interested 
in these wind-mills, will Government try and look into this 
matter a little more carefully and devise ways by which they 
can possibly assist our peasants and others to draw as much 
power as is possible from wind and thus help them ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : As I said it depends 
upon how much wind there is in any particular area. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1072 


1072 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Prof. N. G. Ranga : There are meteorological experts and it 
ought to be possible for them to work out some plans and see 
how much power can be derived by utilising wind in different 
parts of the country ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : Yes ; we have 
considered that. 


472 

* Demobilised Military Officers in Civil Employ 

214. Seth Sukhdev : Will the Honourable the Labour Member 
be pleased to state how many demobilised military officers have 
been taken in civil employment under the Central Government 
in various Department during the last six months ? 

The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar : The information 
asked for is being collected and will be communicated to the 
Honourable Member when ready. 

••• 


legislative Assembly Debates (Central), Vol. IV of 1946,12th April 1946, p. 2904. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1073 


INDEX 


Abdul Ghani, Maulvi Muhammad : 
586, 587, 620, 627, 628, 630, 676, 
678, 682, 697, 698, 723, 760, 762, 

816, 819,890,919,920,927. 

Abdul Halim Ghuznavi, Sir: 574, 

575, 577, 661-62,803. 

Abdul Quiyum : 248, 251, 252, 263, 
832, 833, 839, 844, 846, 891, 894, 
901, 902, 903, 904, 914. 

Abdul Rahim, Sir : 20, 30, 31, 45, 48, 
59, 62, 67, 68, 69, 82, 83, 85, 86, 
88, 90-95, 98, 119,143, 161, 166, 
167, 168, 271-74,577,578,599, 
620, 653,676, 677, 680, 702, 715, 
716, 735, 786, 787, 788, 789, 815, 

817, 819, 828, 829, 876, 877, 911, 
912, 920, 927. 

Abu Talib: 283. 

Adarkar Prof.: 153, 379. 

—Report of: 277, 373-76, 379. 
Adityan S.T.: 984, 1021. 

Advisory Commiucc on Coal Mines 
Welfare Fund : Meeting of: 169- 
70. 

Aerodromes at Gaya : 595-96. 

Afiab Ali: 158. 

Ahmed E. H. Jaffer: 346-47, 378, 
966, 970, 971, 972, 973, 974, 
975, 976, 1002, 1004, 1006, 1016, 
1019, 1023-27, 1053, 1054, 1060, 
1064. 

Ahmed, Dr. Sir Ziauddin : 67, 147, 
346, 348, 349, 554, 562, 565, 579, 
580, 581, 610, 698, 732, 736, 756, 
757, 775, 776, 782, 789, 796, 829, 
864, 925, 926, 927, 965, 967, 995, 
1003, 1053-54,1059-61. 
Alexander, A. V. : 502, 512, 523. 
Ali Khan, Nawab Siddhiqui : 694, 
695, 696. 

All India Trade Union Workers’ 
Study Camp: 107. 

All India Women’s Conference: 257, 
809. 


Ambedkar Dr. B. R.: 3-10, 446, 455, 
463, 469, 472-73, 476, 479, 482, 
487, 491-92, 499-500, 501, 502, 
509, 512, 519, 545, 549. 

— to Alexander A. V.: 492-99 

— Answers Questions : 551-1072. 
Appointment of: 10. 

— Bevin Boys : 561-63, 569-70, 571. 

— To Cripps-. 447-48. 

— Cripps’ proposals criticised : 
455-62. 

— Demands of Railwaymen’s 
Federation: 312-16. 

— Damodar Valley Scheme : 220-24, 
284-88,317-19. 

— Rehabilitation Plans discussed : 
334-38. 

— Dearness allowance to workers : 
50-52, 578 

— Dhanbad Coalmines visited: 130- 
34. 

— Digwadi Colliery visited : 131 

— Discusses with Viceroy: 473-74. 

— Electric Power : Development of: 
120-28, 226-36. 

— Employment Exchange visited : 
186. 

— Factories (Amendment) Bill : 
201-10, 326-33, 366. 

— French Revolution : 39. 

— Geological Survey of India : 19-20, 
557-61. 

— Indian Boilers (Amendment) Bill : 
81-83, 653. 

— Indian Finance Bill : 53-58, 
354-63. 

— Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill: 113-19. 

— Industrial Employment Bill : 
385-89. 

— Jharia Coalfields visited : 129. 

— Joint Labour Conference : 11-18. 

— Labour and parliamentary 
Democracy: 106-12. 

— Labour and War : Broadcast on 
AIR: 36-43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1074 


1074 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Ambedkar, Dr. B. R. — contd. 

— Labour Conferences : 133, 293-99. 
— Labour Department: 

Election of members — Motion re : 
59-62. 

— Supplementary grant: 260-63. 

— meets Lord Privy Seal : 465, 466. 

— to Linlithgow: 470-71. 

— Mica Conference addressed :172-75. 
— Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
Bill: 373-84. 

— Mica Mines visited : 175-77. 

— Mica Mission of USA : 588-89, 591- 
94. 

— Mineral Resources of India Motion 
Re : 237-42. 

— Mines Maternity benefit (Amendment) 
Bill: 87-88, 274-76, 653. 

— Motor Vehicles (Drivers) Amendment 
Bill : 84-86, 653. 

— Muslim representation : 344-52. 

— Navigation : 305. 

— Orissa River Development: 302-9. 

— Paper Control Order : 44-49. 

— Payment of Wages (Amendment) 
Bill: 211-19. 

— Plenary Labour Conference (first 
Session): 100-05. 

— Policy on Labour : 149-57, 243-52. 
— Protection of Mosques : 161-64. 

— Reconstruction Policy Committee : 
120-28. 

— Social Security : 339-43. 

— Situation in India : 

Motion re: 13,15,17-21. 

— Standing Labour Committee : 

4th Meeting: 135-37. 

5th Meeting: 178-80. 

6th Meeting : 277-78. 

7th Meeting: 291-92. 

8th Meeting : 293. 

— Trade Unionism : 110-11. 

— Tripartite Labour Conference : 

— Sixth Session : Address by — 188-96. 
— Memorandum for : 197-200. 

— War Injuries (Copensation Insurance) 
Bill: 69-77, 89-99, 616, 652. 


— to Wavell : 476, 487-90, 491. 

— Women wokers in Coalmines : 139- 
44, 253-59. 

Ambedkar Ramji Maloji : 3 

Amery L.S. : 10, 456, 457, 463,465,467, 
468, 540. 

Aney, M.S.: 469. 

Anglo Indians : 471. 

Annihilation of Caste : 9. 

Asaf Ali, M. :950. 

Asquith, Mr.: 482. 

Assam Labour Emigrant Act: 63. 

Attlee, Mr. : 509, 512, 515, 517. 

Auchinleck, Sir Claude : 491. 

Ayer, Sir C. P. Ramaswami: 356, 463. 

Ayyangar, Sri M. Ananthasayanain : 
335, 355, 356, 358, 359, 362, 939, 
940, 942, 949, 950, 963, 981, 
990,1007, 1009, 1015, 1020, 1027, 
1029, 1046. 

Azad Abdul Kalam : 513, 518. 

Azar Ali, Mr. Muhammad : 572, 573, 
602, 606, 648, 671, 704, 743, 755, 
769, 770, 771, 773. 

Babu Ram Narayan Sing : 317-18, 
335, 1032-35, 1041-43. 

Backward Classes : 936, 937, 938. 

Bahiskrit Bharat :9. 

Bajoria, Babu Baijnath : 45, 570, 588, 
589, 590, 592. 

Banaras Hindu University : 355. 

Banerjea, Dr. P. N.: 22, 34, 45, 55, 
57, 59,60,75,238,248,655. 

Banerjee, Satyapriya : 364, 365, 366. 

Battle of Kirkee: 497. 

Benett, Mr. : 186. 

Benthal, E. C.: 463. 

Bevin Boys Training Scheme : 197-98, 
281,732,937,945. 

Bhai Parma Nand : 637, 639, 795. 

Bhargava, Mukut Bihari Lai: 390, 391. 

Bhargava, Pandit Thakurdas : 1013, 
1067, 1068. 

Bhole R. R.: 158, 196. 

Bhulanbararee : 130. 

Bhutto, Nabi Baksh Illahi Baksh : 
656, 658. 

Bombay Army : 3. 

Bombay University : 357. 

Bose Sharacl Chandra : 513, 527, 545. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1075 


INDEX 


1075 


Brahminism : 498. 

British Labour Party : 498. 

British Parliament: 70. 

Buddhism : 9. 

Carlyle, Sir Thomas : 109. 

Cabinet Mission: 487-500, 503, 512, 
513, 517, 523-28, 537-49. 

Central Waterways, Irrigation and 
Navigation Commission : 308-310. 

Chaman Lall, Diwan : 314, 358, 359, 
360, 367, 372, 379, 380, 381, 382, 
388, 389, 998, 1021, 1046, 1048, 
1051-55, 1061, 1065. 

Chandavarkar V. N. Sir: 69, 77, 201, 
206, 207, 208, 210, 211, 217, 888. 

Chattopadhyay, Amarendra Nath : 69, 
77, 157, 563, 643, 654, 656, 675, 
745, 746, 880, 881, 884. 

Chaudhari, Mohd. Hussain : 211, 217, 
708, 709, 710, 711-13, 741,890,993, 
994, 1055-56. 

Chettiar, Ramalingam : 369, 370. 

Chettiar T.S. Avinashilingam : 
159,209, 264, 780, 781, 783, 830, 
831, 832, 843, 844, 845, 846, 874, 
889, 890, 909, 910, 911, 912, 918, 
921, 926, 934. 

Chetty, Sanii Venkatachlam : 251, 
258. 

Choudhary, Diwan Abdul Basith : 
898, 900, 904. 

Chowdar Tank Satyagrah : 6. 

Christianity : 9. 

Clegg. Dr.: 175. 

Coalmines : 

— Children in underground work : 812. 

Coalmines Labour Welfare Ordinance : 
137-38, 169. 

Coalmines Safety (Slowing) 
Amendment Bill: 145-48,715,723. 

Coal Trade Conference : 700. 

Columbia University : 5. 

Communal Award : 421,465 (f.n.), 
538, 541. 

Communist Manifesto : 110. 

Communist Party of India : 24. 

Congress, Indian National : 22, 23, 
111, 358, 359, 449, 450, 456, 461, 
468, 473-74, 477, 494-96 524, 527, 
542-48, 


Congress Socialist Party : 24. 

Cotton, Sir Arthur: 305. 

Cowasjee Jehangir Sir : 85-86, 209, 248, 
555, 570, 800. 

Cripps’ Mission : 449. 

Cripps Proposals : 452-54, 538 
Cripps, Sir Stafford : 445, 449, 455, 
460, 462, 468, 501. 

Ambcdkar to : 447-48. 

Crossfield Mr. : 175. 

Dadabhoy, Manekji: 362. 

Dalai, Sir Ardcshir : 18,236. 

Dalai, Dr. Sir Ratanji Dinshaw : 211, 
217. 

Dam, Anang Mohan : 627,686,756,778, 
788, 858. 

Damodar Swaroop, Seth : 1030-31. 
Damodar Valley Scheme : 396-98, 947. 
— Calcutta Conference : 220-25, 
248-90. 

— Evacuation of villages: 317-19. 
— Preliminary Memorandum 
discussed : 284-90. 

— T. V. A. Experts’ arrival : 392-93. 
Damodar River Flood Enquiry 
Commute : 284. 

Datta, Akhil Chandra : 237, 242-43, 
247-48, 250-52, 269. 

Defence of India Act: 315. 

Depressed Classes : 6,29, 445, 446, 447, 
448, 450-51,458,459,460,462,465, 
474, 515, 710, 711. 

Deshmukh, G. V.: 561, 562, 563, 590, 
696, 697, 702, 736, 781, 796, 797, 
801, 815, 830 

East India Company : 3, 485. 
Employment Exchanges : 78-80, 301, 
334-38. 

Engineering Services — 

Communal composition : 586-87. 
Factories Act: 480, 769. 

Factories (Amendment) Bill: 326-33, 
989, 1049. 

Factories 2nd Amendment Bill : 201-10, 
772, 876. 

Forced Labour, stoppage of: 981. 

Fox, Dr. : 32. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1076 


1076 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Gadgil, N. V.: 327, 357, 1046, 1063. 

Gackwar of Baroda : 4, 5. 

Gandhi, M. K.: 7, 22, 23, 24, 421, 457, 
484, 514, 518, 519, 538, 540, 541, 
546, 547. 

Garden of Eden : 311. 

Geological Survey of India : 19, 557, 
645, 944, 945. 

Ghiasuddin M.: 936, 937, 938. 

Giri, V. V. : 18, 316. 

Gokhale, B. K. 310. 

Gole, P. B.: 1065. 

Govind Das, Seth :366,943, 1001, 1003. 

Govt. Policy on Labour: 149-56,243-52. 

Gray’s Inn : 5. 

Gregory Committee: 136. 

Griffiths, P. J.: 64, 116-19, 337. 

Grow More Food Campaign : 133. 

Gupta, K. S. : 733, 749, 763, 765, 808, 
833,841,852,853,872. 

Gupta, R.R. : 69, 77, 201,210. 

Gwilt, Mr. Leslie : 69, 73, 76, 77, 388. 

Haddow, Mr.: 73. 

Hajee Abdus Sattar : 973. 

Hajee Choudhari Mohd. Ismail Khan : 
628, 642. 

Haroon Seth Yusuf Abdoola: 69, 77, 
156, 211, 217, 678, 680, 746, 747, 
748,766,981,1000, 1001. 

Hedge, K. B. Jinaraja: 823, 921, 922, 
928, 929. 

Hindu Maha Sabha : 111, 433, 477. 

Hindustan Socialist Party : 24. 

Hindustan Socialist Republican 
Association : 24. 

Hiray, B. S.: 1039. 

Hoosoinbhoy Lalljee : 69, 73, 77, 95, 
148, 156,580,681,685,718. 

Hughes, Mr. A. : 186. 

Independent Labour Party : 7,467. 
Indian Boilors (Amendment) Bill : 
653. 

— Motion to Consider : 81-83. 

Indian Finance Bill : 53-58. 

Indian Labour Conference (Seventh) : 
293-301. 

Indian Labour Federation : 774, 779, 
828, 933. 

Indian Mines (Amendment) Bill : 323- 
25, 939. 


Indian National Army : 524, 542. 

Indian Tea Control (Amendment) 
Bill: 63-68. 

Indian Trade Union Act: 300. 

Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill: 113-19,680,804,957. 

Industrial Workers : 968. 

— Holidays with Pay : 291-92. 

— Sickness Insurance : 658. 

Inskip A. C.: 201, 210, 211, 217, 
272, 388. 

International Labour Conference: 
191 -92. 

Delegates for : 157-58. International 
labour Organisation (I.L.O.): 179, 
191-92, 293-95, 298, 299. 

James Sir Fredrick E.: 53,54,55,57, 
58, 64, 67, 73, 630, 719, 727, 728, 
785, 786, 790. 

Jadhav, D.G.: 283,712. 

Janata : 9. 

Jat Pat Todak Mandal:9 

Jayprakash Narayan : 23, 24. 

Jeelani, Sher Shah : 980. 

Jevon’s Economic Criteria : 232. 

Jharia Coalfields : 129. 

Jinachandran, M. K.: 1057. 

Jinah, M. A. : 518. 

Jogendra Singh, Sir : 463, 469, 491. 

Joint Labour Conference, New Delhi 
(Fourth): 11-18. 

Joshi D. S.: 69, 77, 201, 210, 211, 217. 

Joshi, N. M.: 63-67, 69, 73, 75-77, 
91, 92, 114, 142, 149-52, 154, 157, 
160, 201, 206-207, 210-11, 217-19, 
243-52, 263-64, 266, 269, 555, 557, 
567, 568, 579, 580, 597, 599, 680, 
681, 685, 697, 716, 722, 728, 730, 
734, 735,762,764,799, 802-03, 809, 
849, 870, 871, 887,889, 892-94, 
897,917, 918,936. 

Joshi, S.C.: 180,283. 

Kalarm Temple : 7. 

Karbi, W.H. : 130, 169. 

Karl Marx: 109,110. 

Karmarkar, D. P. : 998. 

Karnik, V. G. : 180. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1077 


INDEX 


Kazmi, Qazi Muhammad Ahmed : 
565, 616, 618, 622, 623, 624, 625, 
626, 664, 758, 759, 817, 818, 819, 
820, 929. 

Khan, Abdul Ghani Khan : 351. 

Khan Bahadur Mian Ghulam Kadir 
Muhammad Shaban : 69, 77, 692. 

Khan Bahadur Shaikh Fazl-i-Haq 
Piracha: 603, 604, 605, 618, 620- 
21, 776, 794. 

Khan, Sir Muhammad Yamin : 162, 
163, 350,655,677,678-79,721, 
722,762, 875,920,926,1015. 

Khan, Maulana Zafar Ali : 58,65,67,69, 
77, 663, 679, 752, 966, 979, 1042. 

Khare, N. B. : 475. 

Khosala, Rai Bahadur, A. N.: 285, 
308, 397. 

Kosi River: 178. 

Krishnamachari, T. T. : 670, 672, 674, 
675,776,843,871,872. 

Kureel, Piarc Lall: 691, 692, 737, 738, 
754, 767, 768, 863. 

Labour Conferences : 133-34, 938. 

Labour Department — 

Election of Members : 59-62, 744. 

Supplementary grant-Demand : 260-63. 

Labour Legislation: 11. 

Labour Wages : 579-86. 

Labour Welfare Committee : 195-96. 

Labour Welfare Funds : 296. 

Lall, K. B.: 742, 744, 753, 817, 824. 

Lall, S.: 169, 179, 186. 

Lallubhai, Mr. Vadilal : 367, 369, 370, 
961,968,999 

League of Nations : 445, 466. 

Liaquat Ali Khan : 344, 349, 680. 

Linlithgow Lord, the Marquess of: 120, 
449, 463, 467, 468, 470, 539, 540. 

London School of Economic : 5. 

Lumley, Sir Roger : 449, 467. 

Macdonald, Mr. Ramsay : 541. 

Mahanadi project: 821. 

Mahars : 440, 451. 

Maithon Dam : 397. 

Maitra, Pandit Laxmi Kant: 19, 28, 
30, 45, 50, 51, 260, 556, 559, 560, 
728, 833. 

Malaviya, Pandit Govind : 354, 355, 
356, 357, 358, 359, 361. 


1077 

Maniben Kara, Ms. : 1012, 1052, 1066, 
1067. 

Manu Subedar : 793, 797,798, 801, 802, 
860, 861, 862, 869, 870, 877, 931, 
949, 959, 960, 974, 985, 998, 1014, 
1016, 1022, 1025, 1052, 1057, 1065. 

Mathews, H. M. : 285, 289. 

Maulavi Syed Munuza Sahib Bahadur : 
616, 619, 631, 632, 633-35, 637. 

Mazumdar, D. L.: 289. 

Mazumdar, S. N.: 130, 175. 

Mehta, Jamanadas M. : 25, 26, 28, 50, 
51, 52, 57, 58, 69, 77, 151, 154, 158, 
180,577-78,620,831. 

Menon, A Karunakara : 1057. 

Miller, C. C.: 69,73, 74,76,77, 82,147, 
180. 

Mica Conference, Kodarma : 172-75. 

Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Bill : 
373-84,390-91, 1049, 1063. 

Mica Mission of USA : 588-89, 590- 
92, 936. 

Mill, J. S.: 110. 

Mirajkar, S. S. : 180. 

Mines Maternity Benefit (Amendment) 
Bill : 87, 88, 274-76, 653, 876, 909. 

Mineral Resources of India : 237-42, 
1069. 

Minimum Wages Bill : 1063. 

Mortimer, Mr. Chapman : 97. 

Moses : 311. 

Motor Vehicles (Drivers) Amendment 
Bill : 84-86, 653. 

Mount Stuart Elphinstone : 439. 

Mudliar A Ramswami : 12, 1045. 

Mukanayak : 9 

Muhammad Usman : 463. 

Muslim representation : 344-52, 574, 
575, 632-33, 966, 967, 970, 980, 
1058. 

Muslim League: 345, 450, 457, 458, 
461,468,474,489,518. 

Naidu, Mr. G. Rangaiah : 724, 727, 
778, 916. 

Nairang, Syed Ghulam Bhik : 260, 263, 
348, 662, 731, 732, 864, 908. 

Narasimhaiya, M.: 397. 

National Service Labour Tribunals : 
279-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1078 


1078 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Nauman, Muhammad: 166-67, 350, 
555, 564, 565, 621, 773, 774, 980. 

Navalrai, Mr. Lalchand : 211, 217, 
554, 555, 575, 594-95, 602, 610, 
631, 649, 655, 656, 657, 659, 662, 
684, 685, 723, 728, 729-30, 737, 
757, 763, 774-777, 779, 781-784, 
786, 794, 814, 828-31, 858, 859, 
875, 934. 

Neogy. K.C. :31, 32, 237, 556, 557, 
560-61, 597, 626,641, 642, 644, 
650, 651, 652, 664, 666, 670, 683, 
699, 700, 702, 713, 714, 717, 718, 
722, 733, 736, 793, 804, 805, 807- 
809, 811, 821, 836, 837, 840, 843, 
854, 901, 911-14, 924, 944, 945, 
951, 953. 

Nimbkar, R. S.: 129, 130, 153, 169. 

Noon, Sir Firoz Khan : 12, 464. 

Noyee, Sir Frank : 206. 

Orissa Rivers : 

Development of: 302-11. 

Orissa Flood Enquiry Committee, 
1928 : 304. 

Orissa Flood Protection Committee : 
306. 

Pakistan : 457, 458, 461,482. 

Paliwal, Sri Krishna Dutt: 991. 

Palmerston Lord : 488. 

Pande, Badri Dint: 264, 776, 781, 787, 
824, 825, 827, 830, 840, 845, 907, 
931,933,934,935. 

Paper Control Order : 44-49. 

Pariahs : 3. 

Parliamentary Democracy : 106-09, 
111 . 

Payment or Wages Act: 211-19, 671, 
684, 696, 756, 769, 778, 983. 

Peace Treaty of Versailles : 191. 

Pethic-Lawrence, Lord : 480, 485, 500, 
502,515,517,518,523. 

Plenary Labour Conference: 16, 100-5. 

Poona Pact: 465, 546. 

Pope Leo XIII : 110. 

Post War Electric Power Development : 
226-36. 

Prior H.C.: 130, 157, 179, 224, 289, 
310. 

Privy Seal, Lord : 465. 

Problem of the Rupee : 9. 


Protection of Mosques : 161-64. 

Provincial Finance in British India : 9 

Rahmat-Ullah, Muhammad: 965, 966, 
967,976,1058. 

Railwaymen’s Federation : 312-16. 

Raisman, Sir Jeremy: 237, 260, 911. 

Rajah, M. C.: 447-48, 465, 466. 

Ram Narayan Singh, Babu : 384, 935, 
963, 964. 

Ranga Iyer: 362. 

Ranga, Prof. N. G.: 207, 209, 243, 260, 
262, 269-71,332,337,358,366,388, 
391, 793, 797, 800, 802, 816, 821, 

833, 835, 848, 850, 865, 867, 868, 

887, 889, 891, 893, 894, 896, 898, 

929-32, 949, 958, 974, 976, 996-97, 
1003-5, 1011, 1012, 1014-16, 1025, 
1027, 1029, 1030, 1042-43, 1045, 
1046, 1052, 1053, 1057, 1069, 1071, 
1072. 

Rao, Dr. Raghavendra : 463. 

Rao, Ms. Shanta Bhall : 130. 

Ray, Mrs. Renuka : 250, 253, 716, 809, 
810, 812, 813, 814, 815-16, 848, 850, 
876, 888, 889. 

Reconstruction Policy Committee : 120. 

Reddiar, Sri R. Venkatasubba : 333, 
948. 

Rege (D. V.) Committee Report: 394-95. 

Reuben, Justice : 379, 380. 

Revolutionary Socialist Party : 24. 

Richardson, Sir Henry : 73. 

Riegel, Ross M.: 392, 393, 397. 

Round Table Conferences : 7, 538, 541. 

Rousseau, Jean Jacques : 110. 

Roy, M.N.: 793. 

Royal Commission on Labour : 63, 64, 
66, 294, 326-27. 

Sait, II. A. Sathar H. Essak : 30, 61, 
69, 242, 243, 600, 601, 677, 702, 
704, 851. 

Saksena, Mohan Lai: 319, 359, 949, 
1002, 1004,1045, 1052, 1053. 

Sanyal, S. S. : 949, 950. 

Sapru Committee : 477. 

Sardar Manual Singh: 781, 782, 986, 
1038, 1039,1040, 1064. 

Sardar Sant Singh : 23, 26, 28, 555, 
560, 607, 610, 611, 612-14, 641, 658, 
659, 660, 663, 667, 668, 669, 688-89, 
690, 693, 694, 739, 750, 751, 766, 
782, 784, 873, 875, 922, 923. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1079 


INDEX 


Scheduled Castes : 405-42,483-86, 502, 
510-11,513-14,517-19,523,524-28. 

— and Cabinale Mission : 537-49. 

— in Civil Pioneer Force : 691, 738. 
— Commissioned Officers : 737 
— Educational grievances of : 426-32. 
— Election Analysis : 529-36. 

— in Food Department: 754. 

— Govt, duty towards : 437-42. 

— Govt. Policy- Criticised : 437-42. 
— Other grievances of : 433-36. 

— Political grievances : 406-25. 

— Represention in Central Executive : 
410-12. 

— Represention in Federal P.S.C. : 
425. 

— Represention in Public Service : 
412-24. 

— Reservation in services for : 398, 
412-16. 

— Separate Electorates for : 361, 
488, 495-96. Scheduled Castes 
Federation: 358, 360, 482-83, 503- 
OS, 510, 526-27, 542, 545. 
Scheduled Caste Students : 
Scholarships for : 392. 

Schlemmer, Fred C. 392, 393, 397. 
Seth Dr.: 283. 

Sikhism : 9. 

Simon, Lord : 468. 

Sinha, Satyanarayan: 827,828,874,978, 
991, 1006, 1050-52. 

Situation in India : 

Motion Re: 21-29. 

Siva Raj N. Rao Bahadur: 201,210,410, 
421, 422, 477, 503, 566, 567, 568, 
570,571,735. 

Sivapur Colliery : 132. 

Skilled Workers Employment of: 181- 
87. 

Social Security : 339-43, 394-95. 

Sri Prakash : 250, 313, 328, 330, 349, 
350,355,845,956,974, 1001. 
Srivastava, Sir J. P.: 121,463,469,475, 
754. 

Standing Advisory Committee : 16, 17. 
Standing Labour Committee : 197. 

— Fourth Meeting : Lucknow : 135- 
37, 828. 


1079 


— Fifth Meeting, New Delhi : 178- 
80, 938. 

— Sixth Meeting, New Delhi: 277- 
78, 939. 

— Seventh Meeting, New Delhi : 
291-92. 

— Eighth Session, New Delhi : 293. 
— Proceedings laid on the table : 
601, 667. 

Subbarayan, Mrs. K. Radhabai : 155, 
156,253,262-63,271, 799, 800,842, 
846, 847, 848, 849, 850, 870, 871, 
876, 884, 885, 887, 889,891-93, 897, 
898,906,915,916,917. 

Sukhdev, Seth : 983, 987, 989, 1072. 
Sultan Ahmed : 469. 

Talaiya Dam: 397. 

Tata Iron and Steel Company : 325. 
Technical Training Scheme : 181-84. 
Tennessee Valley (Scheme) Authority : 
222-24, 228, 392-93. 

Thorium : 1057, 1064. 

Thoughts on Pakistan : 9. 

Tisra Colliery : 131. 

Trade Unionism: 110, 111, 968. 

Trade Union Congress : 170. 
Tripartite Labour Conference : 101, 
102, 133, 136, 153-54, 188-96, 261, 
262, 277-78, 693. 

Tripartite Organisation : 100, 189: 
Tyson, G.W.: 379, 380, 870. 

Visvesvarawa, Sri M. : 304. 

Voorduin, W. L.: 228, 289. 

War Injuries (Compensation, Insurance) 
Bill: 69-77, 89-99, 103, 615, 652. 
War Injuries Ordinance : 70, 71, 74. 
Wavell, Lord: 475, 476, 480, 482, 
487, 503, 540. 

William, Mr. Adams: 304. 

Wolfram Deposits : 674. 
Women-Employment 
Underground Work in Coalmines : 
139-44, 153-59, 715, 728, 765, 809, 
813,815,831,958. 

Workmen’s Compensation Act : 70,71, 
91,320-22,480. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-010\voll0-09.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


4-10-2013/YS-18-11-2013 


1080 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ERRATA 

Page— 237 

After the cut motion of Mr. Deputy President 

“That the demand under the head ‘Geological Survey’ be 
reduced by Rs. 100 

Insert the following : 

The Honourable Sir Jeremy Raisman (Finance Member): 
Motion moved. 

“That a sum not exceeding Rs. 12,62,000 be granted to the 
Governor General in Council to defray the charges which will 
come in course of payment during the year ending the 31st day 
of March, 1946, in respect of ‘Geological Survey ’ ”. 


Page 

Line 

Incorrect 

Correct 

289 

33 

Voordin 

Voorduin 

362 

14 

permision 

permission 

388 

3 

Inskipt 

Inskip 

480 

16 

Workman’s 

Workmen’s 

761 

24 

Mr. shiva Rao 

Mr. Shiva Rao 


